Dwight E. Heron, MD, MBA, FACRO, FACR
M. Saiful Huq, PhD, FAAPM, FInstP
Joseph M. Herman, MD, MSc, MHCM, FACR
Stereotactic Radiosurgery and Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy (SBRT) is a comprehensive guide for the practicing
physician and medical physicist in the management of complex intracranial and extracranial disease. It is a state-ofthe-science book presenting the scientific principles, clinical background and procedures, treatment planning, and
treatment delivery of SRS and SBRT for the treatment of tumors throughout the body. This unique textbook is enhanced
with supplemental video tutorials inclusive to the resource.
Beginning with an overview of SRS and SBRT, Part I contains insightful coverage on topics such as the evolving
radiobiological principles that govern treatment, imaging, the treatment planning process, technologies and
equipment used, as well as focused chapters on quality assurance, quality management, and patient safety. Part II
contains the clinical application of SRS and SBRT for tumors throughout the body including those in the brain, head
and neck, lung, pancreas, adrenal glands, liver, prostate, cervix, spine, and in oligometastatic disease. Each clinical
chapter includes an introduction to the disease site, followed by a thorough review of all indications and exclusion
criteria, in addition to the important considerations for patient selection, treatment planning and delivery, and
outcome evaluation. These chapters conclude with a detailed and site-specific dose constraints table for critical
structures and their suggested dose limits.
International experts on the science and clinical applications of these treatments have joined together to assemble
this must-have book for clinicians, physicists, and other radiation therapy practitioners. It provides a team-based
approach to SRS and SBRT coupled with case-based video tutorials in disease management, making this a unique
companion for the busy radiosurgical team.

n Highlights the principles of radiobiology and radiation physics underlying SRS and SBRT
n P
 resents and discusses the expected patient outcomes for each indicated disease site and condition including

a detailed analysis of Quality of Life (QOL) and Survival
n Includes information about technologies used for the treatment of SRS and SBRT
n R
 ichly illustrated with over 110 color images of the equipment, process flow diagrams and procedures,

treatment planning techniques and dose distributions
n 7
 high-quality case videos reviewing anatomy, staging, treatment simulation and planning, contouring, and

management pearls
n D
 ose constraint tables at the end of each clinical chapter listing critical structures and their appropriate

dose limits
n Includes access to the fully-searchable downloadable eBook
Recommended
Shelving Category:
Oncology
An Imprint of Springer Publishing

11 W. 42nd Street
New York, NY 10036-8002
www.springerpub.com

9

780826

168566

Heron • Huq • Herman

Key Features:

STEREOTACTIC RADIOSURGERY AND STEREOTACTIC BODY RADIATION THERAPY (SBRT)

STEREOTACTIC RADIOSURGERY AND
STEREOTACTIC BODY RADIATION THERAPY (SBRT)

An Imprint of Springer Publishing

STEREOTACTIC
RADIOSURGERY
AND STEREOTACTIC BODY
RADIATION THERAPY (SBRT)

Dwight E. Heron | M. Saiful Huq | Joseph M. Herman

Stereotactic Radiosurgery
and Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy (SBRT)

Heron_68566_PTR_00_i-xii_FM_08-23-18.indd i

22/08/18 10:23 AM

Heron_68566_PTR_00_i-xii_FM_08-23-18.indd ii

22/08/18 10:23 AM

Stereotactic Radiosurgery
and Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy (SBRT)
Editors
Dwight E. Heron, MD, MBA, FACRO, FACR
Chairman, Department of Radiation Oncology, UPMC Hillman
Cancer Center–Shadyside
Professor of Radiation Oncology, Otolaryngology, and Head and Neck Surgery
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania

M. Saiful Huq, PhD, FAAPM, FInstP
Professor of Radiation Oncology
Director, Division of Medical Physics
Department of Radiation Oncology
UPMC Hillman Cancer Center
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania

Joseph M. Herman, MD, MSc, MHCM, FACR
Professor and Division Head ad Interim
Department of Radiation Oncology
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, Texas

An Imprint of Springer Publishing

Heron_68566_PTR_00_i-xii_FM_08-23-18.indd iii

22/08/18 10:23 AM

Visit our website at www.Springerpub.com
ISBN: 9780826168566
ebook ISBN: 9780826168573
Acquisitions Editor: David D’Addona
Compositor: Graphic World
Copyright © 2019 Springer Publishing Company.
Demos Medical Publishing is an imprint of Springer Publishing Company, LLC.
All rights reserved. This book is protected by copyright. No part of it may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without
the prior written permission of the publisher.
Medicine is an ever-changing science. Research and clinical experience are continually expanding our knowledge, in
particular our understanding of proper treatment and drug therapy. The authors, editors, and publisher have made
every effort to ensure that all information in this book is in accordance with the state of knowledge at the time of
production of the book. Nevertheless, the authors, editors, and publisher are not responsible for errors or omissions
or for any consequences from application of the information in this book and make no warranty, expressed or implied,
with respect to the contents of the publication. Every reader should examine carefully the package inserts accompanying each drug and should carefully check whether the dosage schedules mentioned therein or the contraindications
stated by the manufacturer differ from the statements made in this book. Such examination is particularly important
with drugs that are either rarely used or have been newly released on the market.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Heron, Dwight E., editor. | Huq, M. Saiful (Mohammed Saiful), editor.
Herman, Joseph M., editor.
Title: Stereotactic radiosurgery and stereotactic body radiation therapy
(SBRT) / [edited by] Dwight E. Heron, M. Saiful Huq, Joseph M. Herman.
Description: New York : Demos, [2018] | Includes bibliographical references
and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2018026438 (print) | LCCN 2018026700 (ebook) | ISBN
9780826168573 () | ISBN 9780826168566 (hbk. : alk. paper) | ISBN
9780826168573 (eBook)
Subjects: | MESH: Neoplasms--radiotherapy | Radiosurgery | Neoplasms—surgery
Classification: LCC RC271.R3 (ebook) | LCC RC271.R3 (print) | NLM QZ 269 |
DDC 616.99/40642--dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2018026438
Contact us to receive discount rates on bulk purchases.
We can also customize our books to meet your needs.
For more information please contact: sales@springerpub.com
Publisher’s Note: New and used products purchased from third-party sellers are not guaranteed for quality, authenticity,
or access to any included digital components.
Printed in the United States of America.
18 19 20 21 22 / 5 4 3 2 1

Heron_68566_PTR_00_i-xii_FM_08-23-18.indd iv

22/08/18 10:23 AM

CONTENTS
133
9. Patient Safety
Peter B. Dunscombe and M. Saiful Huq

Contributors
vii
Preface
xi
Share Stereotactic Radiosurgery and Stereotactic
Body Radiation Therapy (SBRT)

Part II: Clinical Applications of SRS and SBRT

Part I: Principles of SRS and SBRT—
Radiobiology, Physics, and
Treatment Planning

10. Brain Radiosurgery
141
Ronny Kalash, Johnathan A. Engh, and
Nduka Amankulor

1. General Overview of SRS and
SBRT Program
3
Dwight E. Heron, M. Saiful Huq, and
Annette Quinn

11. Head and Neck SBRT
165
John A. Vargo, Shlomo A. Koyfman,
Robert L. Ferris, Dwight E. Heron, and
Farzan Siddiqui

2. Radiobiology Principles of Radiosurgery
and SBRT
15
Ellen Yorke, David Carlson, and
Vitali Moiseenko

12. Lung SBRT
183
Arjun Pennathur, James D. Luketich,
Dwight E. Heron, Alexandre Escande,
David Pasquier, and Eric F. Lartigau

3. SRS and SBRT Process
39
M. Saiful Huq and Robin Stern

13. Pancreas SBRT
201
Eric D. Miller, Steven A. Burton,
Lauren M. Rosati, and Terence M. Williams

4. Patient Immobilization for SRS
and SBRT
47
Ronald J. Lalonde and
Richard A. Popple
5. Imaging for SRS and SBRT
53
Ronald J. Lalonde and Tianfang Li
6. Treatment Planning for SRS
and SBRT
65
Ronald J. Lalonde
7. Overview of Technologies for SRS and
SBRT Delivery
73
Laura Padilla and Jatinder R. Palta
8. Quality Management
103
Ning Wen, Karen Chin Snyder, Brett Miller,
and Indrin J. Chetty

14. Adrenal SBRT
215
Priscilla K. Stumpf and Karyn A. Goodman
15. Liver SBRT
227
Yushen Qian, Joseph P. Weiner,
Everett J. Moding, Nataliya Kovalchuk,
Albert C. Koong, Theodore S. Hong, and
Daniel T. Chang
16. Prostate SBRT
249
Beant S. Gill, Dwight E. Heron,
Sean P. Collins, and Alan J. Katz
17. Gynecologic SBRT
271
Charles Kunos, Ronny Kalash, and
Sushil Beriwal

v

Heron_68566_PTR_00_i-xii_FM_08-23-18.indd v

22/08/18 10:23 AM

vi

CONTENTS

18. Spine SBRT
279
John A. Vargo, Alina Mihai,
Johnathan A. Engh, Nduka Amankulor, and
Steven A. Burton
19. SBRT for Oligometastatic Disease
Alina Mihai and Michael T. Milano

293

20. Immunoradiosurgery: The Convergence of
SBRT and the Immune Response
321
Uzoma K. Iheagwara, David A. Clump, and
Dwight E. Heron

Heron_68566_PTR_00_i-xii_FM_08-23-18.indd vi

21. Stereotactic Radiosurgery and
Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy
Case Videos
331
John C. Flickinger, Drew Moghanaki,
Joseph M. Herman, Yushen Qian,
Beant S. Gill, John A. Vargo, and
Alina Mihai
Index

333

22/08/18 10:23 AM

CONTRIBUTORS
Nduka Amankulor, MD, PhD
Associate Director, Neurosurgical Oncology Program,
UPMC, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Assistant Professor, Department of Neurological
Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Sushil Beriwal, MD, MBA
Clinical Professor and Residency Program Director,
UPMC Hillman Cancer Center—Radiation
Oncology, Magee—Womens Hospital of UPMC,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Steven A. Burton, MD
Associate Professor, Department of Radiation
Oncology, UPMC Hillman Cancer Center–Shadyside,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
David Carlson, PhD, DABR, FAAPM
Associate Professor, Department of Therapeutic
Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut
Daniel T. Chang, MD
Professor, Department of Radiation Oncology,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California
Indrin J. Chetty, PhD
Director, Physics Division, Department of Radiation
Oncology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit,
Michigan
David A. Clump, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor, Department of Radiation
Oncology, UPMC Hillman Cancer Center–
Shadyside, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Sean P. Collins, MD, PhD
Associate Professor, Department of Radiation
Medicine, Medstar Georgetown University Hospital,
Washington, DC

Peter B. Dunscombe, PhD
Professor, Department of Oncology, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada
Johnathan A. Engh, MD
Director, Neuroendoport Surgery & Neurosurgical
Oncology Program, UPMC, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania
Associate Professor, Department of Neurological
Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Alexandre Escande, MD
Resident Oncologist, Department of Radiation
Oncology, Oscar Lambret Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Lille, France
ONCOLille and University of Lille, Lille, France
Robert L. Ferris, MD, PhD
Director of UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, Chief of
the Division of Head and Neck Oncologic Surgery,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Department of Otolaryngology, Division of Head
and Neck Surgery, UPMC, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania
John C. Flickinger, MD, FACR
Professor, Department of Radiation Oncology,
UPMC Hillman Cancer Center–Shadyside,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Beant S. Gill, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Radiation Oncology,
UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania
Karyn A. Goodman, MD, MS
Professor of Radiation Oncology, Department of
Radiation Oncology, University of Colorado School
of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado
Associate Director of Clinical Research, University of
Colorado Cancer Center, Aurora, Colorado
vii

Heron_68566_PTR_00_i-xii_FM_08-23-18.indd vii

22/08/18 10:23 AM

viii

CONTTRIBUTORS

Joseph M. Herman, MD, MSc, MHCM, FACR
Professor and Division Head ad Interim,
Department of Radiation Oncology, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas
Dwight E. Heron, MD, MBA, FACRO, FACR
Chairman, Department of Radiation Oncology,
UPMC Hillman Cancer Center–Shadyside,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Professor of Radiation Oncology, Otolaryngology
and Head and Neck Surgery, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania
Theodore S. Hong, MD
Associate Professor, Department of Radiation
Oncology, Clark Center for Radiation Oncology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts
M. Saiful Huq, PhD, FAAPM, FInstP
Professor of Radiation Oncology, Director,
Division of Medical Physics, Department of
Radiation Oncology, UPMC Hillman Cancer Center,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Uzoma K. Iheagwara, MD, PhD
Resident Physician, UPMC Hillman Cancer Center—
Radiation Oncology, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Ronny Kalash, DO
Resident Physician, UPMC Hillman Cancer
Center—Radiation Oncology, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania
Alan J. Katz, MD, JD
Clinican, Flushing Radiation Oncology, Flushing,
New York
Albert C. Koong, MD, PhD
Professor and Chair, Department of Radiation
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
Nataliya Kovalchuk, PhD
Associate Staff and Clinical Assistant Professor,
Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California
Shlomo A. Koyfman, MD
Assistant Professor, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College
of Medicine, Section Head of Head and Neck and
Skin Cancer Radiation, Departments of Radiation
Oncology and Bioethics, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio

Heron_68566_PTR_00_i-xii_FM_08-23-18.indd viii

Charles Kunos, MD, PhD
Medical Officer, Investigational Drug Branch,
Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program, Division
of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Rockville, Maryland
Ronald J. Lalonde, PhD, DABR
Associate Professor, Department of Radiation
Oncology, Division of Medical Physics,
UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania
Eric F. Lartigau, MD, PhD
Professor and General Director, Department of
Radiation Oncology, Oscar Lambret Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Lille, France
ONCOLille and University of Lille, Lille, France
Tianfang Li, PhD
Associate Attending, Medical Physics,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, New York
James D. Luketich, MD
Henry T. Bahnson Professor and Chair, Department
of Cardiothoracic Surgery, UPMC, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania
Alina Mihai, MD, MS
Consultant Radiation Oncologist, Department of
Radiation Oncology, Beacon Hospital,
Dublin, Ireland
Michael T. Milano, MD, PhD
Associate Professor, Department of Radiation
Oncology, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York
Brett Miller, MSc
Senior Staff Physicist, Department of Radiation
Oncology, Henry Ford Health System,
Detroit, Michigan
Eric D. Miller, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor, Radiation Oncology, The Ohio
State University Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Columbus, Ohio
Everett J. Moding, MD, PhD
Resident, Department of Radiation Oncology,
Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California
Drew Moghanaki, MD, MPH
Radiation Oncology Service, Hunter Holmes McGuire
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Richmond,
Virginia

22/08/18 10:23 AM

CONTRIBUTORS

Vitali Moiseenko, PhD, FCCPM
Professor, Department of Radiation Medicine and
Applied Sciences, University of California
San Diego, La Jolla, California

ix

Farzan Siddiqui, MD, PhD
Vice-Chairman, Department of Radiation Oncology,
Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, Michigan

Laura Padilla, PhD, DABR
Assistant Professor, Department of Radiation Oncology,
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia

Karen Chin Snyder, MSc
Senior Associate Physicist, Department of Radiation
Oncology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit,
Michigan

Jatinder R. Palta, PhD, FAAPM, FASTRO, FACR
Professor and Chair of Medical Physics, Department
of Radiation Oncology, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, Virginia

Robin Stern, PhD, FAAPM
Professor and Technical Director, Department of
Radiation Oncology, University of California, Davis
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Sacramento, California

David Pasquier, MD, PhD
Radiation Oncologist, Department of Radiation Oncology,
Oscar Lambret Comprehensive Cancer Center, Lille,
France
ONCOLille and University of Lille, Lille, France

Priscilla K. Stumpf, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Radiation
Oncology, University of Colorado Cancer Center,
Aurora, Colorado

Arjun Pennathur, MD, FACS
Assistant Professor, Department of Cardiothoracic
Surgery, UPMC, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Department of Radiation Oncology, UPMC Hillman
Cancer Center, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Richard A. Popple, PhD, FAAPM
Professor, Department of Radiation Oncology, University
of Alabama–Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama
Yushen Qian, MD
Associate Physician, Department of Radiation
Oncology, Southern California Permanente Medical
Group, Los Angeles, California
Annette Quinn, RN, MSN
UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Lauren M. Rosati
Medical Student, University of South Carolina School
of Medicine, Columbia, South Carolina

Heron_68566_PTR_00_i-xii_FM_08-23-18.indd ix

John A. Vargo, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Children’s
Hospital of UPMC, Pittsburgh Pennsylvania
Joseph P. Weiner, MD
Postdoctoral Medical Fellow, Department of Radiation
Oncology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California
Ning Wen, PhD, MBA
Director, Clinical Physics, Department of Radiation
Oncology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit,
Michigan
Terence M. Williams, MD, PhD
Associate Professor, Radiation Oncology, The Ohio
State University Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Columbus, Ohio
Ellen Yorke, PhD
Attending Physicist, Department of Medical Physics,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York

22/08/18 10:23 AM

Heron_68566_PTR_00_i-xii_FM_08-23-18.indd x

22/08/18 10:23 AM

PREFACE
Advances in the field of radiation therapy and
medical imaging have matured rapidly since their
inception. Over the past decade, there has been an
exponential increase in the use of stereotactic body
radiation therapy (SBRT) to treat malignancies.
Although originally developed to treat intracranial
lesions, typically referred to as stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS), these techniques have evolved to
treat extracranial sites because of improvements in
imaging, motion management, treatment planning,
and immobilization technology. SBRT necessitates
high-precision technologies for focused planning
and delivery of a small number of high-dose radiation treatment fractions. As a result of these high
dose per fraction regimens, it is essential for the
radiosurgical team to be aware of the importance
of the dose–volume constraints, especially because
it relates to normal tissues. In fact, the evolving
nature of the radiobiological principles of SRS/
SBRT requires an ongoing commitment to professional development as evidence-based clinical outcomes continue to evolve. This book encompasses
an overview of the new technologies and treatment
protocols that use them in the clinic, as well as the
quality assurance, quality management, and technical aspects involved in treatment planning, delivery, and follow-up.
The guidelines between these pages can then be
used to evaluate efficacy, toxicity, and treatment
response, given different patient variables. This
is especially the case now that SRS/SBRT has an
increasing role in treatment of patients with both
benign and malignant diseases. With proper quality

assurance, quality management, and multidisciplinary
oversight, SRS/SBRT has evolved to become one of
the standards of care in patients who are deemed
medically inoperable, given the highly effective and
safe delivery mechanisms. Furthermore, continued
development of these technologies will allow for safer
methods of re-irradiation, as well as advance the role
of radiation therapy in immune priming with immunotherapeutic agents and vaccines. The contributors
of this textbook are themselves thought leaders helping to design the next wave of clinical trials to exploit
the unique characteristics of radiosurgery and its
potential impact on improving clinical outcomes.
It is our hope that these efforts to systematically
and scientifically evaluate the treatment results of
SRS/SBRT for a variety of tumors will further foster
additional multidisciplinary approaches to improve
the outcomes and reduce the burden of cancer and
other diseases in the lives of our patients for whom
we care.
The editors would like to acknowledge the efforts
of our support team who have made this effort possible. We would like to thank Hillary Lindo, Renee
Banaszewski, Karen Holeva for their clinical and
administrative support and Lauren M. Rosati for her
contribution in reviewing the chapters of this textbook and assisting in the development of the videos.
We would also like to thank Scott Kaylor for his
technical expertise and assistance in recording the
case videos.
Dwight E. Heron
M. Saiful Huq
Joseph M. Herman

xi

Heron_68566_PTR_00_i-xii_FM_08-23-18.indd xi

22/08/18 10:23 AM

Heron_68566_PTR_00_i-xii_FM_08-23-18.indd xii

22/08/18 10:23 AM

Share
Stereotactic Radiosurgery and Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy (SBRT)

Heron_68566_PTR_00_i-xii_FM_08-23-18.indd xii

22/08/18 10:23 AM

P A R T

I

Principles of SRS and SBRT—
Radiobiology, Physics,
and Treatment Planning

Heron_68566_PTR_01_1-14_08-23-18.indd 1

21/08/18 2:12 PM

Heron_68566_PTR_01_1-14_08-23-18.indd 2

21/08/18 2:12 PM

C H A P T E R

1

General Overview of SRS
and SBRT Program
Dwight E. Heron, M. Saiful Huq, and Annette Quinn

Stereotaxy refers to a procedure in which points
within the brain are localized using an external
fixed three-dimensional (3D) reference system
such as a rigid head frame to perform a neurological procedure in a minimally invasive manner. The
“radiosurgery” is accomplished by directing beams
of radiation along any trajectory in this 3D space
toward the localized targeted mass of known 3D
coordinates. Stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) is a
distinct discipline that uses large doses of highly
accurate, precise, and conformal external beam
radiation to inactivate or eradicate the localized
target mass in the brain or spine without the need
to make an incision in a single procedure using
image guidance.
Lars Leksell, a Swedish neurosurgeon, developed the term “stereotactic radiosurgery” in 1951
(1) as a novel concept of a noninvasive method to
treat lesions that were not accessible by open surgery techniques. He coupled a 200-kV x-ray therapy
machine with a stereotactic frame that he designed
to treat patients for facial pain. Leksell quickly realized that radiation of a higher energy than 200-kV
system available at that time was highly desirable.
So, he discarded kilovolt x-rays and between the
period 1957 and about 1967, he evaluated the use
of 185-MeV protons at the Gustaf Werner Institute
in Uppsala, Sweden. Around this time (e.g., 1954),
under the guidance of Lawrence and Jacob Fabrikant,
the Berkley group used 340-MeV protons from
the synchrocyclotron at the Radiation Laboratory

to systematically irradiate pituitary gland in patients
with advanced cancers. In 1961, Raymond Kjellberg
started a radiosurgery program at Harvard Cyclotron
Laboratory and treated patients with arteriovenous
malformations (AVMs) and skull-based tumors using
165-MeV proton beams. It should be noted that all
these facilities were never designed for clinical use;
their focus was mainly to pursue physics research.
In the mid- to late 1960s, Leksell and Borje
Larsson collaborated to develop the first radiosurgery device, the “Gamma Knife I,” suitable for use
in the hospital (2). This unit had 179 cobalt-60
(Co-60) sources distributed in an approximately
hemispherical pattern and was placed at Sophiahemmet Hospital in Stockholm in December
1967. By mid-1970s, Gamma Knife I decayed and
Gamma Knife II was built that had similar design
characteristics of Gamma Knife I. In the era before
CT, treatments were limited to patients with AVMs
and acoustic neuroma that could be imaged either
on angiography or by polymography, respectively.
The first commercially produced Gamma Knife,
model U, was installed at the University of Pittsburgh
in 1987 (3). AVMs and other skull-based tumors
that failed other treatments were considered the
initial indications for radiosurgery. The encouraging results of radiosurgery at the University of
Pittsburgh for benign tumors and vascular malfunctions led to an exponential rise in radiosurgery
cases. Model U presented challenging Co-60 loading and reloading issues. So, over the next years,
3

Heron_68566_PTR_01_1-14_08-23-18.indd 3

21/08/18 2:12 PM

4

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

new models were designed. These Models B,
C, and 4C were all installed at the University of
Pittsburgh over the period ranging from 1996 to
2005. They all had 201 Co-60 sources arranged in
a circular fashion and four collimators (4, 8, 14,
and 18 mm). A new model of Gamma Knife, LGK
Perfexion, was introduced in 2007. The design
features of this model are very different from
those of the previous models; it has 192 Co-60
sources arranged in a conical, rather than spherical, configuration, and three circular collimators
(4, 8, and 16 mm). The latest model of Gamma
Knife, the Leksell Gamma Knife® ICONTM, was
introduced recently. The ICONTM treatment unit
is a radiosurgery device that maintains the same
integrity as the PerfexionTM unit with a few additions: kilovoltage cone-beam computed tomography (kV-CBCT) for stereotactic localization and
the ability to treat patients without traditional
fixation using a mask with real-time tracking of the
patient motion through the use of a high-definition
motion management (HDMM) system that relies
on an infrared marker.
Technological innovation for linear accelerator
(linac)-based radiosurgery began in the early 1980s.
Four academic centers located in Heidelberg,
Montreal, Boston, and Gainesville were at the forefront of this technological innovation research,
which at that time consisted mainly of making
hardware modifications to the linacs to facilitate
the stereotactic frames and improving the targeting
accuracy to overcome the shortcomings associated
with the treatment couch and gantry rotation characteristics. In 1982, Betti and Derechinsky reported
the radiosurgical treatment of a patient using a photon beam from a 10-MV linac with the patient sitting
in a movable chair that they designed in-house and
wearing the Talairach frame (4,5). This followed
the development of linac-based radiosurgery at the
German Cancer Center (DKFZ) in Heidelberg,
Germany, where the group used a commercial
Riechert-Mundinger stereotactic frame and modified
it to mount on the couch of a Siemens linac (6).
Other important works that addressed the inaccuracies that result from the movement of the couch are
those by Lutz et al. (7–9) at Harvard and Podgorsak
et al. (1987) at McGill University in Montreal (10).
Wendell Lutz designed a floor stand to immobilize
and precisely position a patient’s head independent
of the radiation therapy couch, without reference to
room lasers or light field (7–9). Friedman and Bova,
at the University of Florida in Gainesville, followed
on the work of the Harvard group and designed an

Heron_68566_PTR_01_1-14_08-23-18.indd 4

isocentric arm that coupled the source and collimator, through a high-precision bearing, to the floor
stand to improve the accuracy associated with gantry
rotation (11). These efforts led to the development
of the first commercial linac radiosurgery system—
the SRS 200—manufactured by Philips Medical
Systems. This system included the Gainesville floorstand apparatus and CT-based treatment planning
system, a Brown-Roberts-Wells (BRW) stereotactic
frame, circular collimators with nominal diameter
from 10 to 32 mm in 2-mm increments, and other
components from Radionics.
Proliferation in linac-based SRS/stereotactic body
radiation therapy (SBRT) occurred when the noninvasive relocatable Gill-Thomas-Cosman (GTC)
frame was introduced at the Royal Marsden Hospital
in London, England, in 1991 (12). With this frame,
it was possible to reposition the patient within less
than 1.0 mm (3D displacement). Because of the
success of using relocatable GTC frame for SRS
treatments, Radionics, Inc. manufactured it commercially, and other relocatable frames were developed shortly after the introduction of GTC frame.
Through the mid-1990s, radiosurgery was delivered using circular collimators. Because tumors
are not necessarily circular in shape, treatment
with circular collimators often resulted in a compromise between plan quality, treatment time,
and homogeneity. In the years to follow, significant technological development took place to
shape the radiation field. These advances included
shaping the radiation field by adding “vanes”
to circular collimators (13), development of
micro-multileaf collimator (MLC) by the German
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) in Heidelberg
(14), miniature multileaf collimator (15), the m3,
52-leaf micro-MLC system developed jointly by
BrainLAB GmbH (Heimstetten, Germany) and
Varian, and development of a double-focused
miniature MLC in conjunction with WellhoferDosimetrie (Schwarzenbruck, Germany) (16).
Development of dedicated linac-based radiosurgery systems soon followed the initiatives
described in the previous paragraph. This occurred
because linac-based radiosurgery treatments faced
controversy, largely on the assertion by some practitioners that linac-based radiosurgery could not
match the accuracy of Gamma Knife units. Efforts
by different vendors led to the development of dedicated radiosurgery linacs. These systems include
a robot-mounted linac, the Cyberknife, marketed
by Accuray (Santa Clara, CA); a C-arm multirotation axis linac produced by Mitsubishi Electric Ltd.

21/08/18 2:12 PM

1: GENERAL OVERVIEW OF SRS AND SBRT PROGRAM

(Tokyo, Japan); a conventional single-energy 6-MV
photon with a fixed 10-cm-diameter primary collimator (600 SR, Varian) linac; and a linac with an
integrated micro-MLC (Novalis, BrainLAB).
To improve immobilization and targeting accuracy for extracranial treatments, Elekta marketed a
product known as Elekta stereotactic body frame,
Hamilton and Lulu (17) developed an immobilization box for performing radiosurgery of targets involving and adjacent to the spine, and the
German Cancer Center (DKFZ) in Heidelberg also
developed a stereotactic body frame for extracranial
applications.
Modern linacs such as the TrueBeam STx and
Edge (Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto, CA)
and Axesse and Versa HD (Elekta AB, Stockholm,
Sweden) provide many capabilities such as kilovoltage and megavoltage orthogonal imaging and
CBCT capabilities, flattening filter-free beams, volumetric-modulated arc therapy, and capabilities for
gated treatments, which are all well suited for SRS
and SBRT.

WHAT IS SRS/SBRT?
The terms SRS and SBRT refer to an innovative,
high-precision, noninvasive, image-guided delivery
of very high doses of radiation to target a tumor
in an extremely hypofractionated treatment (typically up to five fractions). The use of SRS or SBRT
facilitates the delivery of highly conformal doses of
radiation to a tumor with a sharp dose gradient to
avoid irradiating the adjacent organs at risk (OARs).
This therefore allows for the delivery of higher
radiation doses without increasing toxicity, with a
potential for improved disease control and survival.
In recent years, various national professional
societies in different countries have provided different definitions for SRS and SBRT. The following
gives the definitions of SRS and SBRT given by the
different professional societies as indicated.
The American Association of Neurological
Surgeons (AANS), the Congress of Neurological
Surgeons (CNS), and the American Society for
Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology (ASTRO)
define SRS as a technique for destroying tumor
with highly precise doses of ionizing radiation.
This modalities requires a multi-disciplinary
team including a neurosurgeon, radiation oncologist and medical physicist and can be performed
on a variety of platforms including multi-source
Cobalt-60, particle accelerators, or linear accelerators (18).

Heron_68566_PTR_01_1-14_08-23-18.indd 5

5

American College of Radiology (ACR)-ASTRO
practice parameter for the performance of brain
SRS defines SRS strictly as “radiation therapy
delivered via stereotactic guidance with approximately 1-mm targeting accuracy to intracranial
targets in 1 to 5 fractions” (19). The ACR-ASTRO
practice parameter for the performance of SBRT
defines SBRT as follows:
“Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is
an external beam radiation therapy method that
very precisely delivers a high dose of radiation to
an extracranial target. SBRT is typically a complete course of therapy delivered in 1 to 5 sessions
(fractions)” (20–23). Other professional societies
such as the American Association of Physicists in
Medicine (AAPM) Task Group Report No. 101
(23), the Canadian Association of Radiation
Oncology-Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy
(CARO-SBRT) (24), the National Radiotherapy
Implementation Group of the United Kingdom
(25), and the German Society of Radiation Oncology (Deutschen Gesellschaft für Radioonkologie,
DEGRO) (26) all agree with the above-mentioned
definition of SBRT in which they specify the total
number of fractionations in more general terms as
“one or few treatment fractions.”
The key components of SRS and SBRT procedures are as follows:
Immobilization systems to immobilize the patient
during simulation and treatment delivery; multimodality imaging, such as CT, MRI, and PET/CT, to
localize the tumor or abnormality and organs at risk
within the body and define its exact size and shape;
delineation of the target and OAR volume using
different imaging modalities; specialized treatment planning using static fields, with or without
intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT)
techniques, rotational fields, volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT) plans, or multiple
robotically directed beams, that results in a highly
conformal dose of radiation to the target volume
and a steep dose fall-off to within millimeters for
SRS and subcentimeters for SBRT treatments;
stereotactic target localization and delivery of high
doses of radiation with high levels of targeting accuracy, facilitated by imaging and/or placement of fiducial markers, using gamma ray, high-energy x-ray, or
particle beams; motion assessment techniques such
as four-dimensional (4D) CT, breath-hold, and fluoroscopy to assess organ motion (e.g., respirationinduced motion) during simulation, management
of motion using techniques such as breath-hold,
abdominal compression, or immobilization devices

21/08/18 2:12 PM

6

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

such as body fix, and use of delivery techniques
such as beam gating or tumor tracking to ensure
that the planned dose is delivered to the target; and
strict protocols for quality assurance (QA) because
SRS and SBRT demand a level of accuracy that
surpasses the requirements of conventionally fractionated radiation treatment or IMRT treatments.

DISEASE SITES TREATED WITH SRS/SBRT
In general, SRS or SBRT is not indicated for
cancers that are widely disseminated throughout
the body. When considering SRS or SBRT for a
given indication, various factors are taken into
account before decisions are made on whether a
given type of cancer should be treated with SRS
or SBRT. These considerations include, for example, (a) whether the patient and the tumor meet
the selection criteria developed for the treatment
of such indications; (b) whether the cancer should
be treated using single fraction or multiple fractions; (c) types of imaging studies that are needed
for the identification of the tumor (i.e., CT, MRI,
PET-CT); (d) types of fusion, rigid or nonrigid,
that are relevant for the delineation of the target volumes; (e) dose fractionation for treatment
planning; (f) dose constraints for critical structures; (g) whether motion management will be
important; (h) appropriate platforms (such as
linac-based, Cyberknife, Gamma Knife), techniques (e.g., intensity-modulated radiosurgery
[IMRS], VMAT, motion management), and field
arrangements (for linac-based SRS/SBRT) to be
used for the treatment of the cancer; (i) types
of imaging studies for localization during setup
and treatment; (j) follow-up imaging protocols;
(k) outcome data; (l) quality of life (QOL) issues;
and (m) safety considerations.
Intracranially, there are many indications that
are currently being treated with SRS including,
for example, AVMs, acoustic neuroma, meningiomas, pituitary adenoma, vagal schwannoma/
paragangliomas, brain metastasis, anaplastic
astrocytoma/glioblastoma multiforme (GBM),
trigeminal neuralgia, cochlea, thalamotomy, and
pallidotomy. Extracranially, many disease sites are
currently being treated using SBRT procedures.
These areas include but are not limited to the following: head and neck, lung, pancreas, kidney,
adrenal gland, liver, prostate, gynecological sites,
spine, and oligometastases.
A detailed discussion on the technical and clinical considerations for treating the disease sites

Heron_68566_PTR_01_1-14_08-23-18.indd 6

mentioned earlier is given in Chapters 4 to 7 and
10 to 20.

GENERAL STATEMENTS OF CLINICAL
OUTCOMES FOR SRS/SBRT
SRS/SBRT technique facilitates delivery of high
doses of radiation to the target volume in one to five
fractions with acceptable toxicities to OARs. Faster
treatment time, higher accuracy in the delivery of
high total dose to the target with acceptable toxicities to OARs, and patient comfort all contribute to a
better clinical outcome. Because of this, facilities
across the United States and all over the world are
adopting this technique to treat different disease sites.
Lung cancer is one of the deadliest diseases and
common cause of cancer death in men and women
in the United States. Lobectomy is considered to
be the standard treatment for early stage non–
small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, many
patients are not candidates for surgery because of
aging and/or other comorbid conditions. SBRT has
demonstrated excellent local control and increased
survival with minimal toxicity in patients with early
stage NSCLC and is now considered to be a curative alternative to surgery for patients with early
stage NSCLC, for elderly patients with severe heart
disease, for patients in poor health, and for patients
with early stage but inoperable NSCLC tumors.
Metastatic tumors are the most common malignancy of the spine and represent more than 90% of
the spinal tumor cases. It has also been estimated
that in 5% to 10% of all cancer patients, metastatic
disease to the spine develops during the disease.
Spinal metastasis can cause pain, compression
fractures, and spinal cord compression. Although
these symptoms are typically treated by externalbeam radiation therapy (EBRT) and surgery, up to
50% of patients will require further intervention
for recurrent pain. However, EBRT can cause problems due to its irradiation of healthy tissue and the
spine itself. As a result, support has grown for the
use of SRS, which can deliver a highly conformal
and large radiation dose to a tumor while sparing
the spinal cord. One study by Heron et al. (27)
evaluated pain control, neurological deficits, toxicity, and tumor recurrence in a group of patients
who received CyberKnife radiosurgery in either
single or multiple sessions. The authors found
that pain reduction and relief was about 73%
for all patients regardless of whether they were
treated in a single session or multiple sessions.
However, pain control was significantly higher for

21/08/18 2:12 PM

1: GENERAL OVERVIEW OF SRS AND SBRT PROGRAM

single-session patients (100%) than for multisession
patients (88%) for all measured time points up to
12 months. The authors found that tumor control was superior in the multisession group. Specifically, at 2 years, long-term radiological control
for all multisession patients was 89% and that for
single-session patients it was 61% (with a p value
of <.001). In addition, at 2 years, tumor control
probability in the multisession group was 96%
compared with 70% in the single-session group.
Patients in both groups were equally likely to experience improved neurological functions at each
evaluation time point up to 2 years. Specifically, at
1 and 2 years, 71% of single-session patients and
79% of multisession patients had improved neurological symptoms. For toxicity, the overall rate
of any adverse event was similar in both groups
(4.6% in the single-session group and 5.9% in
the multisession group). The median survival for
the entire cohort was 13 months (11 months for
single-session patients and 18 months for multisession patients). Up to the first year, single-session
radiosurgery controlled pain better than multisession radiosurgery, although the single-session
re-treatment rate was significantly higher. Local
control and 1-year survival rates were significantly
better for multisession patients.
Published literature shows that there are
good outcomes with SRS and SBRT treatments
of other disease sites such as primary and metastatic tumors to the liver, kidney, pancreas, and
prostate.

LAUNCHING A QUALITY SRS/SBRT
PROGRAM
Launching a quality SRS/SBRT program requires
the consideration of many features. The following
provides an overview of them.

Establishing the Goals
The drive to start a comprehensive SRS and
SBRT program requires a thoroughly vetted and
comprehensive evaluation of resource needs,
an established set of goals, a stated mission,
as well as an assessment of program feasibility.
This evaluation requires a multidisciplinary dialog with a common set of stakeholders including
institutional and clinical leaders, primary care
providers, referring physicians, and allied health
professionals, as well as patients and relevant
advocacy groups.

Heron_68566_PTR_01_1-14_08-23-18.indd 7

7

SRS/SBRT is very unlike conventional twodimensional (2D) and 3D radiation therapy and as
such requires a raft of items for implementation.
Before initiating the program, the principals should
ask the following questions:
●

What are the perceived needs?

●

What are the objectives of the program?
For whom and why is there a need for
the program?
What are the practice goals? What are
the institutional goals?
Is there a community need? Are there
patient advocacy groups that should be
engaged?

●

●

●

Once the above-stated questions have been comprehensively answered, the decision can be made
whether to proceed with the establishment of the
program.

The SRS/SBRT Team and Their Credentials
The establishment of a successful SRS/SBRT
program starts with the formation of a specialized
team of multidisciplinary professionals who will
be involved in the care of the oncology patient.
Members of this team should be appropriately
trained in all aspects of radiosurgical planning
and delivery procedures/techniques/processes.
This multidisciplinary team should consist of,
minimally, a radiation oncologist, a medical physicist, two radiation therapists (RTTs), a nurse with
radiosurgical experience, and a surgical and/or
medical oncologist. Optional but equally important are supportive services such as administrative,
information technology (IT), social work, and
nutritional services. Because of the narrow therapeutic ratio of radiosurgery, this multidisciplinary
team should be actively involved in the development of a quality management (QM) program and
a continuous quality improvement (CQI) program.
Task Group 100 of the AAPM recommends that
before launching a clinical program, the multidisciplinary team of professionals involved in the care
of patients should jointly develop a process map
of the specific treatment process, perform a failure
modes and effect analysis for every step in the process, and develop a risk-based QM program (28).
Details of how to set up such a prospective riskbased QM program are given in Chapter 3. Maintenance of an ongoing risk-based quality-managed
program will ensure that the patient will receive
the prescribed treatment correctly.

21/08/18 2:12 PM

8

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

Radiation oncologists responsible for the SRS/
SBRT treatments should have certification in
radiation oncology or therapeutic radiology by an
appropriate recognized certification board and/
or satisfactory completion of a residency program
in radiation oncology approved by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education
(ACGME) or other similarly recognized accreditation authorities. If the radiation oncology residency
training did not include SRS or SBRT training and
direct clinical experience, then specific training or
mentoring should be obtained in SRS and SBRT
before performing any radiosurgical procedures. In
addition, the radiation oncologist should undergo
vendor-specific delivery systems training. It should
be noted that radiation oncologists are also the
“authorized users” for the SRS/SBRT treatments
that are delivered using devices that use radioactive isotopes such as Co-60 sources. ACR-ASTRO
practice parameter for radiation oncology provides
guidance on the credentials for radiation oncologists for practicing SRS/SBRT (29).
For physicians completing the mentorship-based
experience program, it is generally recommended
that 5 to 10 proctored cases in each disease site
with documented sign-off of competencies should
be the norm. It is also important that there is an
ongoing commitment to a peer review process that
evaluates each patient and his or her treatment
plan prior to treatment.
Similarly, the medical physicists involved in the
SRS/SBRT procedures should be qualified medical physicists capable of performing SRS/SBRT
treatments independently. They should be certified by an appropriate recognized certification
board such as the American Board of Radiology
with specialties in therapeutic radiology (or previous medical physics certification categories of
radiological physics and therapeutic radiological
physics). If their training did not include SRS or
SBRT training and direct clinical experience, then
specific training or mentoring should be obtained
in SRS and SBRT before performing any SRS/
SBRT procedures. Such training should be documented. Documented evidence of knowledge is
demonstrated when the physicist either has accomplished the following or can perform the following
independently: (a) generated at least 15 treatment
plans for each disease site, intracranial and extracranial, using different techniques such as IMRS,
VMAT, cone-based planning, or others on appropriate delivery platforms such as linacs, Tomotherapy,
CyberKnife, or Gamma Knife; (b) knowledgeable

Heron_68566_PTR_01_1-14_08-23-18.indd 8

in all aspects of small-field dosimetry; (c) independently able to perform QA measurements on
equipment that are slated for SRS/SBRT treatments
following the guidelines recommended by various national professional societies or international
organizations such as International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and vendors; (d) independently able
to perform patient-specific QA measurements for
intracranial and extracranial treatment plans using
commercially available equipment; (e) knowledgeable about dose constraints for critical structures
as well as prescription doses for the disease sites
to be treated using SRS/SBRT; (f) familiar with
CT-, MRI-, or PET-CT-based cross-sectional anatomical or functional imaging; (g) knowledgeable
about the performance characteristics and operational aspects of various platforms that are used to
deliver SRS/SBRT treatments; and (h) knowledgeable about various immobilization devices that are
used for SRS/SBRT treatments.
The therapists should be certified in radiation
therapy by the American Registry of Radiologic
Technologists (ARRT) or a similar organization.
They should be well trained on the following:
(a) knowledgeable on the operational aspects of
the platform used for the delivery of SRS/SBRT
treatments, (b) experienced with all imaging protocols and procedures that are used to localize the
target before treatment is delivered, and (c) knowledgeable about all the policies and procedures that
have been established by the organization for the
treatment of SRS/SBRT patients.
Radiosurgery and SBRT are rapidly changing
fields with processes that continue to evolve as
experience grows, particularly for extracranial
sites. It is important that there are processes in
place to ensure that all team members are up to
date on the latest indications, prescription dose to
the target and dose constraints to the OARs, QA,
and patient safety recommendations.

Resourcing the Program
Resourcing is essential to the overall success and
safety of an SRS/SBRT program. It is important
that there is institutional commitment at the outset and on an ongoing basis to maintain a safe,
high-quality program. The cost of initiation and
implementation is substantial and will include the
acquisition of the following:
●

Specialized linac with kilovoltage imaging capabilities or modification of an
existing unit that is desirable.

21/08/18 2:12 PM

1: GENERAL OVERVIEW OF SRS AND SBRT PROGRAM
●

Modern treatment planning systems
equipped with advanced dose calculation
algorithms.

●

Advanced imaging technologies, for example, MRI and PET-CT.

●

Immobilization devices.

●

Physics QA devices including those for
small-field dosimetry, water phantoms,
plan QA devices, and so forth.

●

Physical plant upgrades including possible new vault construction given SRS/
SBRT is labor intensive and a single-vault
facility needing equipment upgrades may
present significant operational challenges. If possible, space for multidisciplinary,
one-stop shopping for patient intake,
evaluation, and treatment recommendations that allows for coordinator care and
patient convenience is desirable.

●

Billing and compliance resources including patient financial counseling.

Analysis of the Patient Population
A key element in deciding whether to pursue an
SRS/SBRT program is a careful evaluation of a
region’s or institution’s patient demographics.
It is now clear that a greater understanding of
hypofractionation (e.g., breast, prostate, lung)
coupled with the drive to improve access, control cost and improve patient convenience led
to radiosurgical techniques, which is now being
closely evaluated.
Each institution must thoroughly evaluate its
patient population and understand the potential
impact including cannibalization on existing treatment techniques such as IMRT or brachytherapy.
These two techniques are frequently affected by
the use of SRS/SBRT. For example, some early
stage lung cancers might be treated with fewer
treatments with SBRT (3–5 fractions) instead of
3D or IMRT (28–30 fractions).
The fastest growing areas in radiosurgery remain
extracranial sites, led principally by lung cancer. The
success of lung screening programs and the detection
of early stage lung cancer now offer new opportunities of nonoperative approaches to NSCLC alongside surgical approaches (30). Although a direct
head-to-head comparison in a prospective manner
is yet to be accomplished, several ongoing clinical
trials are evaluating whether SBRT is as equipoised
as surgical resection in NSCLC.

Heron_68566_PTR_01_1-14_08-23-18.indd 9

9

Expansion of treatment indications is likely to be
derived from the expansion of SBRT in the management of oligometastatic disease where there
is ample evidence of treatment benefit in patients
with metastatic disease involving five or fewer
lesions in three or fewer organs.
An even more exciting category of patients comprises those with widely metastatic disease who are
candidates for immunotherapy. Early data appear
to suggest that focal targeting of a subset of tumors
may enhance the effects of targeted therapy and
immunotherapy. Although the full mechanism of
this enhanced therapeutic response is not entirely
understood, it has been observed that an abscopal
effect, that is, treatment of a local tumor, results
in an enhanced response at a distal untreated site.
This concept is outlined in Chapter 20 in greater
detail.
The multidisciplinary approach to radiosurgery
with the collaboration of surgical and medical
oncology will serve to broaden the scope and a
variety of patients evaluated by a comprehensive
program. It is important that there is an established set of standard operating procedures (SOPs)
regarding consultation, treatment and posttreatment assessment, and continuity of care on an
ongoing basis.

Selecting the Right Equipment
Second only to personnel, equipment procurement
and facilities development are critical to establishing an SRS/SBRT program. First, the scope of the
program needs to be clearly defined, that is, intracranial, extracranial, or both. If extracranial treatments are desirable, then a Gamma Knife (Elekta
Medical System, Stockholm, Sweden) will not be
a sufficient radiosurgical device. Depending on
the need for motion management, device selection
may be a factor. In general, treatment characteristics are outlined in Table 1.1.

Establishing the Infrastructure
and Physical Plant
For most single vault practices, the upgrade to
stereotactic radiosurgical systems might pose
some challenges as frequently the existing linacs
might need to be taken offline for these upgrades.
Depending on the age and capabilities of the existing linac, these downtimes can range from several
weekends to several months. For most practices,
downtime of several months might be impractical,
undesirable, and/or detrimental.

21/08/18 2:12 PM

10

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

TABLE 1.1 Stereotactic Devices and Characteristics
Intracranial

Extracranial

Motion
Management

Arc
Therapy

Multifraction

Adaptive

ConeBeam CT

Cyberknife

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

Gamma Knife

Yes

Noa

No

No

Yesb

No

Yesb

Infinity

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Novalis

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Protons

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

TrueBeam/
Trilogy

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Tomotherapy

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

aCan treat upper cervical spine.
bGamma Knife Icon only.

Compared with conventional treatment procedures, SRS/SBRT programs consume more staff
time in immobilization, simulation, planning,
and treatment. These additional resource requirements often result in physical plant modifications
to accommodate these additional time constraints.
A careful assessment of the current state and the
potential impact of an advanced radiation therapy program such as radiosurgery should be performed. Frequently, a common solution to address
the additional demand from SRS/SBRT program is
to extend the treatment day, adding a second shift,
and in some instances building a second vault to
expand capacity. The latter option has some desirable attributes as it would allow for continued operations without interruption of existing care while
providing flexibility in future upgrade options.
Furthermore, if advanced imaging such as PET-CT
is to be incorporated as in the case of some centers,
dedicated rooms for injection, uptake, and storage of radiotracers might be necessary. Figure 1.1
shows a layout of a radiation therapy facility with
SRS and SBRT capabilities.

●

One therapist for CT simulation. If PETCT simulation is planned, the therapist
should be certified in the handling of
unsealed radiotracers. If such a therapist is not available, then a nuclear
medicine technician along with an RTT
is necessary.

●

One medical physicist, preferred Masters
or PhD level with board certification with
specific training in radiosurgical techniques, small-field dosimetry, and QA.

●

One radiation oncologist, ideally
residency-trained or experienced in delivery of highly advanced, stereotactic
therapies. Physician should have documentation indicating training in radiosurgical techniques, patient selection
and assessment, QA, and patient safety.

●

One nurse, ideally with radiosurgical
experience. This staff member may be
shared with the general radiation oncology practice but given the special
needs of radiosurgery patients, this
nurse will need to become proficient in
meeting the specific needs of this population as well as function as a coordinator of patients within a multidisciplinary setting.

●

One administrative staff person to oversee standard operative procedures, insurance authorizations, billing, and scheduling. This staff member will also work
with the entire team to ensure compliance of all regulatory requirements of
radiosurgery.

Gathering the Right Staff
Adequate staffing is an essential component to a
quality radiosurgical program that will depend on
patient volume. To implement a comprehensive
quality and safety program for the entire SRS/
SBRT treatment process, it will be necessary to
ensure quality and safety at each link in this complex chain of treatment process. Minimum staffing
levels should include the following:
●

A minimum of two RTTs on the treatment machine.

Heron_68566_PTR_01_1-14_08-23-18.indd 10

21/08/18 2:12 PM

1: GENERAL OVERVIEW OF SRS AND SBRT PROGRAM

11

FIGURE 1.1 Layout of a radiation therapy facility with SRS and SBRT capabilities.
SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy; SRS, stereotactic radiosurgery.

●

Surgical oncologist(s) and/or medical oncologist(s) who are important elements
for a well-rounded radiosurgery program.
Ideally, these supporting specialists should
themselves be familiar with and have
documented training in radiosurgical
techniques and should participate in patient review and selection, peer review,
and follow-up.

Heron_68566_PTR_01_1-14_08-23-18.indd 11

It is important to note that staffing may be shared
with general practice and is not necessarily mutually
exclusive. What is essential is that core competencies specific to a radiosurgical program should exist.

Training Needs and Requirement
The biggest challenge to any new radiosurgery program is identification and recruitment of appropriately trained staff. In fact, this is also the greatest

21/08/18 2:12 PM

12

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

risk and many reported incidents can be traced back
to inexperienced and inadequately trained personnel. Consequently, care in vetting, documentation,
and supplementation of training is essential when
gaps in skill sets or knowledge deficits are identified.
Given the rapid evolution of SRS/SBRT, training
should be updated on a routine basis with a solid
institutional commitment to continuing medical
education (CME) and professional education for
all team members. These training aspects should
include but are not exclusive of web-based CME,
in-person conferences, at least yearly in-service
training, and evaluation of core competencies.
Training is often divided into two main
components:
1. Equipment training: This is often provided

by equipment manufacturers and is predominately focused on the day-to-day and routine
operation of the program machinery, including updates on the linac and treatment planning systems.
2. Clinical training: This is often more challeng-

ing to acquire especially as a team. Ideally,
training is best performed as a team (inclusive
of at least three members) attending specially
designed SRS/SBRT training courses. These
training sessions usually emphasize the need
for efficient quality team work and clear
communication.
Exposure to common errors in SRS is also an
essential part of initial and ongoing training. This
should include the following:
●

Review of report or errors in the literature

●

How to identify program-specific risk
and to establish adequate reporting
mechanism for events and near misses
and corrective action processes

At least a yearly in-service program of all the
team members on ensuring quality program and
fostering a culture of safety should be performed.

Information Technology Needs
These advanced radiation therapy programs not
only are staff and facilities intensive but also often
have significant IT demands. These demands
include need for installation and configuration of
powerful computer systems, and integration and
networking into existing hospital and general cancer programs network. Frequently, networking

Heron_68566_PTR_01_1-14_08-23-18.indd 12

into picture archiving and communication system
(PACS) for sharing images and data via Digital
Imaging Communication in Medicine (DICOM)
import/export is critical for the centers to efficiently acquire and procure information necessary for treatment planning. The record and verify
systems and deformable registration software are
critical items that should be installed and configured for program use.
Although a dedicated IT resource is not essential, a specialist who is familiar with SRS systems
and their special needs on a network, especially
as it relates to bandwidth, requires network traffic resources and image servers and treatmentrelated PACS.

SUMMARY
Launching an SRS or SBRT program can be challenging but also rewarding. Establishing the goals
and SOPs, identification of key members, and
resourcing the effort are fundamentals for a successful implementation. A solid and competent
team committed to the highest level of care will
yield dividends well into the future.

REFERENCES
1. Leksell L. The stereotaxic method and radiosurgery of the
brain. Acta Chir Scand. 1951;102:316-319. PubMed PMID:
14914373.
2. Leksell L. Cerebral radiosurgery. I. Gammathalanotomy in
two cases of intractable pain. Acta Chir Scand. 1968;134:585595. PubMed PMID: 5713443.
3. Lunsford LD, Maitz A, Lindner G. First United States 201
source cobalt-60 gamma unit for radiosurgery. Appl Neurophysiol. 1987;50:253-256. PubMed PMID: 3329857.
4. Betti OO, Derechinsky YE. Irradiations stereotaxiques
multifaisceaux. Neurochirurgie. 1982;28:55-56.
5. Betti OO, Derechinsky YE. Hyposelective encephalic irradiation with linear accelerator. Acta Neurochir. 1984;33:
385-390.
6. Hartmann GH, Schlegel W, Sturm V, et al. Cerebral radiation
surgery using moving field irradiation at a linear accelerator
facility. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1985;11:1185-1192.
PubMed PMID: 3997600.
7. Lutz W, Winston KR, Maleki N, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery in the brain using a 6 MV linear accelerator. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 1984;10(suppl 2):189.
8. Lutz W, Winston KR, Maleki N. A system for stereotactic
radiosurgery with a linear accelerator and its performance
evaluation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1986;12(suppl 1):
100. doi:10.1016/0360-3016(86)90521-3
9. Lutz W, Winston KR, Maleki N. A system for stereotactic
radiosurgery with a linear accelerator. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 1988;14:373-381. PubMed PMID: 3276655.
10. Podgorsak EB, Olivier A, Pla M, et al. Physical aspects
of dynamic stereotactic radiosurgery. Appl Neurophysiol.
1987;50:263-268. PubMed PMID: 3329860.

21/08/18 2:12 PM

1: GENERAL OVERVIEW OF SRS AND SBRT PROGRAM
11. Friedman WA, Bova FJ. The University of Florida radiosurgery system. Surg Neurol. 1989;32:334–342. PubMed
PMID: 2683164.
12. Gill SS, Thomas DGT, Warrington AP, et al. Relocatable frame for stereotactic external beam radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1991;20:599-603.
doi:10.1016/0360-3016(91)90076-G
13. Leavitt DD, Gibbs FA Jr, Heilbrun MP, et al. Dynamic field
shaping to optimize stereotactic radiosurgery. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys. 1991;21:1247-1255.PubMed PMID: 1938523.
14. Schlegel W, Pastyr O, Bortfeld T, et al. Computer systems and
mechanical tools for stereotactically guided conformation
therapy with linear accelerators. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
1992;24:781-787. PubMed PMID: 1429105.
15. Shiu AS, Kooy HM, Ewton JR, et al. Comparison of miniature multileaf collimation (MMLC) with circular collimation for stereotactic treatment. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
1997;37:679-688. PubMed PMID: 9112467.
16. Meeks SL, Bova FJ, Buatti JM, et al. Clinical dosimetry considerations for a doubled-focused miniature multileaf collimator.
In: Kondziolka D, ed. Radiosurgery 1999. Basel, Switzerland:
Karger; 2000:83-90.
17. Hamilton AJ, Lulu BA. A prototype device for linear
accelerator-based extracranial radiosurgery. Acta Neurochir
Suppl. 1995;63:40-43. PubMed PMID: 7502726.
18. Barnett GH, Linskey ME, Adler JR, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery—an organized neurosurgery-sanctioned definition.
J Neurosurg. 2007;106(1):1-5. doi:10.3171/jns.2007.106.1.1
19. ACR Practice Parameters for Performance of brain Stereotactic Radiosurgery, Revised 2016 (resolution 41) https://
www.acr.org/-/media/ACR/Files/Practice-Parameters/
StereoBrain.pdf
20. American College of Radiology. ACR–ASTRO practice
parameter for the performance of stereotactic body radiation therapy. 2014. Available at: https://www.acr.org/-/
media/ACR/Files/Practice-Parameters/SBRT-RO.pdf.
21. American College of Radiology. Practice Guideline for the
Performance of Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy. Reston,
VA: American College of Radiology; 2009:8.

Heron_68566_PTR_01_1-14_08-23-18.indd 13

13

22. Potters L, Kavanagh B, Galvin JM, et al. American Society
for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology (ASTRO) and
American College of Radiology (ACR) practice guideline for
the performance of stereotactic body radiation therapy. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;76:326-332. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2009.09.042
23. Benedict SH, Yenice KM, Followill D, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy: the report of AAPM Task Group 101. Med
Phys. 2010;37(8):4078-4101. doi:10.1118/1.3438081
24. Sahgal A, Roberge D, Schellenberg D, et al. The Canadian Association of Radiation Oncology scope of practice
guidelines for lung, liver and spine stereotactic body radiotherapy. Clin Oncol. 2012;24(9):629-639. doi:10.1016/
j.clon.2012.04.006
25. Kirkbride P, Cooper T. Stereotactic body radiotherapy. Guidelines for commissioners, providers and clinicians: a national
report. Clin Oncol. 2011;23(3):163-164. doi:10.1016/
j.clon.2011.01.155
26. Guckenberger M, Andratschke N, Alheit H, et al. Definition of stereotactic body radiotherapy: principles and practice for the treatment of stage I non-small cell lung cancer.
Strahlenther Onkol. 2014;190(1):26-33. doi:10.1007/
s00066-013-0450-y
27. Heron DE, Rajagopalan MS, Stone B, et al. Single-session and
multisession CyberKnife radiosurgery for spine metastases—
University of Pittsburgh and Georgetown University experience. J Neurosurg: Spine. 2012;17(1):11-18. doi:10.3171/20
12.4.SPINE11902
28. Huq MS, Fraass BA, Dunscombe PB, et al. Application of risk
analysis methods to radiation therapy quality management,
report of AAPM TG100 of the Therapy Physics Committee of
the AAPM. Med Phys. 2016;43(7):4209-4262.
29. American College of Radiology. ACR–ASTRO practice parameter for radiation oncology. 2009. Available at: https://www
.acr.org/-/media/ACR/Files/Practice-Parameters/RadOnc.pdf
30. National Lung Screening Trial Research Team. Reduced
lung-cancer mortality with low-dose computed tomographic
screening. N Engl J Med. 2011;365(5):395-409. doi:10.1056/
NEJMoa1102873

21/08/18 2:12 PM

Heron_68566_PTR_01_1-14_08-23-18.indd 14

21/08/18 2:12 PM

C H A P T E R

2

Radiobiology Principles
of Radiosurgery and SBRT
Ellen Yorke, David Carlson, and Vitali Moiseenko

At this point in time, there is no rigorous, comprehensive “radiobiology” that covers the multiple
effects of radiation therapy. There are serious theories about the true mechanisms of cell killing and
microenvironment changes that lead to tumor control and normal tissue complications in the clinical
setting (or even in the laboratory). Nonetheless,
clinicians and scientists have put together a useful
quantitative framework that describes and predicts
treatment effects for the full range of treatments
including conventionally fractionated treatments
and the extreme hypofractionation of stereotactic ablative radiation therapy (SABR, also called
stereotactic body radiation therapy [SBRT]). The
basic concepts of this framework are described in
this chapter.

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
The 5 Rs
Both the benefits and dangers of ionizing radiation
for treatment of cancer come from the fact that
radiation kills cells. Factors that alter cell killing
efficacy were summarized long ago by the “4 Rs”
of radiobiology:
1. Repair: Radiation produces both lethal and

sublethal damage. Given enough time, sublethal damage to a tumor cell may get repaired so that the cell retains the ability to
divide and produce progeny that can divide

indefinitely and perhaps metastasize. For a
normal organ, repair means that an initially damaged cell regains or keeps its ability
to contribute to organ function. See references (1-3) for details about the dominant
radiation damage and repair mechanisms.
The time course of repair is usually modeled as exponential or biexponential, with
half-times ranging from about 15 minutes to
5 hours or more (4,5).
2. Repopulation: Tumor cells and many types of

normal cells (skin, mucosa, white blood cells)
repopulate their environment. To effectively
treat a tumor, radiation killing must outpace
repopulation so that at the end of treatment,
no cells capable of unlimited division (clonogens) remain at the irradiated site. Repopulation can occur while dose is being delivered
(as in brachytherapy) and during and between
sessions of a fractionated external beam regimen, in which case it is often modeled as
exponential growth, sometimes commencing
after a “kickoff” time of days to weeks (6).
Repopulation during treatment is responsible
for the loss of efficacy in long-course radiation
therapy regimens, whereas repopulation after treatment is the major (perhaps the only)
cause of local recurrence of an irradiated tumor. Although posttreatment repopulation is
often modeled as exponential growth, there
are other models, among them the Gompertz
15

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 15

23/08/18 6:13 PM

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

model, which allow for size-dependent growth
of new or recurrent tumors (7).
3. Redistribution: As cells pass through the cell

cycle, their sensitivity to radiation damage
changes. Because cells in vivo are asynchronous, cells in more sensitive phases are preferentially killed initially, so shortly after irradiation there is an excess of cells that were
in the resistant phase during irradiation. The
effect of redistribution of cells within the cell
cycle eventually restores the original distribution and thereby also restores the initial
sensitivity. The effect of redistribution on
clinical outcomes and its role in the efficacy
of different fractionation schedules is difficult to quantify and remains unclear.
4. Reoxygenation (1,8): Hypoxia is a common

feature of the tumor microenvironment
and is known to increase radioresistance.
Two types of tumor hypoxia are described
in the literature, chronic and acute; the
latter, in contrast to the former, is the result of temporary opening and closing of
blood vessels inside the tumor. Tumor vasculature is structurally and functionally
abnormal and inefficient at transporting
oxygen. Hypoxic cells are more distant from
microvessels than oxic cells and diffusion
limits the amount of oxygen available to
them. Furthermore, hyperactive oxic cells
consume excessive amounts of oxygen,
which reduces oxygen availability beyond
what diffusion alone would allow. However,
as radiation kills the more sensitive oxic cells,
their oxygen use decreases and hypoxic cells
reoxygenate and become more radiosensitive.
Because reoxygenation requires days to occur,
the impact of hypoxia on outcomes of shortcourse treatments, as in SBRT, is unclear.
A fifth “R”—radiosensitivity—is sometimes
invoked because some tumor histological types are
much more radiosensitive than others (9,10). For
example, lymphomas are radiosensitive, whereas
melanoma is radioresistant. Normal tissue cells
also have a range of radiosensitivities, which may
be reflected in different dose dependence of normal
tissue complications in different organs. Intrinsic
radiosensitivity of tumors and normal tissues may
also vary between patients and within individual
tumors, even in a single patient.
The Rs apply to cell killing by all types of
ionizing radiation. However, because by far the

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 16

greatest clinical SBRT experience is with megavoltage photons, further discussions and associated model parameters in this chapter are based
on the photon experience.

Mechanisms of Radiation-Induced
Cell Killing
The Rs described earlier are qualitative observations
without mention of the mechanisms by which radiation kills cells. But quantitative assumptions are
needed to rationally manipulate treatment schedules
and dose distributions to achieve a beneficial therapeutic ratio, that is, high tumor control probability
(TCP) and low or clinically acceptable normal tissue
complication probability (NTCP). For conventionally
fractionated regimens (1–3 Gy/fraction), the overwhelmingly dominant mechanism of cell killing is
damage to the double-stranded DNA structure. Specifically, DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), or perhaps a subset of DSBs, are considered precursors of
radiation-induced lethal lesions (11). In vitro experiments, which have been done for decades on numerous cell types by numerous investigators (1), show that
for cells exposed to a single dose of densely ionizing
radiation (e.g., alpha particles), the logarithm of the
surviving fraction (SF) of cells decreases linearly with
dose, D (SF = exp[–D]). For a single dose of sparsely
ionizing radiation (kV or MV x-rays, electrons), the
logarithm of SF has a “shoulder”—a shallower than
linear decrease at low doses—as shown in Figure 2.1.

0

0

5

10

Dose (Gy)
15

20

25

30

–5
–10
–15
In (SF)

16

–20
–25
–30
–35

Linear
LQ
USC

–40

FIGURE 2.1 Single-fraction cell survival curves for three
models: the linear model (SF(D) = exp(–D) with  = 0.33
Gy–1), the LQ model (SF(D) = exp(–D – D2) with  = 0.33
Gy–1,  = 0.03835 Gy–2), and the USC model (SF(D) =
exp(–D – D2) with  = 0.33 Gy–1,  = 0.03835 Gy–2 for
D ≤ DT and = exp(–D/D0 + Dq/D0) for D ≥ DT with  = 0.33,
D0 = 1.25 Gy, and Dq = 1.8 Gy). These last parameters and
 and  for the other two models are from reference (24).
LQ, linear–quadratic; SF, surviving fraction; USC, universal survival
curve.

23/08/18 6:13 PM

2: RADIOBIOLOGY PRINCIPLES OF RADIOSURGERY AND SBRT

Linear–Quadratic Model
In vitro single-fraction cell survival curves are
well fit by a number of mathematical functions
(or “models”) including the linear–quadratic [LQ]
model:
SF(D) = exp(− D − D2 )

(1)

This general behavior persists at least to singlefraction doses up to 10 Gy and is a reasonable
approximation up to 15 to 18 Gy (12) but the
“curviness” of in vitro survival curves does not
continue to ultrahigh doses. Rather, they begin
to straighten and approach a purely exponential
decrease (13). The radiobiological parameters 
and  depend on the cell type and environment
but, according to the LQ model, are independent
of dose. The linear term is associated with lethally
misrepaired DSBs or unrepairable DNA damage
formed by a single radiation track, whereas the
quadratic term is attributed to two DSBs, formed
by two independent radiation tracks traversing
the cell, perhaps at two different times (14). Cells
have the potential to repair such lesions before
the cell’s reproductive capability is destroyed, and
this makes a dose delivered in two fractions separated by an interval of time less effective than the
same total dose delivered in a single acute fraction.
Repair plays an important role in understanding
and modeling brachytherapy and in determining a
safe interval between external beam treatment fractions. The well-explored Lea-Catcheside formalism
deals with repair within the LQ model through a
time-dependent factor G, whose effect is to reduce
 for protracted irradiations (15,16[appendix]).
According to the LQ model, the fraction of cells
surviving total dose D delivered in n fractions that
are spaced far enough apart in time for complete
repair of sublethal damage before the next fraction
is delivered yet close enough together for repopulation to be insignificant is given by
SF(D, n) = exp(− D − D2 / n)

(2a)

which is sometimes written as
⎛
⎛
D / n⎞⎞
SF(D, n) = exp ⎜ − D ⎜1 +
/ ⎟⎠ ⎟⎠
⎝
⎝

(2b)

/ determines the dependence of outcome on
dose per fraction and is therefore very important in
distinguishing effects of SBRT from conventional
fractionation. The 1/n in the quadratic term of
Eq. 2a arises naturally in the Lea-Catcheside formalism as the limiting case when the time between
successive fractions is much longer than the repair

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 17

17

time. For quick calculations, it is common to approximate tumor / by 10 Gy. For reasons that are not
well understood, / is lower—often approximated
by 3 to 4 Gy—for late complications (months to
years after the end of radiation), whereas for acute
complications such as skin reactions, which occur
during or shortly after a course of radiation, / is
approximated by 10 Gy. For hypotheses regarding
the systematic / differences, see references 5 and
16. Late-responding normal tissue complications
are particularly important dose-limiting factors in
SBRT. Repopulation during a treatment lasting
for time T (including intertreatment intervals and
weekends) where growth with half-time T1/2 starts
after a “kickoff” time, Tk, is approximated by
⎛
⎛
D / n⎞⎞
SF(D, n) = exp ⎜ − D ⎜1 +
exp( (T − Tk) )
/ ⎟⎠ ⎟⎠
⎝
⎝

(2c)

where  = ln 2/T1/2 and the repopulation term
applies only to time T > Tk (6).
The key LQ model parameters are /, , and,
for more sophisticated variations, kinetic parameters for sublethal damage repair and repopulation.
The fraction of cells surviving a single 2-Gy dose
(SF2), which is readily measured in vitro, is sometimes reported instead of  as an efficient metric
for comparing cellular radiosensitivity (10,17).
There are many tabulations of in vitro, in vivo,
and clinically measured values of LQ parameters,
and experimental techniques for determining them
are well described in other books (1,16,18). For
radiosensitive tumors (e.g., lymphomas),  ˜ 0.7
Gy–1, whereas for radioresistant tumors  ˜ 0.26
Gy–1 (10). Repair half-times range from approximately 0.25 hour to over 5 hours. Tumor repopulation half-times during radiation treatment range
from less than a day to several weeks. Measured
volume doubling times for untreated new, recurrent, or metastatic tumors are months to several
years, generally longer than the “potential doubling
time,” Tpot, of pure repopulation because of competing effects of cell loss, cell cycling, and microenvironmental limitations (1,7,19,20).
Hypoxia increases radioresistance. The oxygen
enhancement ratio (OER), which depends on the
type of radiation and the biological effect of interest,
is defined as the ratio of dose for effect under extreme
hypoxic conditions to isoeffective dose with the oxygen level under investigation (often normal oxygen
levels). As a function of oxygen partial pressure, OER
rises steeply as the oxygen partial pressure increase
from 1 mmHg for extreme anoxia to approximately
20 mmHg, but thereafter it changes only slightly with
increasing oxygen tension. OER is often approximated

23/08/18 6:13 PM

18

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

as 3 for photon radiation therapy (1[Chapter 6],
17[Chapters 15–17]). OER values for the end point
of cell death are relatively constant over a large
dose range (possible slight increase with dose: (1).
Within the LQ model, Eq. 1, 2a, 2b, or 2c implies
that hypoxia reduces  by a factor of OER and
 by a factor of (OER)2. Carlson et al. (21) have
statistically tested this hypothesis against a large
number of in vitro datasets and shown that this is
a reasonable assumption.

Other DNA Damage Models
In vitro studies at high (>10–15 Gy) single-fraction
doses provide evidence that cell kill is overpredicted by the continuously bending quadratic term
of ln(SF(D)) and that a simple exponential is more
appropriate in this dose range. In more complex in
vivo settings, there are multiple confounding variables and it is not clear whether breakdown of the
LQ model is clinically observed (22). Nonetheless,
it is known that LQ is an approximation that can
be derived from several models that include mechanisms and kinetics of potentially lethal DNA damage
and its repair. These include the repair–misrepair
model (23), the lethal–potentially lethal damage
model (24), the repair saturation models (25), and
the repair–misrepair fixation model (14). There
are also many nonmechanistic functions or empirical models that introduce parameters to straighten
out the ln(SF) curve at high doses where this effect
might impact SBRT outcomes. One such model that
is cited in some SBRT outcome-related publications
is the “universal survival curve” (USC) (26), which
changes from LQ to exponential at a threshold dose
(DT) while remaining continuous and with a continuous derivative. Figure 2.1 shows a comparison of
ln(SF) curves for the linear, LQ, and USC models
with a matching choice of parameters.
In their simplest forms—ignoring kinetic
effects—these other models require that more
parameters be determined from data than the LQ
model, which requires only two ( and /). For
“back of the envelope” calculations to determine
approximately equivalent treatment schedules, the
LQ model has many advantages: Only the single
experimental parameter / is needed, one must at
worst solve a quadratic equation, and LQ can be
used fairly confidently even up to 15 to 18 Gy. No
model to date offers sufficient advantages over the
LQ model to replace it as an important clinical tool.
Sufficient clinical evidence to support the use of any
of the alternative models at high fraction doses in
clinical practice is also currently lacking (27).

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 18

Mechanisms for cell killing at high fraction doses
that do not rely on DNA damage have also been
proposed and are discussed briefly in the following text but currently they have no accompanying
mathematical models.

Cell Killing by Means Other Than DNA Damage
The high fraction doses given in SBRT have
prompted investigation into other cell-killing
mechanisms, especially for tumors. Brown et al.
(22) have recently critically reviewed the evidence
for and against these potential high-dose mechanisms. Among them are the following:
Radiation-induced vascular damage: Tumor microvasculature often differs from normal in
that it is tortuous, irregular, and thin-walled.
Destruction of these vessels by high doses
(above approximately 10 Gy) has been reported in animal models, and mechanisms
for this damage have been proposed (28,29).
Although there is insufficient clinical evidence
at this time, vascular effects have been proposed as a reason for superior tumor control
in SBRT (30). On the contrary, there is evidence against this mechanism, suggesting that
tumor cells, rather than endothelial cells of
the vasculature, remain the critical targets that
regulate tumor eradication by high doses (22).
Immunogenic effects: It has been suggested that
the high fraction doses applied to a tumor
by SBRT treatments promote both local and
systemic immune responses and may potentiate tumoricidal effects of immunotherapy.
In the abscopal effect, this may cause tumors
distant from the irradiated site to regress
and might prevent further development of
subclinical metastases. Although there is little clinical evidence, there is evidence from
animal experiments and a number of clinical
trials are underway (31,32).
“Bath and shower” effects in normal tissues:
Several elegant animal (rat) experiments
found that surrounding a high-dose length of
cord (the shower) by a longer length low-dose
bath strongly reduces the tolerance dose of
the high-dose region. A similar effect has been
reported in rat parotid glands. But the degree
to which these effects are seen clinically in normal tissues or tumors is not known (33,34).
Neither vascular nor immunogenic effects have
been systematized into mathematical models,

23/08/18 6:13 PM

2: RADIOBIOLOGY PRINCIPLES OF RADIOSURGERY AND SBRT

although efforts have been made to model the bath
and shower effect (35). Robust clinical evidence
is needed to determine the extent to which these
novel mechanisms play a role in SBRT treatments.

Biologically Effective Dose
The biologically effective dose (BED) is widely
used to compare radiation treatment schedules.
The BED concept is not restricted to the LQ
model, although that is its most common use.
Given a dose-based model for a specified biological effect, two regimens are biologically equivalent
if they have the same biological effect (e.g., same
TCP, same NTCP for a particular complication). In
this case, we have
BED(D,{qi }) = BED(D',{qi '})

(3a)

where {qi} refers to nondosimetric aspects of
treatment. The higher the BED, the greater is the
biological effect. If the effect of concern depends
mostly on cell kill, BED can be defined as
BED =

( { })

−ln(SF D, qi )

(3b)

where SF is calculated from the model being used.
For example, in the simple (no time dependence)
form of the LQ model, the BED for dose D delivered in n fractions is
⎛
D / n⎞
BED = D ⎜1 +
/ ⎟⎠
⎝

(4a)

Repopulation during treatment lasting for T days,
for T > Tk, is commonly added as follows:
⎛
D / n⎞
− (T − Tk ) /
BED = D ⎜1 +
/ ⎟⎠
⎝

(4b)

However, for many applications, including the
short-course treatments of SBRT, estimations using
Eq. 4a are sufficient.
Note that when comparing the effectiveness of
different fractionation schemes without repopulation, such as comparing conventional to hypofractionation, , which is common to both schemes,
cancels out, leaving only one biological parameter,
/. Sometimes it is convenient to compare the effect
of a dose given with a novel radiation schedule with
the isoeffective dose delivered at the familiar 2 Gy
per fraction by using the equivalent dose in 2-Gy
fractions (EQD2/), often called normalized total
dose (NTD). In the LQ model, this is defined as
EQD2 / = D

1 + [(D / n) / ( / )]
1 + [2 / ( / )]

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 19

(4c)

19

As an example, for a tumor with / = 10 Gy,
the BED of 60 Gy delivered in 30 fractions of 2 Gy
each is 72 Gy and EQD210 is 60 Gy. However, the
BED and EQD210 of 60 Gy delivered in three fractions of 20 Gy each are 180 and 150 Gy, respectively. Thus, according to the LQ model without
repopulation, 60 Gy in 3 equal fractions, a regimen
used in early SBRT treatment of non–small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) (36), is the equivalent of a
75-fraction course of conventionally fractionated
radiation (i.e., a total of 150 Gy in 2-Gy fractions).
If a late-responding normal tissue (e.g., mainstem
bronchus, nearby parts of lung), with / =3 Gy,
is sufficiently close to the tumor to receive the
full prescription dose, then normal tissue BED
and EQD23 are 100 and 60 Gy, respectively, for
the conventional schedule but are 460 and 276
Gy, respectively, for the hypofractionated schedule.
This predicted extreme effect of hypofractionation
on late-responding normal tissue is a major reason
that safe SBRT requires strict patient immobilization and target localization during treatment as
well as very sharp dose gradients that minimize the
volume of dosimetrically “close” normal tissue. A
dose–volume histogram (DVH) is easily converted
to a BED-VH or an EQD2-VH for a chosen /
by converting dose to BED or EQD2 in each dose
bin. Such conversion is often, but not always, done
in papers on outcomes of SBRT and is particularly
useful when comparing or combining SBRT studies with different fractionation regimens. Figure 2.2
compares the target and the ipsilateral normal lung
DVHs and EQD2-VHs for the common lung SBRT
prescription of 12 Gy × 4 fractions.
As a second example, there is much evidence
that for prostate cancer, / is low, ˜1.5 to 3 Gy
(37–40), much lower than the generic “tumor”
value of 10 Gy. Typical SBRT regimens for low- to
intermediate-risk prostate cancer are 7 to 8 Gy ×
5 fractions, often given every other day to minimize normal tissue toxicity (41). These regimens
correspond to EQD21.5 values between 85 and
108.6 Gy (or EQD23 of 70–88 Gy). The highest
conventionally fractionated prostate prescription
is an 8- to 9-week (48 fractions of 1.8 Gy) treatment course of 86.4 Gy (42) corresponding (without repopulation) to a comparable tumor EQD21.5
of approximately 76.5 Gy (EQD23 of 82.9 Gy).
With meticulous image guidance, strict normal
tissue constraints, and often special rectal immobilization or displacement methods, reported toxicities of prostate SBRT out to 3 to 5 years have
been acceptable and the convenience of the much
shorter treatment course is an important practical

23/08/18 6:13 PM

20

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

100

Volume (%)

80
Ipsilateral lung minus ITV,
 /  = 3 Gy

60

PTV,  / = 10 Gy

40
20
0

0

20
40
Absorbed dose (Gy)

(A)

60

100

Volume (%)

80
60
Ipsilateral lung minus ITV,
 / = 3 Gy
PTV,  /  = 10 Gy

40
20
0

0

20

40

(B)

60

80
100 120
EQD2 / (Gy)

140

160

180

FIGURE 2.2 PTV and ipsilateral lung minus ITV DVHs (A) and EQD2_VHs (B) for tumor (/ = 10 Gy) and ipsilateral lung
minus ITV (/ =3 Gy) for a typical SBRT regimen of 12 Gy × 4 fractions.
DVH, dose–volume histogram; EQD2, equivalent dose in 2-Gy fractions; ITV, internal target volume; PTV, planning target volume; SBRT,
stereotactic body radiation therapy.

factor. But, because prostate cancer recurrence and
some urinary complications may occur years after
treatment, further follow-up is needed for fair comparison with more conventional schedules.

TUMOR CONTROL PROBABILITY
TCP is the probability that, after treatment, the
treated tumor ceases to grow to a detectable size
during the patient’s entire life (43). It is an inherently population-based concept that is observable
for a patient cohort but not for an individual. The
measurable clinical end point for TCP is local
tumor control. Metastases at untreated sites and
new primary tumors do not count in evaluating
TCP, although the competing risk of death is an
important factor in analyzing clinical outcomes.
A commonly used criterion for a radiobiology-based mathematical model of TCP is the fraction
of cases in which the treatment has eliminated all the
clonogenic cells—that is, all the cells at the irradiated
site that are capable of reproducing without limit
and eventually regrowing the tumor. It is important
to realize that there are also nonclonogenic cells in
a tumor—some are normal, some are genetically
abnormal, and some are stromal cells such as the
necessary vasculature or small lung airways that are
surrounded by tumor. The probability p that a clonogen does not survive a therapy regimen represented

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 20

by {qi} is (1 – SF({qi})). If the tumor consists of
N identical clonogens, all receiving the same treatment regimen and radiation-induced cell killing
events are independent (which may not be the case
in the presence of immunogenic or vascular damage effects) and randomly distributed, and there is
negligible repopulation during treatment, the
surviving clonogen distribution is approximately
poissonian and the probability that no clonogens
survive is (44)
TCP ≅ [(exp ( −SF )]N

(5)

Under these conditions, for n equal treatment fractions that give uniform dose D to the tumor and
are spaced far enough apart for almost complete
repair, TCP assuming the simple LQ model (no
time dependences) is
⎛
⎛
⎛
D / n⎞⎞⎞
TCP = exp ⎜ − N exp ⎜ − D ⎜1 +
⎟
/ ⎟⎠ ⎟⎠ ⎠
⎝
⎝
⎝

(6)

Repopulation during treatment is usually handled
by including an exponential growth term as in
Eq. 4b. This invalidates the Poisson distribution
assumption and a more accurate formalism was
published by Zaider and Minerbo (45), although
few investigators apply the more complex equations derived in that reference to clinical outcomes.
An extension of the Poisson TCP formalism to
inhomogeneous tumor dose distributions and to

23/08/18 6:13 PM

2: RADIOBIOLOGY PRINCIPLES OF RADIOSURGERY AND SBRT

tumors with spatially varying clonogen radiosensitivity, such as might arise from hypoxia, was developed by Brahme and Agren (46) and by Goitein (47)
and Niemierko and Goitein (48). Modern functional
imaging technology allows us to quantitatively infer
tumor characteristics, such as cell concentration or
hypoxia, from PET and MRI, making such formalisms
particularly useful (49). The tumor is divided into
voxels (Goitein called them “tumorlets”), usually of
equal volume, vi, which is small enough so that it has
uniform dose Di and/or radiosensitivity (i, i). If the
clonogen density of the ith voxel is i, it contains ivi
clonogens and the TCP in that voxel (TCPi) is given by

(

)

(

) v

TCPi = exp − i vi SFi = [exp −SFi ] i i

(7a)

Local control is achieved if no voxel contains surviving clonogens, or
TCP =

∏ TCP = ∏ [exp ( −SF )]
i

i

i

i

i vi

(7b)

and
ln TCP = −

∑ v SF
i i i

(7c)

i

Given a treatment plan, the voxel-by-voxel dose to
use in SFi is obtained from the differential DVH of
the tumor. Different SBRT studies use very different
target dose distributions. If the target surrounds a
critical normal tissue, it might be preferable to have
an approximately uniform target dose, or to have a

21

central cold spot if tolerance of a central normal tissue is more important than target coverage. But often,
following the precedent of cranial stereotactic radiosurgery, the target dose is highly nonuniform (e.g.,
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group [RTOG] trials
0236 and 0618) with the dose at the approximate
center of the planning target volume (PTV) being
20% to 50% higher than at the periphery. Figure 2.3
shows idealized typical SBRT DVHs. Publications
that describe outcomes usually cite prescription
doses and sometimes the prescription isodose, but
few publications provide detailed dose distributions.
The fallback position for analyses of published data,
especially those combining data from several studies, is to assume either, conservatively, that the clonogens receive uniform prescription dose or that they
receive an estimated, higher central dose.

Simpler TCP Dose–Response Formulas
Simpler functions with no cellular radiobiological
foundations are useful in demonstrating important
relationships between TCP and dose distributions.
TCP is expected to increase monotonically from
almost 0 at very low doses to 1 at sufficiently high
doses (Figure 2.4). A minimum of two parameters
define the dose–response curve: D50 (or BED50 or
EQD2/50 depending on the “dose”-axis variable),
which sets the dose at which there is tumor control
in 50% of a population, and T%, the percent change

1.2

Fractional volume

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4
Uniform
Rx to 80% IDL
Rx to 50% IDL
Central cold spot

0.2

0.0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8
1.0
1.2
Dose/prescription

1.4

1.6

1.8

2.0

FIGURE 2.3 Idealized integral target DVHs for typical SBRT cases. Triangles are the ideal (but unattainable) uniform dose
distribution. However, for SBRT, it is common to not want a uniform target dose, but rather to prescribe to a low isodose
(with 100% at the target center); the large and small dotted lines are DVHs for prescription dose to the 80% and 50%
isodose surface. Finally, SBRT treatments must protect a critical structure within the PTV (e.g., paraspinal cases where the
PTV surrounds the spinal cord) that requires a central cold spot.
DVH, dose–volume histogram; IDL, isodose line; PTV, planning target volume; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 21

23/08/18 6:13 PM

22

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

in TCP per percent change of dose at the point where
TCP equals T% (50). Most commonly,  is specified
at TCP = 50% and called 50. If 50 is small, TCP
increases gradually with dose. D50 and 50 can be
measured, both clinically and in animal models.
The log-logistic function is a commonly used
expression. If the SF of clonogens for a tumor that
receives a uniform dose D is given by a log-logistic
function 1/(1 + (D/D50)k), then TCP for a uniform
dose D is (1 – p) or
TCP(D) =

1

(8a)

1 + (D50 / D)k

where k = 450. For a nonuniform dose distribution, {Di, vi}, we have

v
⎡
⎤ i
1
⎢
⎥
TCP = ∏
i ⎢⎣1 + (D50 / D)k ⎥⎦

(8b)

where vi is the fractional volume of the voxels
(or tumorlets) receiving dose Di. Tumorlets with
different radiobiology are handled with tumorletspecific D50s and ks.
A logistic function is another frequently used
expression:
TCP ( D ) =

1
D50
;k =
4 50
1 + exp ( −(D − D50) / k )

(8c)

Biologically effective doses (BEDs) can be used
instead of D and D50.

100
90
80
70
TCP (%)

60

+

50
40
30
20

+

10
0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

(A)

1.0
1.2
D/D50

TCP uniform dose
Normalized slope g 50
D50 (D/D50 = 1)
1.4

1.6

1.8

2.0

100
90
80

TCP (%)

70
60
50
40
30

D50 = 35 Gy, g 50 = 1.25
Steeper dose–response
D50 = 35 Gy, g 50 = 2.5
Resistant dose–response
D50 = 50 Gy, g 50 = 1.25

20
10
0

0

(B)

10

20

30

40

50
60
Dose (Gy)

70

80

90

100

FIGURE 2.4 (A) A typical sigmoidal curve (log-logistic equation) with the definitions of D50 and 50. (B) Comparison of
the effects of changes in D50 and 50.

TCP, tumor control probability.

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 22

23/08/18 6:13 PM

2: RADIOBIOLOGY PRINCIPLES OF RADIOSURGERY AND SBRT

Finally, sometimes the Poisson expression
(Eq. 5–7) may be used. Although it might be
regarded as more basic, it also requires more input
parameters about which there is greater uncertainty. There are no universal standards.
As a simple example, consider a tumor with a
log-logistic dose–response with k = 8 (50 = 2) and
uniform radiosensitivity. As shown in Figure 2.5, a
deep but volumetrically small cold spot (30% of the
dose to 10% of the volume) causes notable decrease
in TCP compared with uniform dose—indeed, even
a very small subvolume with zero dose results in zero
TCP because the clonogens in that protected subvolume survive. But a 30% hotspot to 10% of the
volume has little effect because TCP is dominated
by survival of the clonogens in the majority of the
volume. Because the x-axis is D/D50, the identical
arguments apply to a situation in which the dose is
uniform but the clonogen radiosensitivity is variable.
Specifically, the dashed TCP curve also applies when
the tumor receives uniform dose but the cells in a
10% subvolume are 43% more radioresistant cells
(D50 = 1.43D50). If this subvolume can be identified (e.g., with some form of molecular imaging),
boosting its dose by 43% would restore the TCP of
the solid curve. Thus, directing a hot spot to a known
high-risk subvolume is beneficial, even though a randomly placed hotspot is not. Similarly, the “30%
higher dose” curve for a biologically uniform tumor
also applies to a uniform dose applied to a tumor in
which 10% of the clonogens are more radiosensitive (D50 = 0.77D50). Even though the tumor has
a small radiosensitive component, the radioresistant

23

cells dominate the response. For examples of similar exercises, see references 51 (with the log-logistic
function) and 52 (with the Niemierko/Goitein formalism of reference 48).

A TCP Puzzle
Although the mechanistically motivated Poisson
dose–response is given by Eq. 6, an interesting
question arises when the model is used together
with the straightforward assumption of identical
radiobiological parameters for all clonogens. To
more cleanly see this, assume that  = 0 and the
dose is uniform. Then, we get
TCP(D) = exp(− N exp ( − D ))
D50 =

ln[N / (ln 2)]

;

⎛ ln 2 ⎞ ⎛ N ⎞
ln
⎝ 2 ⎟⎠ ⎜⎝ ln 2 ⎟⎠

50 = ⎜

(9a)
(9b)

D50 depends on both the radiosensitivity () and
the number of identical clonogens (N), whereas 50
depends only on the number of clonogens. The cell
density in soft tissue is 108 to 109 cells/mL so the
number of cells in a tumor of volume V is ˜109V.
But the fraction that is clonogenic is unknown, as is
the clonogen distribution within the target volume.
Although N is unknown, reasonable order-ofmagnitude assumptions lead to predictions that
disagree with observation. As N varies from 100 to
108, the calculated 50 varies from 1.7 to 6.5. Thus, if
all the cells in a 1-mL tumor were clonogenic, 50
would be at least 6.5 and the dose–response for larger
tumors would be even steeper. However, values

100
90
80

TCP (%)

70
60
50
40

20

TCP uniform dose
10% volume has
30% lower dose

10

10% volume has
30% higher dose

30

0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0
1.2
D/D50

1.4

1.6

1.8

2.0

FIGURE 2.5 Effects of nonuniform dose/uniform clonogen radiosensitivity on TCP. As described in the text, this also
describes the effect of uniform dose in a tumor with nonuniform radiosensitivity.

TCP, tumor control probability.

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 23

23/08/18 6:13 PM

24

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

of 50 in clinical studies are typically 1 to 3 (9,50),
regardless of tumor size. Taking Eq. 9a and 9b literally implies that tumors have fewer than 1,000
clonogenic cells, regardless of size. Even in animal
studies, where conditions can be tightly controlled,
50 is below 4 (53). In addition, if the number of
clonogens scales with the tumor volume, the simple
LQ model predicts a much stronger dependence of
TCP on volume than is observed (47). These problems persist for other DNA-damage models, as they
are rooted in the Poisson statistics definition of TCP.

One Solution: Fit Dose or BED to Local
Control Observations
Many published studies do not worry about this
seeming paradox and, by clever use of available data,
rather than starting a model from scratch, answer
important questions. For example, Fowler et al. (54)
started from a NSCLC TCP dose–response obtained
from a single institution’s conventionally fractionated
dose escalation study with prescription doses ranging from 60 Gy to approximately 100 Gy. At 2 Gy
per fraction, they estimated treatment times from 39
to 67 days, including weekends. Using repopulation
kinetics on the basis of clinical observations of loss
of local control in patients who experienced treatment delays in an earlier RTOG trial, they argued
that the main tumoricidal advantage of SBRT comes
from its elimination of repopulation during the much
shorter treatment schedule (Figure 2.6).
As a second example, in general, the data for
the more common SBRT treatments, though quite

noisy, clearly suggest a dose–response and for
NSCLC, brain metastases, prostate, and spinal
tumors, clinicians now prescribe schedules that
have been reported to be successful and safe. An
analysis of a large set of patients (811 lesions in
657 patients) treated with single-fraction SBRT for
paraspinal tumors over 12 years at a single institution found that the gross target volume (GTV) and
PTV D95 were highly significant predictors of local
control. Although these were all metastatic patients,
the mean overall survival was 26.9 months. The
best cut point distinguishing “low” from “high”
dose was 18.3 Gy for GTV D95 and 17.4 for PTV
D95. The cumulative incidence of local failure at
48 months was 2.1% for the high-dose cohort,
14% for the low-dose GTV group, and 20% for the
low-dose PTV group, independent of the primary
tumor’s histological type. Because all cases were
treated with a single fraction, no “BED” conversion
was necessary to compare outcomes (55).
Meta-analyses of publications that include local
tumor control data for a variety of fractionations
often do not need to consider full model-predicted
TCP, but rather investigate the fit of outcomes data
(y-axis) with the BED or EQD determined by a chosen model (x-axis)—as an example, see Figure 2.7.
Several analyses (including references 27,56–58) of
large, single-institution or pooled published data that
include different SBRT fractionation schedules for
NSCLC find that local control and overall survival
are significantly better for treatments with LQ BED10
(BED with / = 10 Gy) above 100 to 105 Gy: These

100
90
80

Constructed from
Martel et al. 1999:
f50 = 1.5
D50 = 84.5 Gy

 50

.5

=1

70
%
Rec-free
survival
at 30
months

60
50
40
a/b = 10 Gy
a = 0.35/Gy
TP = 3 days
g/a = 0.66/day
Tk = 28 days

30
20
10
Total
0
Dose@ 2Gy/Fr Gy:
Overall time (days):
BED TP = 3 d, Tk = 28 d: Gy10:
BED if no prolif: Gy10:

60
39
65
72

70
46
72
84

80
53
80
96

90
60
87
108

100
67
94
120

110
74
102
132

120
81
109
144

130
88
116
156

FIGURE 2.6 Short treatment schedules, as with SBRT, increase tumor control (recurrence-free survival) because radiation
treatment is not fighting against repopulation during treatment.

BED, biologically effective dose; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.
Source: Reprinted with permission from Fowler JF, Tomé WA, Fenwick JD, et al. A challenge to traditional radiation oncology. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2004;60(4):1241–1256. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2004.07.691

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 24

23/08/18 6:13 PM

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6
Early stage NSCLC
(`/a = 10 Gy N0 = 105)

0.4

Single-fraction data
Multifraction data
Standard LQ Model
Heterogeneous LQ Model

0.2
0.0
50

100

150
200
250
BED at isocenter (Gy)

TCP

TCP

2: RADIOBIOLOGY PRINCIPLES OF RADIOSURGERY AND SBRT

0.6
Brain metastases
(`/a = 10 Gy N0 = 105)

0.4

Single-fraction data
Multifraction data
Standard LQ Model
Heterogeneous LQ Model

0.2

300

25

0.0
20

40

60
80
100
BED at periphery (Gy)

120

FIGURE 2.7 Data compiled by Shuryak et al. (27) from literature over past 15 years reporting TCP at ≥1 year as a function
of BED calculated according to two different models. A dose–response curve—higher BED corresponds to better TCP—is
evident.
BED, biologically effective dose; LQ, linear–quadratic; NSCLC, non–small-cell lung cancer; TCP, tumor control probability.

include the popular schedules of 3 fractions × 18
or 20 Gy and 4 fractions × 12 Gy. For stereotactic
radiotherapy (SRT) of brain metastases, a systematic
review (59) identified only 11 of 260 papers published between 1990 and 2009 that met their search
criteria (>10 patients, actuarial local control reported,
a single dose-fractionation schedule for all or a welldefined cohort of the study, SRT as primary treatment
or treatment for recurrence after whole-brain treatment). Treatments of approximately 1,600 metastases were in this analysis. The authors found that
1-year local control was “excellent after single fraction SRT doses above 20 Gy, but disappointing after
doses of 15 Gy or less.” For comparison with fractionated treatments they defined BED with a linear–
quadratic–cubic model that accounted for return to
exponential dependence of SF at high fraction doses
and used / = 12 Gy and recommended fractionated regimens above 11.6 Gy × 2 or 8.5 Gy × 3.

A Second Solution: Population Averaging
To reconcile DNA damage models with realistic
clonogen densities, a widely accepted solution to
the steep slopes exhibited by Poisson models with
what are believed to be reasonable clonogen densities is provided by the observation that even for a
well-controlled animal study or patient cohort, there
are both interpatient and intratumor variations in
radiosensitivity and clonogen number (48,60–62),
such that observed TCP is the weighted sum of
multiple dose–response curves, which decreases
the 50 of the observed combination. Figure 2.8
is a simple illustration of the effect of population
averaging. Several studies using TCP outcomes
of conventionally fractionated treatments take
a population-averaging approach, assuming a

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 25

reasonable clonogen density (e.g., 107 clonogens/
mL) and a Gaussian distribution of  (60–62).
Two recent papers used population-averaged models to analyze reported SBRT local control outcomes.
It is now well documented that excellent local control
is achieved for early stage NSCLC at a LQ BED (/
= 10 Gy) greater than 100 Gy (Figure 2.8). Shuryak
et al. (27) analyzed early stage NSCLC studies
(19 studies, 2,028 patients) and brain metastases
studies (14 studies, 937 patients) that reported
TCP for 1 or more years after treatment. The “heterogeneous LQ model” in Figure 2.7 shows the fit
to the NSCLC data from that analysis. The authors
assumed that  was distributed over the patient population with a gamma distribution and compared
the goodness of fit with published TCP data to the
LQ and three other models (linear–quadratic–linear,
USC, Pade LQ). The clonogen number was fixed as
105 independent of tumor size and the results were
insensitive to / varying between 10 and 20 Gy.
The LQ model with heterogeneity in radiosensitivity produced the best fit for both NSCLC and brain
metastases.
Liu et al. (63) analyzed 1-, 2-, 3-, and 5-year
actuarial survival taken from 46 studies of SBRT
for NSCLC with six different models, seeking the
BED model that gave the best fit to the data with
optimized model parameters. Reported doses were
converted to isocenter doses when possible. By
taking BED as the independent dose variable in
the fit, the authors were able to avoid estimating
N for all but the newly proposed regrowth model.
Five of the models, including the LQ model (one
fitting parameter) and the USC (three parameters),
did not include population averaging, nor did they
account for repopulation by surviving cells after
treatment. Data for the different survival time

23/08/18 6:13 PM

26

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

FIGURE 2.8 Example of reduction of γ50 by population averaging. Populations 1, 2, and 3, represented by log-logistic

curves, have different D50s (35, 45, and 55 Gy) and γ50 = 2.5 (k = 10). The slope that would be observed from a simple
average of the populations (equally weighted populations) is clearly reduced.
TCP, tumor control probability.

points were analyzed separately for these models.
Nonetheless, the best fit to the data, both overall
and at discrete time points, was provided by the
newly proposed “regrowth model” (six parameters) that assumes exponential growth of the clonogens that remain after treatment, with tumor
control reached if fewer than a critical number of
clonogens remain. This model includes a population average over the initial number of clonogens.
Although the initial clonogen number does not
enter directly as a parameter, but rather in the ratio
of the critical number of clonogens and in a ratio
with the standard deviation of the population distribution, it was taken to be between 104 and 106,
independent of tumor size. In this study, / was
high (˜20 Gy) for the best fit versions of all models.

Equivalent Uniform Dose (EUD)
The EUD was introduced by Niemierko (65) as
a way to quantitatively rank TCP efficacy of rival
treatment plans (with nonuniform dose distributions) without worrying about such microscopic
details as the number of clonogens. In this context, EUD is defined as the uniform dose that
gives the same TCP as the actual dose distribution given in the same number of fractions. This
initial formulation of EUD is based on the LQ
model and a key parameter is the SF at 2 Gy, SF2.
Niemierko showed that, if the volume fraction
getting dose Di is vi and a chosen reference dose
is Dref, the EUD for the inhomogeneous dose distribution is
N

∑ v (SF2)

ln(

Di / Dref

)

Perhaps We Are Asking Too Much

EUD = Dref

An interesting “uncertainty principle” situation may
limit ability to extract fundamental radiobiological
parameters from observed TCP data, regardless of
their quality. In a theoretical study, Carlone et al. (64)
started from a general LQ plus exponential growth
model, assuming an independent Gaussian population distribution of each model parameter (N, , ,
and ) and found that “limited radiobiological information can be determined by the analysis of dose
response data: information about parameter ratios
can be ascertained, but knowledge of absolute values for the fundamental radiobiological parameters
will require independent auxiliary measurements.”

where the sum is over all the subvolumes of the
tumor. Expressions were also derived for the full
LQ model, for tumors with nonuniform distributions of clonogens, and for a population-averaging
model. A minor problem with this definition of
EUD is that if the dose to a subvolume is zero, EUD
is not zero, which is contradictory to the intuitive
idea that a tumor is not controlled if a subvolume
receives very low or no dose.
However, in a subsequent publication, Niemierko
introduced a nonmechanistic but computationally
more convenient quantity, the generalized equivalent

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 26

i =1 i

ln(SF 2)

(10)

23/08/18 6:13 PM

2: RADIOBIOLOGY PRINCIPLES OF RADIOSURGERY AND SBRT

uniform dose (gEUD), which has become far more
widely used (66) for plan comparison and even optimization. gEUD provides a unified formalism that
can be applied to normal tissues and tumors and it is
discussed later in this chapter.

TCP Summary
Although a purely theoretical understanding of
TCP for any dose/fractionation regimen remains a
still unreachable “promised land” of radiation biology, existing clinical experience and approximate
models on the basis of cell killing because of DNA
damage can get us a long way toward effective
SBRT treatments. Quantitative formalisms have
not yet been devised for mechanisms other than
those on the basis of DNA damage (30–35) and
these need further investigation under protocol
conditions to determine their validity and the value
of implementing a mathematical framework.

NORMAL TISSUE COMPLICATION
PROBABILITY
All radiation therapy carries some risk of accompanying complications in organs that receive dose
during treatment. A given organ can experience
more than one complication; many of these are
described by the QUANTEC group in a special
issue of the International Journal of Radiation
Oncology Biology Physics (67). As examples, lung
complications include radiation pneumonitis, typically during or within the first 6 months following
therapy, and radiation fibrosis, typically a late complication, occurring a year or more after radiation.
Rectal complications include rectal bleeding, ulceration, fistula, and fecal incontinence (68).
Normal tissue complications are graded according to severity. Several grading systems are in use,
including those designed by RTOG and Southwest
Oncology Group (SWOG) and, in increasing use,
the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse
Events (CTCAE) (69). CTCAE, now up to Version
4.0, is not specific to radiation and does not differentiate between early and late effects. The systems agree on generalities, though not specifics. A
crude general description of the rankings is given
in Table 2.1.
Publications about normal tissue complications
often specify the grades of complication under
discussion as “greater than or equal to” a chosen
value, such as Grade 2+ or 3+ (G2+ or G3+).
Although no complication is desirable, the risks
and implications of a specific complication must

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 27

27

TABLE 2.1 General Description of Normal Tissue
Complication Rankings
Grade

Symptoms

0

None

1

Subclinical (radiological or other tests)

2

Mild; worthy of mention to a physician but
manageable with over-the-counter medications or other conservative means; minimal
interference with ADL

3

More severe, clearly interfere with ADL,
requiring medical intervention

4

Hospitalization may be needed; major
interference with ADL

5

Death

ADL, activities of daily life.

be balanced against the risk of tumor recurrence
or ineffective palliation. Achieving this balance is
part of the art of treatment planning. Ultimately,
the lowest grade of a complication that is clinically
“acceptable” for a particular patient is a clinical
decision. For example, all modern radiation treatments maintain very low risk of any spinal cord
complications (70,71), often at the cost of undertreating the tumor. For SBRT treatments, which
use all the modern tools of image guidance and
sharp dose gradients, the risk of Grade 2+ myelopathy is below 1%. On the contrary, a 10% to 20%
risk of Grade 2+ lung toxicity or up to a 25% to
30% risk of symptomatic xerostomia is considered
acceptable (though certainly not desirable).
Unlike tumors, functionality of most normal
organs at risk (OARs) depends on the integrity of
several different cell types including the endothelial
cells that make up the organ’s vasculature, epithelial cells (gastrointestinal tract, lung), muscle cells,
hepatocytes (liver), neurons and glial cells (central
nervous system [CNS] organs), and other specialized
cells peculiar to the organ. Some complications are
the result of radiation-induced microenvironmental
effects (e.g., radiation pneumonitis, where damaged
cells secrete proinflammatory substances) (72).
Nonetheless, the LQ model can often be used for
quantitative analysis of normal tissue complication
risks at different fractionation schedules (1,5,15)
where it is assumed that the probability of the abnormal organ function of interest is an increasing function of BED or EQD2, calculated with Eq. 4a or 4c.
/ may be different for different complications in
the same organ, although whether that is because of
different target cells or noisy and limited data is not

23/08/18 6:13 PM

28

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

clear. For conventional fractionation, / is high
(˜10 Gy) for acute complications and low (5 Gy,
often taken as 3 Gy) for late (more than half a
year after radiation) complications. Values similar to those obtained from clinical outcomes at
conventional fractionations have given reasonable
results in outcome analyses of SBRT. Tables of
/ ranges associated with specific complications
are Table 8.1 in reference (5) and Tables 3.1 and
3.2 in reference (15).
A wide range of half-times, on the order of 0.5
to 1.5 hours, are reported for repair of normal
tissue sublethal damage and there is evidence of
biexponential kinetics for some tissues with a second 3- to 6-hour component (15,17,73,74). The
common clinical rule of “at least 6 hours between
treatments” for twice-daily treatments is based on
clinical observations that imply loss of repair for
more closely spaced treatments. There is also evidence of reduced rectal (75), carotid artery (76),
and lung (77) toxicity when SBRT treatments are
delivered on alternating days, as opposed to daily.

Dose–Volume Effects
For most complications, there is a “volume dependence,” that is, NTCP depends on the dose distribution within the organ as well as on dose and dose
per fraction. Volume dependences are sometimes
described as “serial” or “parallel,” stemming from a
conceptual model of how components are organized
to carry out an organ’s function (78). The literature
often describes the response of multicellular “functional subunits” (FSUs) such as nephrons or alveoli
rather than single cells. For a serial organ or complication, the FSUs are arranged in series (sometimes compared with bulbs on a string of Christmas
tree lights) and if one is incapacitated, organ function is destroyed. Damage is more likely at higher
BED, so serial complications depend on the highest
doses in the organ and constraints are often placed
on Dmax or Dvery small volume, whereas lower dose
regions are of less interest. Observationally, spinal
cord, brainstem, and optic structure complications
are largely “serial type” and in treatment plans their
DVHs are evaluated accordingly. In parallel organs
(or for parallel-type complications), the contributions of the FSUs to organ function are redundant
and a critical volume (or critical fraction) must be
incapacitated to impair organ function (79–80).
Parallel-type complications depend strongly on the
irradiated volume; often, NTCP is correlated with
the mean organ dose or with the Vdose, the percentage or absolute volume receiving more than a

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 28

selected dose. For example, V20 is a common plan
evaluation metric for lung toxicity, regardless of
fractionation. The most common lung, parotid, and
liver complications are largely “parallel.”
Some complications do not clearly fall into either
category. At conventional fractionation, rectal and
esophageal complications have been shown to correlate with the highest dose regions and with medium-dose regions (81,82); and the “bath and shower”
effect mentioned earlier describes a situation in
which large low-dose volumes promote a serial-type
breakdown of function in the high-dose part of the
organ. Complexity is increased in situations in which
different parts of an organ are responsible for different complications (68) or damage to two organs
increases the probability of a single complication
(83). For SBRT treatments, sharp dose gradients,
strict immobilization, image guidance, and motion
control during treatment are crucial, especially near
serial or mixed volume dependence OARs.
Dose–volume (DV) correlates of many normal
tissue complications for conventionally fractionated radiation therapy were compiled in the literature reviews of Emami et al. (84) in the early days
of three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy
(3D-CRT). Most of the information in this review
came from outcomes observed in the “2D era.”
In 2010, the QUANTEC group (61) published
reviews and guidelines for normal tissue DV metrics on the basis of outcomes that also included the
3D-CRT experience and early reports on effects
of intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT).
Because QUANTEC reviewed publications only
up to 2008 to 2009, SBRT-related complications
were not addressed for most organs. But currently
SBRT is used with increasing frequency at almost
every anatomical site, and knowledge about complications is being accrued through local clinical
experience, protocols, and information sharing
through peer-reviewed publications. Despite difficulties described in “The Lessons of QUANTEC”
(Jackson et al. in reference 67) over the past two
decades, clinicians have evolved sufficiently safe
planning constraints to usually prevent the normal tissue complications of SBRT treatments from
exceeding those for conventionally fractionated
treatment. But despite meticulous planning and
image-guided treatment of generally small targets,
complications that are rare or unreported for conventional treatments are sometimes seen in SBRT
treatments. Further understanding is needed to deal
with unexpected—especially late—complications
and to prevent tumor undertreatment caused by
overly conservative limits.

23/08/18 6:13 PM

2: RADIOBIOLOGY PRINCIPLES OF RADIOSURGERY AND SBRT

Asbell et al. (85) developed an interesting
graphic tool, the DVH Risk Map, for displaying and updating the state of knowledge relating to published SBRT normal tissue constraints
(of course, Risk Maps need not be restricted to
SBRT treatments). In its simplest form, the user
plots as many of the published planning limits
for a particular complication as can be found
by a literature search. It is useful to group these
according to the number of fractions for SBRT.
When different studies use different DV metrics,
there can be a separate Risk Map for each; for
example, for radiation myelitis, some studies use
the maximum spinal cord dose and some use the
dose to a specified small volume such as 0.1 or
1 mL. Published adverse effects distinguished by
a particular symbol and isocomplication curve
from a mathematical model can also be plotted
in these graphs. From a Risk Map, one can see
where one’s departmental constraints lie or, given
a new mathematical model, test its predictions
against published constraints. The example in
Figure 2.9 is a Risk Map for radiation myelitis
in SBRT treatment, reproduced from reference
(86). The blue diamonds are published constraints that, for radiation myelitis (a serial-type
complication), constrain the high-dose end of the

dose distribution. Although these limits are not
derived from fundamental radiobiology, they are
based on empirical observations and local or published patient outcome experiences. As expected
from the LQ model, the dose limits are higher for
more fractions. The extreme caution with regard
to spinal cord complications is evidenced by
the fact that there are only nine such literaturereported complications. Those plotted as red
crosses are all the Grade 4 spinal complications in
a cohort of 318 patients treated at three academic
centers in the study by Sahgal et al. (87). The low
(green) and high (red) risk limits in the figure are
the 1% and 3% levels, respectively, predicted by
a model being tested by the authors. Although a
50% spinal cord volume (with no data points) is
included as a matter of academic interest, there is
no evidence that this has bearing on spinal cord
complications, especially for SBRT treatments
that involve a much smaller percentage of the
cord than many conventional treatments.

NTCP Models
As with TCP, mathematical models help physicians and physicists evaluate competing or novel
treatment plans. It is important to recognize that

Limit for 10%
spinal cord volume

Limit for 1cc
spinal cord volume

Limit for 0.1cc
spinal cord volume

Limit for maximum
spinal cord dose

Number of fractions

Number of fractions

Number of fractions

Number of fractions

Raw total dose (Gy)

Limit for 50%
spinal cord volume

29

Number of fractions
Published limits

1 fx
2 fx
3 fx
4 fx
5 fx

D50%
limit
(Gy)
1.8
3.6
5.4
7.2
9.0

Selected limits

D10%
limit
(Gy)
7.0
9.1
11.1
12.8
13.5

Published AE

Institution data

Low risk limits
D1cc
D0.1cc
limit
limit
(Gy)
(Gy)
7.0, 0.1%
8.5, 0.1%
9.5, 0.1%
12.7, 0.1%
11.1, 0.1% 16.3, 0.2%
13.6, 0.2% 18.3, 0.2%
13.5, 0.1% 20.0, 0.2%

Dmax
limit
(Gy)
13.0, 0.9%
16.5, 0.6%
20.0, 0.7%
21.0, 0.5%
22.0, 0.4%

Institution G3 AE

Unified high-risk

D50%
limit
(Gy)
7.0
11.0
15.0
18.5
21.0

High risk limits
D1cc
D0.1cc
limit
limit
(Gy)
(Gy)
8.0, 0.2%
10.0, 0.2%
12.0, 0.4% 14.5, 0.3%
16.0, 0.9% 18.0, 0.4%
20.0, 2.2% 20.5, 0.4%
21.5, 2.0% 22.5, 0.4%

D10%
limit
(Gy)
10.0
14.0
18.0
20.5
23.0

Unified low-risk

Dmax
limit
(Gy)
14.0, 1.6%
18.0, 1.1%
22.0, 1.3%
26.0, 1.8%
30.0, 2.6%

FIGURE 2.9 Risk Map for radiation myelitis.

AE, adverse effects.
Source: Asbell SO, Grimm J, Xue J, et al. Introduction and clinical overview of the DVH risk map. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2016;26(2):89–96.
doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.2015.11.005

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 29

23/08/18 6:13 PM

30

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

NTCP models are even less mechanistic than those
for local control. Rather, they are equations with
parameters that have been fit, often by complex
statistical methods, to what are frequently sparse
data (clinicians do not seek to have complications).
The parameters that QUANTEC extracted from
literature reviews of mostly conventionally fractionated treatments, for which the dose per fraction,
fraction number, dose gradients, and relationships
between planned and delivered doses are all different, should not be assumed to apply to SBRT
regimens without cautious validation. But these
parameters, sometimes modified to give the same
EQD2, and associated models provide a necessary
starting point for single and interinstitutional clinical studies.
Validated models, in which clinicians can have
some confidence, assist in predicting adverse effects
of current regimens, making rational, patientspecific treatment decisions, and may be helpful in
extending to new regimens, such as the moderate
hypofractionated schedules with more than 5 fractions, such as 7 Gy × 10 and 7.5 Gy × 8, which are
of interest in NSCLC SBRT (88). TCP and NTCP
models can also be incorporated into plan optimization or plan evaluation algorithms (89). There
were efforts for a few years to generate mechanistic,
tissue architecture-based (serial or parallel) models
of NTCP (79,90) that would handle volume dependences, and a model termed the “relative seriality
model” is often used in European publications (91).
In North America, it is more common to use other
multiparameter functions that capture dominant features of the DV response for various complications.
It is generally believed that NTCP, like TCP,
increases monotonically from 0 for very low doses to
1 at a dose distribution with sufficiently high doses
over sufficiently large volumes (conditions are deliberately explored only in animal studies). The function
representing a complication dose–response is usually
assumed to be sigmoidal, sometimes the logistic or
log-logistic function. Dosimetric and clinical factors
(e.g., gender, age, comorbid conditions, systemic
therapies) that might affect complication risk may
be identified through analysis of patient outcomes
and validated through analysis of independent datasets. This is an ongoing process for all types of radiation therapy, not only SBRT. It is not uncommon for
a model derived from one dataset to do poorly with
a dataset from a different institution, even given
similar prescription doses and treatment techniques.
For example, two recent studies modeled radiation
pneumonitis in patients with NSCLC treated with
SBRT. Each used a model on the basis of the mean

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 30

ipsilateral normal lung EQD2 with / = 3 Gy and
had a moderate number of patients. Yet in one (92)
the mean 2-Gy equivalent dose for 50% complications (NTCP = 50% at TD50) was 22.4 Gy and 50
was 2.2, whereas for the other (93) the TD50 was
32.4 Gy and 50 was 0.6. Differences in end-point
scoring were likely responsible for much of the
difference—but this example shows that NTCP
models, even when published, should not be
adopted without close inspection and validation. It
is also not uncommon for available data to be so
noisy that no coherent model can be found (this
was the case in the QUANTEC reviews for radiation
myelitis in the T-spine [70] and radiation-induced
bladder complications [94]). Nonetheless, for many
complications, there is enough agreement to provide clinically useful, though imperfect models for
conventional fractionation (67) and the situation for
SBRT is evolving toward a similar state.
A typical analysis starts with a dataset that, ideally, consists of dose distributions (DVHs for the
OAR under study), complication outcomes, and
other characteristics of the patients in the study that
the authors think might be relevant. The DVH is
sometimes reduced to a few key points (e.g., Dmax,
V20, D05) but often more complex expressions that
account for the entire DVH are used, as described
in the following text. The most significant predictive variables are identified by increasingly sophisticated statistical outcome analyses, and these are
often combined as the argument of a sigmoidally
increasing function. This argument, Z, may be a
single significant DV variable such as mean organ
dose, or such a variable multiplied by a dosemodifying factor (e.g., for chemotherapy [95]) or
a combination of significant variables determined
by multivariate analysis (e.g., Z p0 p1 DV1
p2
DV2
p3
[nondosimetric factor]). For
an explicit application using DV variables for two
different organs, see reference 83. The sigmoidal
shape is versatile and convenient and, when there
are enough data to discriminate, is a reasonable
representation of the low to medium region of the
reported OAR response (it is hard to test the highNTCP region clinically for obvious reasons).

Model Functions
As with TCP, the log-logistic expression is one
often-used function to predict the probability of
normal tissue complication:
NTCP(Z ) =

1
k

(11)

1 + (Z 50 / Z )

23/08/18 6:13 PM

2: RADIOBIOLOGY PRINCIPLES OF RADIOSURGERY AND SBRT

31

For example, for spinal cord complications, Z could
be Dmax (conventional fractionation) or BEDmax;
for normal liver, Z could be the mean dose or the
mean BED. In a general case, Z need not be dose—
it can be Vdose or a combination of significant variables. NTCP is 0.5 at Z50 and k determines the
steepness of the Z dependence at Z50.
The logistic function is also frequently used (for
examples, see reference 83):

zero dose (84,97) (Figure 2.10). This dose distribution, called “partial organ irradiation,” is not
totally artificial; it is a reasonable approximation
of the dose distribution from parallel-opposed
beams. In a companion paper, Burman et al. (97)
fit these six data points “by eye” to the Lyman
model, where NTCP for partial organ irradiation
of a volume v is

1
NTCP =
1 + exp(−(Z − Z 50) / k)

NTCP(D, v) =

(12)

The probit function is increasingly used to
describe a complication’s dose responses. Here, we
have
NTCP(Z ) =

1
2

∫

Z − Z 50

−∞

⎛ −t 2 ⎞
exp ⎜
⎟ dt
⎝ 2 ⎠

(13)

The Lyman Model
In the Lyman model (96), which is perhaps the
most widely used NTCP model in North America,
the upper limit of the probit function incorporates
the effect of the complication’s volume dependence on complication probability. About 5 years
after Lyman’s paper, Emami et al. (84) reviewed
the literature from the “two-dimensional” era for
28 dose-limiting complications. They captured
volume dependences through literature-based
estimates of the doses for 5% and 50% incidence
of each complication for uniform irradiation of
the whole, two-thirds, and one-third of an organ
(v = 1, 2/3, and 1/3), with the remainder receiving

1

∫

( D − TD50( v))/ mTD50( v)

−∞

2

⎛ −t 2 ⎞
exp ⎜
⎟ dt
⎝ 2 ⎠ (14)

TD50(v), the dose at which NTCP for partial organ
irradiation of volume fraction v is 50% (0.5),
is given by a power law TD50(v) = TD50(1)/vn.
One parameter of the Lyman model is the “reference volume,” which is usually the entire organ, so
v is always 1. The Lyman model volume-dependence parameter, n, is always positive. Burman et
al. restricted n 1, although there was no biological or mathematical reason to do so and some later
studies have found n above 1. However, Burman et
al. had an acceptable “by-eye” fit to the limited data
available prior to 1991. If n is very small, vn varies
weakly with v and the complication is “serial,” with
a weak volume dependence. An example is radiation myelitis, for which n = 0.05. If n is close to or
larger than 1, the complication has a strong volume
dependence; an example is radiation pneumonitis
for which Burman et al. (97) found n = 0.87 and
many later analyses have found n = 1, implying
that pneumonitis at conventional fractionation correlates with the mean lung dose. Figure 2.10 shows
the n from Burman et al. (97) for partial volume

70
60

Dose (Gy)

50
40
30
20

Liver failure (n = 0.32)
Radiation pneumonitis (n = 0.87)
Radiation pericarditis (n = 0.35)
Esophageal stricture or perforation (n = 0.06)
Radiation myelits/necrosis: reference 20 cm (n = 0.05)

10
0

0

10

20

30

40
50
60
70
Volume irradiated (%)

80

90

100

FIGURE 2.10 Lyman model volume dependences for partial organ irradiations according to reference (97).

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 31

23/08/18 6:13 PM

32

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

dependences of some important complications The
parameter m determines the steepness of the dose–
response; 50 = ((2 )1/2m)–1. For the fits of Burman
et al. (97), m ranges from approximately 0.1 (50 ˜ 4)
to 0.27 (50 ˜ 1.5).
To use the Lyman model for a plan that is more
complex than partial organ irradiation, the DVH
must be converted into an isoeffective single-step
DVH, that is, a uniform dose to partial volume.
Two “histogram reduction” schemes were devised
to deal with general dose distributions where a volume fraction vi receives dose Di, as summarized
by a DVH. The effective volume method converts the general case into a partial organ irradiation of a volume fraction veff to a reference dose
Dm such that this partial irradiation has the same
Lyman model NTCP as the true distribution. Here,
1/ n
veff
vi and D is often taken as D
i (Di / Dm )
m
max
(98,99), although this choice is arbitrary and the
prescription dose has also been used. In the upper
limit of the probit integral, TD50(v) is set to
n
TD50(verr ) TD50(1) / verr
.
A more common histogram reduction method is
to convert the dose distribution to a uniform dose
to the entire volume that has the same NTCP as the
true dose distribution:

∑ (D ) v )

Deff = (

i

1/ n

i

n

(15)

With this method, the upper limit in Eq. 14 is (Deff –
TD50(1))/mTD50(1). Deff is the mean organ dose
for n = 1, whereas small n favors the highest doses
in the distribution.
The Lyman model is often applied to new data
to refit the parameters for the original 28 complications or to apply the model to other complications. For applications to SBRT, some investigators
convert the dose for each dose bin to a BED or an
EQD2 (or EQD with a different reference dose) bin,
but a surprising number of investigators do not.

The Relative Seriality Model
The relative seriality model (100) is widely used
in Europe and is implemented on several planning systems. The basic premise is that normal
tissues are a mix of serial and parallel components. However, the amount of mixture is determined by fitting outcomes to dose distributions
rather than studying the microscopic construction of the organ. Thus, this model, like the
Lyman model, is phenomenological, albeit with a
different four-parameter function to express the

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 32

DV dependence of a complication. Specifically, if
a fraction vi of the reference volume receives a
dose (or a BED) Di, then we have
1/ s
v ⎪⎫
⎪⎧
s
i
NTCP = ⎨1 − ∏ [1 − P(D ) ] ⎬
i
i
⎭⎪
⎩⎪

(16)

2−exp(e(1 − Di/D50))

where P(Di)

The parameter s is called the seriality parameter:
s = 1 describes the serial model of Niemierko and
Goitein (101), whereas s is small for a complication that exhibits a strong volume dependence
(a parallel-type complication).

Generalized Equivalent Uniform Dose
Niemierko recognized that the Deff as defined for
the Lyman model is the EUD for normal tissues.
He proposed that general volume dependences of
radiation responses could be efficiently described
for both OARs and tumors by a gEUD (66). The
gEUD is quite unlike the earlier cell-survival-based
EUD concept (65), and perhaps because gEUD captures important effects of volume dependences in a
simple mathematical form that does not require a
cell-based radiobiological model, gEUD is widely
used. The gEUD volume dependence parameter is
called a. For normal tissues, the gEUD a is the inverse
of the Lyman model n. However, a is also allowed
to be negative and can represent the EUD for TCP.
Thus, for a general dose distribution, we have

∑ (D ) v )

gEUD = (

i

a

i

1/ a

(17)

A large value of a accentuates high-dose portions of
the dose distribution; for a = 1, gEUD is the mean
dose, whereas if a is negative, gEUD is sensitive
to cold spots. For example, consider a simple dose
distribution where the dose to 5% of a structure is
30 Gy, the dose to another 5% is 75 Gy, and the
remaining 90% receives a dose of 60 Gy. gEUD is
dominated by the cold spot in the dose distribution
and gEUD = 34.8 Gy for a = –20. If a = 1, gEUD =
59.25 Gy, whereas if a = 20, gEUD = 65.2 Gy. gEUD
can be used to rank dose distributions according to
both relative tumoricidal efficacy and OAR sparing and can also be incorporated into optimization
algorithms through terms that, by choice of the a
parameter for an optimization structure, “push”
only on selected points of that structure’s DVH (89).
As with the Lyman model’s Deff, the “dose” from
which gEUD is calculated can be replaced by BED

23/08/18 6:13 PM

2: RADIOBIOLOGY PRINCIPLES OF RADIOSURGERY AND SBRT

or EQD, which is especially useful when dealing
with hypofractionated treatments.

Two Unexpected Normal Tissue
Responses to SBRT Treatments
In most applications, thanks to caution, imageguided radiation therapy (IGRT), and luck, the
toxicity of SBRT treatments has been comparable
to or even less than that of modern conventionally
fractionated radiation therapy. But there have been
a few surprises along the way, as seen from the following two examples.

Severe Complications in Early Days of Lung SBRT
Treatment of early stage NSCLC was pioneered
in the early 2000s (102). Initially, the treatment
plans were calculated without inhomogeneity correction and were normalized to give prescription dose at the periphery of the PTV with
a dose distribution shaped so that prescription
was approximately 80% of the central PTV dose.
Non-coplanar beams, shaped to just cover the PTV
(no margin to account for penumbra), were used
to sharpen dose falloff in normal tissue. An institutional Phase I trial, without restriction on tumor
location, found that 20 to 22 Gy × 3 fractions
did not exceed the maximum tolerable dose and
a Phase II trial with 70 patients followed. Actuarial local control at 2 years was 95%. However,
the trial also produced a high toxicity rate, including six deaths (Grade 5) and eight Grade 3 or
4 pulmonary and other toxicities (103). Highgrade toxicities were strongly associated with
central or perihilar tumor location. The authors
advised against using SBRT with this schedule
for tumors in the “zone of the proximal bronchial tree,” which they defined as encompassing
a 2-cm expansion of the proximal bronchial tree,
thus including the major airways. In popular terminology, clinicians began to refer to this region as
the “no fly zone” and RTOG trials 0236 and 0618
avoided treating tumors in this region. Of note,
although bronchial stenosis has been reported in
the treatment of central lung tumors to high doses,
it is relatively uncommon with conventionally
fractionated external beam treatment (104).
The 20 Gy × 3 regimen for central tumors is no
longer in common use, and outcomes data from
early trials have become subject to interpretation
because the dose distributions were calculated using
the pencil-beam algorithm without inhomogeneity
correction. To evaluate the delivered treatments,

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 33

33

retrospective analyses were performed to recalculate dose distributions (same beams, same monitor
units (MUs)) with the analytical anisotropic algorithm (AAA) (105) or with Monte Carlo (MC). It
was found that the original plan monitor units delivered, in reality (i.e., when recalculated with AAA),
a lower PTV dose, because increased attenuation in
the pencil beam algorithm with no corrections for
tissue inhomogeneity was not sufficient to compensate for the effects of lateral electronic disequilibrium
and lack of backscatter that were correctly handled
by AAA or MC. Thus, the observed results—both
good and bad—of the 20 Gy × 3-fraction prescription were because of a delivered dose that was
slightly lower than expected from the original treatment plans. To obtain similar outcomes from plans
done from the start with an advanced tissue inhomogeneity algorithm (now required by national protocols), the prescribed dose per fraction for 3-fraction
treatments has been reduced, often to 18 Gy.
The current approach to SBRT for tumors partly
within the “no fly zone” is cautious and uses more
fractions for better normal tissue sparing without
reducing the prescription BED (/ = 10 Gy) below
the 100 to 105 Gy that correlates with superior
local control for NSCLC (Figure 2.8). RTOG protocol 0813 is a Phase I dose escalation followed by
a Phase II efficacy trial using 5-fraction SBRT for
patients with centrally located NSCLC. The maximum point dosimetric constraints for central structures shown in Table 2.2 were strictly enforced,
whereas the volume maximum dose constraints
were encouraged but not mandatory.
The Phase II results for the maximum protocol
doses, 11.5 or 12 Gy × 5 fractions (BED 123.6–132
Gy) were reported as an ASTRO abstract in 2016
(106). There were two Grade 5 toxicities attributed
to SBRT in the 11.5 Gy × 5 group and one in the 12
Gy × 5 group. Overall there were 6 G3+ toxicities
of the 38 patients in the 11.5 Gy × 5 group and 7
of the 33 patients in the 12 Gy × 5 group, whereas
2-year local control in the two groups was statistically the same (89.4% and 87.7%). The toxicity
rate did not exceed the trial’s “stopping rule” and
its effect on the standard of care for such patients
awaits further study and publications.

Chest Wall Pain and Rib Fracture
in Lung Cancer SBRT
Chest wall pain (CWP) and rib fractures are rare
complications of conventionally fractionated photon treatment of intact breast with tangents or

23/08/18 6:13 PM

34

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

TABLE 2.2 Constraints on Central Risk Organs for RTOG 0813
Complication to Be
Avoided

Serial Tissue

Volume

Volume Maximum

Maximum Point Dose

Esophagus (nonadjacent wall)

<5 mL

27.5 Gy (5.5 Gy/fx)

105% of PTV
prescription

Stenosis/fistula

Heart/pericardium

<15 mL

32 Gy (6.4 Gy/fx)

105% of PTV
prescription

Pericarditis

Great vessels (nonadjacent wall)

<10 mL

47 Gy (9.4 Gy/fx)

105% of PTV
prescription

Aneurysm

Trachea and ipsilateral
bronchus (nonadjacent
wall)

<4 mL

18 Gy (3.6 Gy/fx)

105% of PTV
prescription

Stenosis/fistula

PTV, planning target volume.

other conventionally treated thoracic sites. A
rib fracture incidence of 1.8% was reported in a
study of 1,624 patients with Stage I to II breast
cancer treated with tangents or a three-field technique from 1968 to 1985 (107). A dose response
was noted with patients receiving a whole breast
dose less than 50 Gy having a significantly lower
rib fracture rate than those receiving 50 Gy. Rib
fracture incidence was also significantly increased
by chemotherapy and lower beam energy (4 MV vs.
6 or 8 MV). Pain without fracture was not reported
and not all fractures were accompanied by pain.
However, as 3- to 5-fraction SBRT became a
common treatment of early stage lung cancer and
lung metastases, a surprisingly high incidence of
CWP alone or with rib fractures, occurring in
the first 1 to 2 years after treatment, was noted.
There is some mechanistic understanding of
radiation-induced bone complications (108) but
the physiological origin of CWP without fracture
is poorly understood. Although CWP is usually a
transient complication that can be managed with
nonprescription medicines, its effect on quality
of life and the novelty of its common occurrence
in the SBRT setting make it a topic of both clinical and academic interests. Murray et al. (109)
reviewed 18 publications on thoracic SBRT (2,422
lesions). They found a median-reported CWP incidence of approximately 19% (range 6.1%–46.5%)
for all reported grades, with a median of 1.2%
(0%–17%) Grade 3+ for papers that separated
these out. Incidence of rib fracture was reported
in eight of these papers; fracture incidence was
usually less than that of CWP and frequently the
fractures were painless. Because the chest wall is
not a well-defined anatomical structure, artificial
structures (e.g., a 2- to 3-cm expansion outward
from the ipsilateral lung–chest wall interface) are

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 34

used for dosimetric evaluation, and absolute volume rather than relative volume metrics are often
recommended. Several studies of rib fracture
(110,111) contoured multiple individual ribs in
seeking a dose response.
Most studies of CWP are large retrospective
reviews by single or collaborating institutions
using their own data from modern treatment planning systems and follow-up standards. Some have
been restricted to a single fractionation scheme but
others have included 3, 4, and 5 fractions and at
least five use biological correction, usually with
/ = 3 Gy. At least five studies summarize their
findings in terms of a dose–response model from
which the probability of CWP as a function of
selected DV metrics could be calculated. In addition, obesity (body mass index) was reported as
a risk factor in at least three papers. Most papers
provide recommendations for treatment planning
DV constraints, often limiting the chest wall volume receiving doses above 30 to 40 Gy as much
as possible without compromising target coverage.
The maximum dose, the highest dose to a small volume (1–5 mL), and the highest dose to 30 to 70 mL
of the artificial chest wall structure have all been
cited. Some clinicians advise using more fractions for patients with targets near the chest wall
(112–114) and effects of 8-, 10-, and 15-fraction
treatments remain to be analyzed. Figure 2.11
is a three-dimensional Risk Map of the DV and
fraction number constraints that are suggested
in five publications (115–119). Roughly, higher
doses are associated with the 5-fraction regimens
and smaller volumes. Although there is no single
consensus on constraints that will prevent CWP,
because the points on a structure’s DVH tend to
be highly correlated, efforts to reduce one or more
DVH points combined with judicious counseling

23/08/18 6:13 PM

2: RADIOBIOLOGY PRINCIPLES OF RADIOSURGERY AND SBRT

a great deal of uncertainty about the basic radiobiology involved in the outcomes. Better understanding,
even on a phenomenological level, of the biology
that underlies SBRT successes is needed to safely
and effectively apply such treatments to larger target volumes and to situations in which cure or longterm survival raises the risk of late complications.

60
55
50
Dose (Gy)

35

45
40
35
30

REFERENCES

25
20

0

4

20

3
40

Vo
lu

me

2
1

60

(m

L)

80

#

5

ns

tio

c
fra

FIGURE 2.11 A three-dimensional Risk Map (dose,
volume, number of fractions) for chest wall pain showing
the recommended limits from five studies.
Sources: Adapted from Kimsey F, McKay J, Gefter J, et al.
Dose-response model for chest wall tolerance of stereotactic
body radiation therapy. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2015;26:129–134.
doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.2015.11.003; Benedict SH, Yenice KM,
Followill D, et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy: the report
of AAPM Task Group 101. Med Phys. 2010;37(8):4078–4101.
doi:10.1118/1.3438081; Din SU, Williams EL, Jackson A, et al.
Impact of fractionation and dose in a multivariate model for
radiation-induced chest wall pain. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2015;93(2):418–424. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.06.014; Welsh J,
Thomas J, Shah D, et al. Obesity increases the risk of chest wall
pain from thoracic stereotactic body radiation therapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;81:91–96. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2010.04.022; Stephans KL, Djemil T, Tendulkar RD, et al. Prediction of chest wall toxicity from lung stereotactic body
radiotherapy (SBRT). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;82:
974–980. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.12.002

of patients at increased risk because of tumor size
or location or high body mass index (BMI) may be
a clinically sufficient way to deal with this nonlethal complication.

CONCLUSIONS
SBRT presents radiation oncology with a paradigm
change and a challenge. Relative to conventionally
fractionated radiation therapy, for primary cancers,
including early stage NSCLC and prostate cancer, it
offers superior or at least equivalent complicationfree cure, and for metastatic disease, it provides
superior or equivalent palliation in a time frame
that is far more manageable for patients and caregivers. The physics developments that contribute
to SBRT’s success—advanced planning and delivery tools including superior image guidance—are
well understood, as are physics improvements that
might make it still more effective. However, there is

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 35

1. Hall EJ, Giaccia AJ. Radiobiology for the Radiologist. 7th
ed. Philadephia, PA: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2012.
2. Sachs RK, Hahnfeld P, Brenner DJ. The link between lowLET dose-response relations and the underlying kinetics
of damage production/repair/misrepair. Int J Radiat Biol.
1997;72(4):351-374. PubMed PMID: 9343102
3. Wouters BG, Begg AC. Irradiation-induced damage and the DNA
damage response. In: Joiner MC, van der Kogel A, eds. Basic Clinical Radiobiology. 4th ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2009.
4. Ling CC, Gerweck LE, Zaider M, et al. Dose-rate effects
in external beam radiotherapy redux. Radiother Oncol.
2010;95:261-268. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2010.03.014
5. Joiner MC, Bentzen SM. Fractionation: the linear-quadratic
approach. In: Joiner MC, van der Kogel A, eds. Basic Clinical
Radiobiology. 4th ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2009.
6. Withers HR, Taylor JM, Maciejewski B. The hazard of accelerated tumor clonogen repopulation during radiotherapy.
Acta Oncol. 1988;27:131-146. PubMed PMID: 3390344
7. Norton L. A Gompertzian model of human breast cancer
growth. Cancer Res. 1988;48(24 Pt 1):7067-7071. PubMed
PMID: 3191483
8. Horsman MR, Wouters BG, Joiner MC, et al. The oxygen effect
and fractionated radiotherapy. In: Joiner MC, van der Kogel A,
eds. Basic Clinical Radiobiology. 4th ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Press; 2009.
9. Okunieff P, Morgan D, Niemierko A, et al. Radiation doseresponse of human tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
1995;32(4):1227-1237. PubMed PMID: 7607946.
10. Chapman JD. Can the two mechanisms of tumor cell killing
by radiation be exploited for therapeutic gain? J Radiat Res.
2014;55:2-9. doi:10.1093/jrr/rrt111
11. Goodhead DT. Initial events in the cellular effects of ionizing radiations: clustered damage in DNA. Int J Radiat Biol.
1994;65(1):7-17. PubMed PMID: 7905912.
12. Brenner DJ. The linear-quadratic model is an appropriate
methodology for determining isoeffective doses at large doses
per fraction. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2008;18(4):234-239.
doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.2008.04.004
13. McKenna FW, Ahmad S. Fitting techniques of cell survival curves in high-dose region for use in stereotactic body
radiation therapy. Phys Med Biol. 2009;54:1593-1608.
doi:10.1088/0031-9155/54/6/013
14. Carlson DJ, Stewart RD, Semenenko VA, et al. Combined use
of Monte Carlo DNA damage simulations and deterministic
repair models to examine putative mechanisms of cell killing.
Radiat Res. 2008;169:447-459. doi:10.1667/RR1046.1
15. Lea DE, Catcheside DG. The mechanism of the induction
by radiation of chromosome aberrations in Tradescantia.
J Genetics. 1942;44:216-245.
16. Thames HD, Hendry JH. Fractionation in Radiotherapy.
Philadelphia, PA: Taylor & Francis; 1987.

23/08/18 6:13 PM

36

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

17. Deacon J, Peckham MJ, Steel GG. The radioresponsiveness of
human tumours and the initial slope of the cell survival curve.
Radiother Oncol. 1984;2:317-323. PubMed PMID: 6395213.
18. Joiner MC, van der Kogel A, eds. Basic Clinical Radiobiology.
4th ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2009.
19. Zips D; 2009. Tumor growth and response to radiation. In:
Joiner MC, van der Kogel A, eds. Basic Clinical Radiobiology.
4th ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
20. Steel GG. The growth rate of tumours. In: Steel GG, ed.
Basic Clinical Radiobiology. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Arnold
& Oxford University Press; 1997.
21. Carlson DJ, Stewart RD, Semenenko VA. Effects of oxygen on
intrinsic radiation sensitivity: a test of the relationship between
aerobic and hypoxic linear-quadratic (LQ) model parameters.
Med Phys. 2006;33(9):3105-3115. doi:10.1118/1.2229427
22. Brown JM, Carlson DJ, Brenner DJ. The tumor radiobiology
of SRS and SBRT: are more than the 5 Rs involved? Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2014;88(2):254-262. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2013.07.022
23. Tobias CA. The repair-misrepair model in radiobiology: comparison to other models. Radiat Res Suppl. 1985;8:S77-S95.
PubMed PMID: 3867092.
24. Curtis SB. Lethal and potentially lethal lesions induced by
radiation—a unified repair model. Radiat Res. 1986;106:
252-270. PubMed PMID: 3704115.
25. Sontag W. Comparison of six different models describing
survival of mammalian cells after irradiation. Radiat Environ
Biophys. 1990;29(3):185-201. PubMed PMID: 2396008.
26. Park C, Papiez L, Zhang S, et al. Universal survival curve and
single fraction equivalent dose: useful tools in understanding
potency of ablative radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2008;70(3):847-852. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.10.059
27. Shuryak I, Carlson DJ, Brown JM, et al. High-dose and fractionation effects in stereotactic radiation therapy: analysis
of tumor control data from 2965 patients. Radiother Oncol.
2015;115:327-334. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2015.05.013
28. Garcia-Barros M, Paris F, Cordon-Cardo C, et al. Tumor
response to radiotherapy regulated by endothelial cell
apoptosis. Science. 2003;300:1155-1159. doi:10.1126/
science.1082504
29. Fuks Z, Kolesnick R. Engaging the vascular component of
the tumor response. Cancer Cell. 2005;8:89-91. doi:10.1016/
j.ccr.2005.07.014
30. Park HJ, Griffin RJ, Hui S, et al. Radiation-induced vascular
damage in tumors: implications of vascular damage in ablative hypofractionated radiotherapy (SBRT and SRS). Radiat
Res. 2012;177:311-327. PubMed PMID: 22229487.
31. Kang J, Demaria S, Formenti S. Current clinical trials testing
the combination of immunotherapy with radiotherapy. J Immunother Cancer. 2016;4:51. doi:10.1186/s40425-016-0156-7
32. Chandra RA, Wilhite TJ, Balboni TA, et al. A systematic
evaluation of abscopal responses following radiotherapy in
patients with metastatic melanoma treated with ipilimumab.
Oncoimmunology. 2015;4(11):e1046028. doi:10.1080/2162
402X.2015.1046028
33. Bijl HP, Coppes RP, et al. Unexpected changes of rat cervical
spinal cord tolerance caused by inhomogeneous dose distributions. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2003;57(1):274-281.
PubMed PMID: 12909243.
34. Faber H, Schippers JM, et al. Bath and shower effects in the
rat parotid gland explain increased relative risk of parotid
gland dysfunction after intensity-modulated radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2009;74(4):1002-1005.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.03.039
35. van Luijk P, Bijl HP, Knonings AW, et al. Data on dose-volume
effects in the rat spinal cord do not support existing NTCP

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 36

models. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005;61(3):892-900.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2004.10.035
36. McGarry RC, Papiez L, Williams M, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy of early-stage non-small-cell lung carcinoma: phase I study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005;63(4):
1010-1015. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2005.03.073
37. Brenner DJ, Martinez AA, Edmundson GK, et al. Direct
evidence that prostate tumors show high sensitivity to fractionation (low alpha/beta ratio), similar to late-responding
normal tissue. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2002;52(1):6-13.
PubMed PMID: 11777617.
38. Brenner DJ, Hall EJ. Fractionation and protraction for radiotherapy of prostate carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
1999;43:1095-1101. PubMed PMID: 10192361.
39. Fowler JF, Toma-Dasu I, Dasu A. Is the alfa/beta ratio for
prostate tumours really low and does it vary with the level of
risk at diagnosis? Anticancer Res. 2013;33:1009-1011.
40. Carlson DJ, Stewart RD, Li XA, et al. Comparison of in vitro
and in vivo alpha/beta ratios for prostate cancer. Phys Med
Biol. 2004;49(19):4477-4491. PubMed PMID: 15552412.
41. Kishan AU, King CR. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for lowand intermediate-risk prostate cancer. Semin Radiat Oncol.
2017;27(3):268-278. doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.2017.02.006
42. Spratt DE, Zumsteg ZS, Ghadjar P, et al. Comparison of high
dose (86.4 Gy) IMRT vs combined brachytherapy plus IMRT
for intermediate-risk prostate cancer. BJU Int. 2014;114:
360-367. doi:10.1111/bju.12514
43. Zaider M, Hanin L. Tumor control probability in radiation treatment. Med Phys. 2011;38(2):574-583. doi:10.1118/1.3521406
44. Munro TR, Gilbert CW. The relation between tumor lethal
doses and the radiosensitivity of tumor cells. Br J Radiol.
1961;34:246-251. doi:10.1259/0007-1285-34-400-246
45. Zaider M, Minerbo GN. Tumour control probability: a formulation applicable to any temporal protocol of dose delivery.
Phys Med Biol. 2000;45:279-293. PubMed PMID: 10701504.
46. Brahme A, Agren AK. Optimal dose distribution for eradication of heterogeneous tumours. Acta Oncol. 1987;26(5):
377-385. PubMed PMID: 3426851.
47. Goitein M. The probability of controlling an inhomogeneously irradiated tumor. In: Zink S, ed. Evaluation of Treatment Planning for Particle Beam Radiotherapy, NCI Contract
Report. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute; 1987.
48. Niemierko A, Goitein M. Implementation of a model for estimating tumor control probability for an inhomogeneously
irradiated tumor. Radiother Oncol. 1993;29:140-147.
PubMed PMID: 8310139.
49. Jaffray DA, Chung C, Coolens C, et al. Quantitative imaging
in radiation oncology: an emerging science and clinical service. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2015;25(4):292-304. doi:10.1016/
j.semradonc.2015.05.002
50. Bentzen S. Dose-response relationships in radiotherapy. In:
Joiner MC, van der Kogel A, eds. Basic Clinical Radiobiology.
4th ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2009.
51. Kim Y, Tomé WA. Risk-adaptive optimization: selective boosting of high-risk tumor subvolumes. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2006;66(5):1528-1542. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2006.08.032
52. Tomé WA, Fowler JF. On cold spots in tumor subvolumes.
Med Phys. 2009;29(7):1590-1598. doi:10.1118/1.1485060
53. Khalil AA, Bentzen SM, Overgaard J. Steepness of the doseresponse curve as a function of volume in an experimental
tumor irradiated under ambient or hypoxic conditions. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1997;39(4):797-802. PubMed PMID:
9369125.
54. Fowler JF, Tomé WA, Fenwick JD, et al. A challenge to traditional radiation oncology. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2004;60(4):1241-1256. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2004.07.691

23/08/18 6:13 PM

2: RADIOBIOLOGY PRINCIPLES OF RADIOSURGERY AND SBRT
55. Yamada Y, Katsoulakis E, Laufer I, et al. The impact of histology and delivered dose on local control of spinal metastases treated with stereotactic radiosurgery. Neurosurg Focus.
2017;42(1):E6. doi:10.3171/2016.9.FOCUS16369
56. Stahl JM, Ross R, Harder EM, et al. The effect of biologically effective dose and radiation treatment schedule on
overall survival in Stage I non-small cell lung cancer patients
treated with stereotactic body radiation therapy. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2016;96(5):1011-1020. doi:10.1016/j.
ijrobp.2016.08.033
57. Mehta N, King CR, Agazaryan N, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy and 3-dimensional conformal radiotherapy
for stage I non-small cell lung cancer: a pooled analysis of biological equivalent dose and local control. Pract Radiat Oncol.
2012;2:288-295. doi:10.1016/j.prro.2011.10.004
58. Onishi H, Araki T. Stereotactic body radiation therapy for
Stage I non-small-cell lung cancer: a historical overview
of clinical studies. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2013;43(4):345-350.
doi:10.1093/jjco/hyt014
59. Wiggenraad R, Kal HB, et al. Dose-effect relation in
stereotactic radiotherapy for brain metastases. A systematic
review. Radiother Oncol. 2011;98:292-297. doi:10.1016/
j.radonc.2011.01.011
60. Zagars GK, Schultheiss TE, Peters LJ. Inter-tumor heterogeneity and radiation dose-control curves. Radiother Oncol.
1987;8:353-361. PubMed PMID: 3588999.
61. Webb S. Optimum parameters in a model for tumour control
probability including interpatient heterogeneity. Phys Med
Biol. 1994;39:1895-1914. PubMed PMID: 15559999.
62. Webb S, Nahum AE. A model for calculating tumour control probability in radiotherapy, including the effects of
inhomogeneous distribution of dose and clonogenic cell
density. Phys Med Biol. 1933;38:653-666. PubMed PMID:
8346278.
63. Liu F, Tai A, Lee P, et al. Tumor control probability modeling for stereotactic body radiation therapy of early-stage lung
cancer using multiple biophysical models. Radiother Oncol.
2017;122:286-294. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2016.11.006
64. Carlone MC, Warkentin B, Stavrev P, et al. Fundamental form
of a population TCP model in the limit of large heterogeneity.
Med Phys. 2006;33(6):1634-1642. doi:10.1118/1.2193690
65. Niemierko A. Reporting and analyzing dose distributions:
a concept of equivalent uniform dose. Med Phys. 1997;24:
103-110. doi:10.1118/1.598063
66. Niemierko A. A generalized concept of equivalent uniform
dose (EUD). Med Phys. 1999;26:1101.
67. Jackson A, Marks LB, Bentzen SM, et al. The lessons of
QUANTEC: recommendations for reporting and gathering
data on dose-volume dependencies of treatment outcome. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;76(3S):S155-S160.
68. Peeters ST, Hoogeman MS, Heemsbergen WD, et al. Rectal
bleeding, fecal incontinence and high stool frequency after
conformal radiotherapy for prostate cancer: normal tissue
complication probability modeling. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2006;66(1):11-19. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2006.03.034
69. https://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/CTCAE_4.03/Archive/
CTCAE_4.0_2009-05-29_QuickReference_8.5x11.pdf
70. Kirkpatrick JP, Schultheiss TE. Radiation dose-volume effects
in the spinal cord. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;76
(suppl 3):S42-S49. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.04.095
71. Sahgal A, Ma L, Gibbs I, et al. Spinal cord tolerance for
stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2010;77(2):548-553. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.05.023
72. Dörr W. Pathogenesis of normal-tissue side-effects. In: Joiner
MC, van der Kogel A, eds. Basic Clinical Radiobiology. 4th ed.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2009.

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 37

37

73. Ang KK, Jiang GL, Guttenberger R, et al. Impact of spinal
cord repair kinetics on the practice of altered fractionation
schedules. Radiother Oncol. 1992;25:287-294. PubMed
PMID: 1480775.
74. Ling CC, Gerweck LE, Zaider M, et al. Dose rate effects
in external beam radiotherapy redux. Radiother Oncol.
2010;95:261-268. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2010.03.014
75. King CR, Brooks JD, Gill H, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for localized prostate cancer: interim results of a prospective phase II clinical trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2009;73:1043-1048. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.05.059
76. Yazici G, Sanli TY, Cengiz M, et al. A simple strategy to
decrease fatal carotid blowout syndrome after stereotactic body reirradiation for recurrent head and neck cancers.
Radiat Oncol. 2013;8:242. doi:10.1186/1748-717X-8-242
77. Verma V, Shostrom VK, Zhen W, et al. Influence of fractionation scheme and tumor location on toxicities after stereotactic body radiation therapy for large (≥ 5 cm) non-small
cell lung cancer: a multi-institutional analysis. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2017;97(4):778-785. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp
.2016.11.049
78. Withers HR, Taylor JM, Maciejewski B. Treatment volume
and tissue tolerance. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1988;14:
751-759. PubMed PMID: 3350731.
79. Niemierko A, Goitein M. Modeling of normal tissue response
to radiation: The critical volume model. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys. 1993;25:135-145. PubMed PMID: 8416870.
80. Yorke ED, Kutcher GJ, Jackson A, et al. Probability of
radiation-induced complications in normal tissues with
parallel architecture under conditions of uniform whole or
partial organ irradiation. Radiother Oncol. 1993;26:226-237.
Pubmed PMID: 8316652.
81. Michalski JM, Gay H, Jackson A, et al. Radiation dose-volume effects in radiation-induced rectal injury. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;76(suppl 3):S123-S129. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2009.03.078
82. Werner-Wasik M, Yorke E, Deasy J, et al. Radiation
dose-volume effects in the esophagus. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys. 2010;76(suppl 3):S86-S93. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp
.2009.05.070
83. Huang EX, Hope AJ, Lindsay PE, et al. Heart irradiation
as a risk factor for radiation pneumonitis. Acta Oncol.
2011;50(1):51-60. doi:10.3109/0284186X.2010.521192
84. Emami B, Lyman J, Brown A, et al. Tolerance of normal tissue to therapeutic irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
1991;21:109-122. PubMed PMID: 2032882.
85. Asbell SO, Grimm J, Xue J, et al. Introduction and clinical overview of the DVH risk map. Semin Radiat Oncol.
2016;26(2):89-96. doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.2015.11.005
86. Grimm J, Sahgal A, Soltys SG, et al. Estimated risk level of
unified stereotactic body radiation therapy dose tolerance
limits for spinal cord. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2016;26(2):
165-171. doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.2015.11.010
87. Sahgal A, Weinberg V, Ma L, et al. Probabilities of radiation myelopathy specific to stereotactic body radiation therapy to guide safe practice. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2013;85(2):341-347. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2012.05.007
88. Li Q, Swanick CW, Allen PK, et al. Stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR) using 70 Gy in 10 fractions for
non-small cell lung cancer: exploration of clinical indications. Radiother Oncol. 2014;112:256-261. doi:10.1016/
j.radonc.2014.07.010
89. Alber M, Deasy JO, et al. The use and QA of biologically
related models for treatment planning: Short report of the
TG-166 of the therapy physics committee of the AAPM. Med
Phys. 2012;39(3):1386-1409. doi:10.1118/1.3685447

23/08/18 6:13 PM

38

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

90. Jackson A, Ten Haken RA, Robertson JM, et al. Analysis
of clinical complication data for radiation hepatitis using a
parallel architecture model. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
1995;31:883-891. doi:10.1016/0360-3016(94)00471-4
91. Källman P, Agran A, Brahme A. Tumor and normal tissue
responses to fractionated non-uniform dose delivery. Int
J Radiat Biol. 1992;62:249-262. PubMed PMID: 1355519.
92. Ricardi U, Filippi AR, Guarneri A, et al. Dosimetric predictors of radiation-induced lung injury in stereotactic body
radiation therapy. Acta Oncol. 2009;48:571-577. doi:10
.1080/02841860802520821
93. Guckenberger M, Baier K, Polat B, et al. Dose-response relationship for radiation-induced pneumonitis after pulmonary
stereotactic body radiotherapy. Radiother Oncol. 2010;97:
65-70. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2010.04.027
94. Viswanathan AN, Yorke ED, Marks LB, et al. Radiation
dose-volume effects of the urinary bladder. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys. 2010;76 (suppl 3):S116-S122. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2009.02.090
95. Plataniotis GA, Dale RG. Assessment of the radiationequivalent of chemotherapy contributions in 1-phase radiochemotherapy treatment of muscle-invasive bladder cancer.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2014;88(4):927-932. doi:10
.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.11.242
96. Lyman JT. Complication probability as assessed from
dose-volume histograms. Radiat Res Suppl. 1985;8:S13S19. PubMed: PMID: 3867079.
97. Burman C, Kutcher GJ, Emami B, et al. Fitting of normal tissue tolerance data to an analytic function. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys. 1991;21(1):123-135. PubMed PMID: 2032883.
98. Dawson LA, Eccles C, Craig T. Individualized image
guided iso-NTCP based liver cancer SBRT. Acta Oncol.
2006;45(7):856-864. doi:10.1080/02841860600936369
99. Moiseenko V, Battista J, Van Dyk J. Normal tissue complication probabilities: dependence on choice of biological model
and dose-volume histogram reduction scheme. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2000;46(4):983-993. PubMed PMID:
10705021.
100. Källman P, Agren A, Brahme A. Tumour and normal tissue responses to fractionated non-uniform dose delivery.
Int J Radiat Biol. 1992;62(2):249-262. PubMed PMID:
1355519.
101. Niemierko A, Goitein M. Calculation of normal tissue
complication probability and dose-volume histogram
reduction schemes for tissues with a critical element architecture. Radiother Oncol. 1991;20:166-176. PubMed
PMID: 1852908.
102. McGarry RC, Papiez L, Williams M, et al. Stereotactic
body radiation therapy of early-stage non-small-cell lung
carcinoma: phase I study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2005;63(4):1010-1015. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2005.03.073
103. Timmerman R, McGarry R, Yiannoutsos C, et al. Excessive
toxicity when treating central tumors in a phase II study of
stereotactic body radiation therapy for medically inoperable
early-stage lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24(30):48334839. doi:10.1200/JCO.2006.07.5937
104. Miller KL, Shafman TD, Anscher MS, et al. Bronchial stenosis: an underreported complication of high-dose external
beam radiotherapy for lung cancer? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2005;61(1):64-69. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2004.02.066
105. Ding GX, Duggan DM, Lu B, et al. Impact of inhomogeneity corrections on dose coverage in the treatment of lung

Heron_68566_PTR_02_15-38_08-23-18.indd 38

cancer using stereotactic body radiation therapy. Med Phys.
2007;34(7):2985-2994. doi:10.1118/1.2745923
106. Bezjak A, Paulus R, Gaspar LE, et al. Efficacy and toxicity
analysis of NRG Oncology/RTOG 0813 trial of stereotactic
body radiation therapy (SBRT) for centrally located nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2016;96(suppl 2):S8.
107. Pierce SM, Recht A, Lingos TI, et al. Long-term radiation
complications following conservative surgery (CS) and radiation therapy (RT) in patients with early stage breast cancer.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1992;23:915-923. PubMed
PMID: 1639653.
108. Hopewell JW. Radiation-therapy effects on bone density. Med Pediatr Oncol. 2003;41:208-211. doi:10.1002/
mpo.10338
109. Murray L, Karakaya E, Hinsley S, et al. Lung stereotactic
ablative radiotherapy (SABR): dosimetric considerations
for chest wall toxicity. Br J Radiol. 2016;89:20150628.
doi:10.1259/bjr.20150628
110. Taremi M, Hope A, Lindsay P, et al. Predictors of
radiotherapy induced bone injury (RIBI) after stereotactic lung radiotherapy. Radiat Oncol. 2012;7:159.
doi:10.1186/1748-717X-7-159
111. Pettersson N, Nyman J, Johansson KA. Radiation-induced
rib fractures after hypofractionated stereotactic body radiation therapy of non-small cell lung cancer: a dose- and
volume-response analysis. Radiother Oncol. 2009;91:
360-368. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2009.03.022
112. Coroller TP, Mak RH, Lewis JH, et al. Low incidence of
chest wall pain with a risk-adapted lung stereotactic body
radiation therapy approach using three or five fractions
based on chest wall dosimetry. PLoS One. 2014;9:e94859.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0094859
113. Westover KD, Loo BW, Gerber DE, et al. Precision hypofractionated radiation therapy in poor performing patients with
non-small cell lung cancer: phase 1 dose escalation trial. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015;93(1):72-81. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2015.05.004
114. Li Q, Swanick CW, Allen PK, et al. Sterotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR) using 70 Gy in 10 fractions for
non-small cell lung cancer: exploration of clinical indications. Radiother Oncol. 2014;112:256-261. doi:10.1016/
j.radonc.2014.07.010
115. Kimsey F, McKay J, Gefter J, et al. Dose-response model
for chest wall tolerance of stereotactic body radiation therapy. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2015;26:129-134. doi:10.1016/
j.semradonc.2015.11.003
116. Benedict SH, Yenice KM, Followill D, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy: the report of AAPM Task Group 101.
Med Phys. 2010;37(8):4078-4101. doi:10.1118/1.3438081
117. Din SU, Williams EL, Jackson A, et al. Impact of fractionation and dose in a multivariate model for radiationinduced chest wall pain. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2015;93(2):418-424. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.06.014
118. Welsh J, Thomas J, Shah D, et al. Obesity increases the risk
of chest wall pain from thoracic stereotactic body radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;81:91-96.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.04.022
119. Stephans KL, Djemil T, Tendulkar RD, et al. Prediction of
chest wall toxicity from lung stereotactic body radiotherapy
(SBRT). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;82:974-980.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.12.002

23/08/18 6:13 PM

C H A P T E R

3

SRS and SBRT Process
M. Saiful Huq and Robin Stern

Stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) is a nonsurgical
specialized type of external beam radiation treatment in which large doses of highly accurate, precise, and conformal ionizing radiation are delivered
to a well-defined target volume in a single procedure
using image guidance. The term “stereotactic” refers
to a procedure in which a targeted mass is localized
with respect to a fixed three-dimensional reference
system such as a rigid head frame. The “radiosurgery” is accomplished by directing beams of radiation along any trajectory in this three-dimensional
(3D) space toward the localized targeted mass of
known 3D coordinates. Lars Leksell, a Swedish
neurosurgeon, developed the term SRS in 1951 as
a novel concept of a noninvasive method to treat
lesions that were not accessible by open surgery techniques. Patients with trigeminal neuralgia (a nerve
disorder that causes pain in the face) were the first
to be treated using an orthovoltage x-ray machine
mounted to a stereotactic frame. In 1968, Leksell
developed the first commercially available dedicated
radiosurgical device called the Gamma Knife. The
Gamma Knife technology made it possible to precisely deliver a single, large dose of highly conformal
radiation to any number of intracranial targets using
201 fixed cobalt-60 sources aimed at a focal point
while delivering very low doses to the surrounding
normal tissue. This provided an alternative treatment for certain neurosurgical procedures that were
then associated with significant morbidity (1,2). In
the era before the emergence of computed tomography (CT), treatments were initially limited to
patients with acoustic neuromas and arteriovenous

malformations (AVMs), which are tangles of
expanded blood vessels that disrupt normal blood
flow in the brain and that bleed sometimes (2,3).
For decades, SRS treatment with Gamma Knife
as well as with linacs, TomoTherapy, and specialized devices such as CyberKnife has been successfully used in the treatment of brain metastases and
many intracranial neoplasms and functional disorders. Radiosurgery can halt tumor cell division,
destroy neoplastic blood vessels, induce apoptosis
or necrosis, and, when used intracranially, modify
the blood–brain barrier around the tumor (4–10).
Since the introduction of SRS, thousands of publications have appeared in the literature reporting the
benefits of the use of this noninvasive procedure as
an efficient and effective means of achieving a high
rate of local control and, in some settings, improved
survival (11). SRS is now routinely used for the
management of single and multiple metastatic, primary, malignant, intracranial, and central nervous
system (CNS) tumors as well as benign tumors such
as pituitary adenomas, acoustic neuromas, and
meningiomas. SRS is also used for the management
of AVMs and other neurological conditions such as
trigeminal neuralgia and essential tremor.
The success of SRS in the management of intracranial and CNS tumors has led to the development
of fractionated SRS, also called stereotactic body
radiation therapy (SBRT), with unique technological
and clinical considerations. SBRT uses the advantages of stereotactic guidance to deliver hypofractionated, highly conformal, high doses of radiation
to extracranial tumors using image guidance in two
39

Heron_68566_PTR_03_39-46_08-23-18.indd 39

21/08/18 2:11 PM

40

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

to five sessions. Biologically equivalent doses greater
than 100 Gy can be delivered to various extracranial
tumors using this technique.
As in intracranial SRS, SBRT also requires a high
level of precision and accuracy at every step in the
treatment process. Therefore, successful clinical
implementation of SBRT requires careful consideration of details of every step in the treatment process
and integration of several technologies that provide
solutions to challenges posed by the unique characteristics of various extracranial tumors. Important
considerations for SBRT treatments include, but
are not limited to, the following:
1. Three-dimensional imaging and localiza-

tion techniques that determine the exact 3D
coordinates of the target within the body
2. Integration of modern imaging systems (CT,

MRI, PET-CT, etc.) to visualize and precisely delineate the target volume and critical
structures
3. For moving targets such as lung and liver tu-

mors, technologies such as four-dimensional
(4D) CT for quantification of motion of
tumor(s) as well as that of the critical structures that lay close to the tumor
4. Technologies and techniques to manage tumor

motion during SBRT treatment to more effectively spare irradiation of healthy tissue; examples of such techniques are gated treatment
delivery or tumor tracking
5. An immobilization system that ensures ac-

curate and reproducible patient positioning
throughout the duration of treatment
6. Treatment planning systems with the capa-

bility of integrating information from various
imaging modalities for delineating target and
critical structure volumes and calculating
accurate highly conformal dose distributions
with a sharp dose gradient using different techniques such as intensity-modulated radiation
therapy (IMRT) or volumetric-modulated arc
therapy (VMAT)
7. Availability of dose calculation algorithms

that can account for the effects of tissue heterogeneities
8. Linear accelerators and/or other machines

that are designed for the delivery of SBRT
treatments
9. Sophisticated image guidance technolo-

gies and techniques, such as cone beam

Heron_68566_PTR_03_39-46_08-23-18.indd 40

CT imaging, stereoscopic x-ray imaging,
fluoroscopic verification of tumor motion,
gating, and tracking, to confirm the location of a tumor immediately before and
during the delivery of radiation
One of the key challenges of SBRT is motion
assessment and motion management for tumors
and critical structures close to the tumor that move
during treatment. Special considerations must be
made to account for the effect of internal organ
motion (primarily breathing-associated motion but
also bowel peristalsis motion) on target positioning
and reproducibility. As a first step, it is necessary to
quantify the specific motion of a target or critical
structure close to the target. Options for motion
assessment include real-time fluoroscopy or 4D
CT scanning. The gross target volume (GTV) to
planning target volume (PTV) expansion should be
no greater than 0.5 cm in the axial plane and 0.7 to
1.0 cm in the craniocaudal plane. If tumor motion
combined with setup error causes any PTV to be
greater than the GTV beyond these limits, then a
motion management strategy (or plan to reduce
setup error) must be used with validation of success. The patient should be instructed to breathe
normally at the time of initial tumor motion assessment. Deep inspiration or expiration breath-hold
is not recommended for the initial tumor motion
assessment, as such assessment generally overestimates free breathing tumor motion.
Motion assessment involves a query to appreciate the nature of both tumor target and normal
tissue displacement that may occur during a typical
SBRT treatment session. Dynamic imaging such
as fluoroscopy, ultrasound, or 4D CT is typically
required for such an assessment. It is not enough
to understand how surrogates for targets move
(e.g., the diaphragm for a lung tumor). Instead,
the actual motion of the target must be reasonably
understood. In turn, this assessment may either
allow appropriate expansions of targets to encompass this movement (if the expansion would only
be minimal) or trigger the use of motion control.
Motion management is a logical reaction to excessive motion appreciated from the motion assessment where the natural physiological motion is
either modified (e.g., dampened) or countered with
an active process (e.g., gating or tracking).
Motion management is highly recommended for
SBRT. In instances in which motion management is
not possible, larger expansion volumes will be used
to adequately cover the motion-related uncertainties. Typical motion management strategies include

21/08/18 2:11 PM

3: SRS AND SBRT PROCESS

4D CT, active breath-hold, gated treatment, and
abdominal compression.
Image-guided radiation therapy (IGRT) uses
imaging to facilitate accuracy and precision
throughout its entire process from target and
normal tissue delineation to radiation delivery to
adaptation of therapy to anatomical and biological
changes over time in individual patients. Here, the
terminology IGRT is used to focus on image guidance at the time of radiation delivery to ensure its
adherence to the planned treatment. Sophisticated
image guidance reduces uncertainties and allows
smaller treatment margins for SBRT treatments.
Confidently identifying the stereotactic fiducials
(e.g., implanted markers, close body tissue surrogates, or even the tumor itself) before and during
treatment mostly eliminates interfraction error and
reduces intrafraction error, allowing the smaller
margins critical to the overall SBRT approach.
SRS/SBRT processes are unique to every facility
practicing radiosurgical procedures. Even within a
given facility, they are different for different treatment modalities. Figure 3.1 shows an example of a
process map or a process tree for a patient undergoing linac-based SRS/SBRT treatment. The trunk
of the tree, as shown by the central arrow, depicts
the main process of SRS/SBRT treatment, whereas
the branches show the subprocesses that feed
into the main process. Each of the subprocesses
can then be subdivided into many smaller steps
that constitute the subprocesses. For the execution
of a successful SRS/SBRT treatment, each step in
each of these subprocesses will need to be executed

Additional
imaging/procedures

successfully. This particular process tree consists
of 18 subprocesses. To gain a better understanding
of the overall SRS/SBRT process, in the following
text we provide a list of various steps that constitute
each of the subprocesses. This list is obviously not
exhaustive and is given here only as a guide to the
reader on how to build a process map for a given
process. It should also be mentioned that details
of different subprocesses, that is, immobilization,
imaging, technology for SRS/SBRT, treatment planning, and so forth, shown in this process map can be
found elsewhere in other chapters in this book. The
reader is cautioned that this particular process map
is applicable to only one of the author’s institutions
and the detail is not necessarily applicable to other
cancer centers that provide SRS/SBRT services.
Subprocesses for the linac-based SRS/SBRT
process map in Figure 3.1
1. Start of SRS/SBRT process
• Patient referred to radiation oncology
2. Patient information entered into database
• Demographic/insurance
information
•
•

•

obtained and entered
Insurance information verified and authorization obtained
Previous medical and treatment records
obtained and entered into database, if/as
appropriate
Previous and outside imaging studies
obtained and entered into database if/as
appropriate

Plan
approval

Transfer images and
other DICOM data

Immobilization
and positioning

Consult

41

Initial treatment
planning directive

End of
treatment

Day 1 Tx
verification

Assessment
of outcomes

Start of
SRS/SBRT
process

End of Tx

Patient information
entered into
database
Patient
selection

Simulation
ordered

Plan
preparation

Contouring

CT simulation—
3D and 4D

Treatment
planning

Patient
follow-up

Subsequent
treatments

FIGURE 3.1 A process map for a linac-based SRS/SBRT process.
3D, three-dimensional; 4D, four-dimensional; DICOM, Digital Imaging Communication in Medicine; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation
therapy; SRS, stereotactic radiosurgery; Tx, treatment.

Heron_68566_PTR_03_39-46_08-23-18.indd 41

21/08/18 2:11 PM

42

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

•

Patient scheduled for consult (±additional
tests/imaging needed for the consult
and/or patient selection steps)

3. Consult (may include one or more discus-

sions between the patient and the physician)
• Nursing assessment performed and documented
• History and physical examination completed and documented
• Prior medical records and treatment records (if any), including imaging studies,
reviewed by physician
• Patient education performed (including
financial counseling when needed)
• Diagnosis/staging completed
• Imaging/lab tests ordered and performed
as needed to determine patient eligibility,
if not done during previous step
• Results of imaging/lab tests evaluated by
physician, entered into database
• Alternative treatment methods considered
and discussed with patient
• Consent for treatment obtained
4. Patient selection
• Case reviewed with multidisciplinary team
• Lesion type/size/location/stage confirmed
•
•
•

to be appropriate for SRS/SBRT
Role for concurrent systemic therapy
determined
Patient ability to tolerate treatment/
immobilization assessed
Eligibility for open protocol(s) determined

•
•
•

7. Immobilization and positioning
• Immobilization devices created/configured

•
•

■

•
•

8. Simulation/imaging for treatment planning
• External fiducials attached if/as needed
• Images obtained using imaging proto-

•

■

Heron_68566_PTR_03_39-46_08-23-18.indd 42

cols as ordered and with positioning/
immobilization/motion management as
ordered
4D CT image acquisition:
4D CT images acquired covering regions of interest; images retrospectively sorted into breathing phase bins
If institutional protocol is to use maximum intensity projection (MIP)-based
approach, then MIP or other composite image sets created if/as needed
Motion analysis performed for target
and critical structures, as appropriate
For gated treatment procedure, gating
window determined
Quality assurance (QA) performed on
the information derived from the 4D
CT image acquisition
Patient marked/tattooed if needed and
associated point on the image set defined

■

■

6. Simulation/imaging for treatment planning

ordered
• Simulation orders/imaging request(s)
completed, including special instructions
• Patient position specified
• Immobilization specified
• Imaging protocol(s) specified, including use
of contrast, slice thickness, and interslice gap
More than one image set/technique/
imaging protocol may be needed (e.g.,

as needed
Can include special devices such as
specialized SBRT body frame, VacLock, thermoplastic mask, and head
frame
Description and settings for immobilization devices entered into database
Devices prepared/attached as necessary
for motion management
Can include abdominal compression
with either paddle or inflatable belt,
Real-Time Position Management
(RPM), Active Breathing Coordinator
(ABC), audiovisual feedback, and
surface-image guidance
Description and settings for motion management entered into database
Setup pictures obtained and entered into
database

■

5. Additional supplemental imaging/procedures

required for treatment/treatment planning
• Supplemental imaging ordered and performed (e.g., MRI for fusion)
• Need for internal fiducial determined
• Internal fiducial placement ordered and
performed (if applicable)
• Lab work ordered and obtained (e.g.,
BUN/Cr if intravenous [IV] contrast to
be given for imaging)

free breathing and abdominal compression CTs; axial, sagittal, and coronal MRIs)
Motion management method specified, if
used/needed
Patient scheduled for simulation/imaging
Patient given instructions for simulation/
imaging preparation

■

■

■

•

21/08/18 2:11 PM

3: SRS AND SBRT PROCESS

9. Transfer images and other Digital Imaging

Communication in Medicine (DICOM) data
• Images transferred to treatment planning system; transfer includes marked/
tattooed point(s) as well as images
Transfer the treatment planning
image set as well as all other image
set(s) to be used for contouring
• Transfer of correct images verified
• Images transferred to external storage
database (e.g., Picture Archiving and
Communication System [PACS]) if
appropriate
• Additional imaging sets registered to
the treatment planning imaging set if/
as needed
Registration can be rigid or
deformable
• Image registration verified, particularly
for deformable registration; goodness
of registration is most critical in the
anatomical region where the additional
imaging set will be used to determine
contours

•
•
•
•

■

■

10. Contouring
• GTV contoured
• GTV expanded to clinical target volume

•
•
•

•

(CTV), internal target volume (ITV) (if
appropriate), and PTV
Normal/critical structures contoured
Critical structures expanded as required
All contours drawn on an image set
other than the planning image set transferred to the planning image set
Contours reviewed on the planning
image set

•
•

•

•
•

•
•

Heron_68566_PTR_03_39-46_08-23-18.indd 43

ment planner
Any prescription or constraint specifications that are not met by the plan
identified by the treatment planner
Plan revised if/as needed
Final plan approved by physician
Written prescription finalized by physician if/as needed and approved/
signed
Orders for image guidance entered by
physician for both initial setup and for
tracking during treatment, as needed
Plan documentation created by planner
and uploaded into electronic medical
record (EMR)
■

•
•
•

•

•

14. Pretreatment preparation and QA
• Peer review of plan performed
• Information from treatment planning

•

system uploaded to record and verification (R&V) system and/or treatment
console
Additional information entered into R&V
and/or treatment console as needed
Includes
any
special
setup
instructions
Physics review/check of plan performed
Information in R&V and/or treatment
console verified
Often performed as part of the
physics review/check
For gating/motion management/tracking
Information uploaded into appropriate systems
Uploaded information verified
■

•
•

12. Treatment planning: linac based (note that

the details are very much dependent on both
the treatment modality, e.g., linac based,
TomoTherapy, CyberKnife, or Gamma Knife,
and the treatment planning system)
• Fiducials localized, if appropriate, if not
done during contouring

Objectives created for inverse planning
Beam arrangement determined
Dose calculation grid size set
appropriately
Additional planning structures created
if/as required for inverse planning
Dose calculated
Dose distribution normalized so that
the 100% isodose line corresponds to
the plan maximum dose
Dose–volume histograms (DVHs) created and compared with prescription
and constraints
Conformity evaluated
Dose distribution reviewed on treatment
planning image set

13. Plan review and approval
• Plan reviewed by physician with treat-

11. Initial treatment planning directive
• Treatment parameters specified, includ-

ing total dose, dose per fraction, number of fractions, treatment site, modality, beam energy, and allowable target
dose heterogeneity
Normal tissue constraints specified
All other planning-related constraints
specified

43

■

•

■

■

21/08/18 2:11 PM

44

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

•

Patient-specific
measurement
performed, if appropriate
Verification plan created
Measurement performed, results
analyzed/evaluated, and results
documented
Therapist pretreatment checks performed
On the day of treatment
Coincidence of treatment unit
imaging and treatment isocenters
confirmed, if appropriate
Gating/motion management/tracking
systems tested, if needed

■
■

•
•

■

■

15. Day 1 treatment
• Patient set up in immobilization de•
•
•

vice(s) on table
Motion management system connected,
if used
Patient positioned to marks/tattoos/
fiducials
Patient position verified
This includes performing any pretreatment image guidance and, if
the patient is shifted from the original position based on this guidance,
verifying the shift
Physician confirms patient position
Portal imaging performed, if appropriate
Machine settings verified
Includes external collimators; jaw
and multileaf collimator (MLC)
leaf positions; energy; monitor unit
(MU) settings
Motion management verified, if used
Diaphragm/tumor motion verified
Settings for gating limits verified
Required personnel present in control area
Procedural pause/time out performed
before initiation of first treatment beam
Position tracked during treatment, if done
Posttreatment position verified, if done

■

■

•
•

■

•

■
■

•
•
•
•

16. Subsequent treatments (for SBRT)
• Same as Day 1 except
■

■

17.

Ports probably do not take every
treatment
The rules for personnel present may
be different

End of treatment
Treatment completion verified (e.g.,
physics final check)

•

Heron_68566_PTR_03_39-46_08-23-18.indd 44

18. Patient follow-up
• Follow-up regimen discussed with patient
• Follow-up appointment(s) scheduled
• Follow-up imaging and other tests
•

scheduled as needed
Patient status information entered into
database

19. Assessment of outcomes
• Information in database analyzed

The high fractional doses, steep dose gradients,
and small target margins used in SRS/SBRT make
creation and implementation of a robust quality control program critical for safe and accurate
treatment. Many publications exist in the literature
describing the failure modes and effects analysis
(FMEA) for various SRS/SBRT processes (12–18).
FMEA is an industrial engineering tool that is
used to evaluate the risks associated with every
step in a given process. To perform an FMEA, a
given user needs to start with a given process map
for a given procedure, as shown earlier, and list all
possible steps associated with that process/subprocess. Process maps (or process trees) and FMEAs
are important tools that help the user to prospectively analyze risks and severities associated with
different steps in a given process. Irrespective of
whether one is starting a new SRS/SBRT program
or making an effort to improve the quality of an
existing program, it is important to start with a
process map for that particular program and then
perform an FMEA to ensure that one has a safe and
very high quality SRS/SBRT process in place. Note
that FMEA in the literature provide good guidance
but cannot replace performing one’s own analysis,
because of the variability in the detailed SRS/SBRT
process from one facility to another.

REFERENCES
1. Lekse ll L. The stereotaxic method and radiosurgery of the brain.
Acta Chir Scand. 1951;102:316-319. PubMed PMID: 14914373.
2. Leksell L. Stereotactic radiosurgery. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1983;46:797-803. PubMed PMID: 6352865
3. Chin LS, Regine WF, eds. Principles and Practice of Stereotactic Radiosurgery. New York, NY: Springer; 2015.
4. Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD, Claassen D, et al. Radiobiology
of radiosurgery: part I. The normal rat brain model. Neurosurgery. 1992;31:271-279. PubMed PMID: 1513433
5. Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD, Claassen D, et al. Radiobiology
of radiosurgery: part II. The rat C6 glioma model. Neurosurgery. 1992;31:280-287. PubMed PMID: 1325039.
6. Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD, Flickinger JC. The radiobiology
of radiosurgery. Neurosurg Clin North Am. 1999;10:157-166.
PubMed PMID: 10099087.

21/08/18 2:11 PM

3: SRS AND SBRT PROCESS
7. Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD, Witt TC, et al. The future of
radiosurgery: radiobiology, technology, and applications. Surg
Neurol. 2000;54:406-414. PubMed PMID: 11240166.
8. Niranjan A, Gobbel GT, Kondziolka D, et al. Experimental radiobiological investigations into radiosurgery: present understanding and future directions. Neurosurgery.
2004;55:495-504. PubMed PMID: 15335417.
9. Witham TF, Okada H, Fellows W, et al. The characterization of tumor apoptosis after experimental radiosurgery.
Stereotact Funct Neurosurg. 2005;83:17-24. doi:10.1159/
000084475
10. Santacroce A, Kamp MA, Budach W, et al. Radiobiology of
radiosurgery for the central nervous system. Biomed Res Int.
2013;2013:362761. doi:10.1155/2013/362761
11. Andrews DW, Scott CB, Sperduto PW, et al. Whole brain
radiation therapy with or without stereotactic radiosurgery
boost for patients with one to three brain metastases: phase III
results of the RTOG 9508 randomised trial. Lancet. 2004;
363:1665-1672. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(04)16250-8
12. Perks JR, Stanic S, Stern RL, et al. Failure mode and effect
analysis for delivery of lung stereotactic body radiation
therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;83:1324-1329.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.09.019

Heron_68566_PTR_03_39-46_08-23-18.indd 45

45

13. Yang F, Cao N, Young L, et al. Validating FMEA output against incident learning data: a study in stereotactic
body radiation therapy. Med Phys. 2015;42:2777-2785.
doi:10.1118/1.4919440
14. Veronese I, Martinotti AS, et al. Multi-institutional application
of Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) to CyberKnife
Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy (SBRT). Radiat Oncol.
2015;10:132. doi:10.1186/s13014-015-0438-0
15. Manger RP, Paxton AB, Pawlicki T, et al. Failure mode
and effects analysis and fault tree analysis of surface image
guided cranial radiosurgery. Med Phys. 2015;42:2449-2461.
doi:10.1118/1.4918319
16. Younge KC, Wang Y, Thompson J, et al. Practical implementation of failure mode and effects analysis for safety and efficiency in stereotactic radiosurgery. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2015;91:1003-1008. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2014.12.033
17. Masini L, Donis L, Loi G, et al. Application of failure mode
and effects analysis to intracranial stereotactic radiation
surgery by linear accelerator. Pract Radiat Oncol. 2014;4:
392-397. doi:10.1016/j.prro.2014.01.006
18. Xu AY, Bhatnagar J, Bednarz G, et al. Failure modes and
effects analysis (FMEA) for Gamma Knife radiosurgery. J Appl
Clin Med Phys. 2017;18:152-168. doi:10.1002/acm2.12205

21/08/18 2:11 PM

Heron_68566_PTR_03_39-46_08-23-18.indd 46

21/08/18 2:11 PM

C H A P T E R

4

Patient Immobilization
for SRS and SBRT
Ronald J. Lalonde and Richard A. Popple

Stereotactic radiation therapy, in the cranium and in
the body, rests on the idea that improved localization
of target structures will permit the use of smaller
treatment planning margins than those used in conventional external beam radiation therapy. These
smaller target volumes will in turn allow higher
fractional radiation doses to be delivered safely. To
reduce planning margins, however, extreme care
must be taken in patient setup and positioning for
treatment. Effective immobilization is critical in
minimizing intrafraction motion of the patient,
which could result in catastrophic consequences in
high-dose fraction delivery. In addition, stereotactic
immobilization should be stable and relatively comfortable for long treatment times.
Early stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) systems
almost exclusively used rigid, invasive skull fixation
systems that incorporated a stereotactic coordinate
system in the frame. The use of image-guided radiation therapy (IGRT) has allowed the use of nonrigid,
relocatable frames often very similar to those used
for conventional radiation therapy, and expanded the
scope of radiosurgery to targets throughout the body.
The process of immobilizing the patient is
therefore tightly bound to the imaging process
(see Chapter 5). During initial simulation, a
standard immobilization system is generally used
for a particular treatment site, depending on its
location in the body, the rigidity of the target, and
the presence or absence of intrafraction motion
(Figure 4.1). When developing a new relocatable
system, repeat imaging studies may be used to
assess repeatability of setup. Simulation lasers

may be used to mark the relative position of the
patient in the frame.
During treatment planning, fiducials in the treatment frame may be used to generate stereotactic
coordinates for the target. It is important, particularly for noncoplanar treatments, to account for
the bulk of the frame when determining clearance
of treatment beams.
It is critical, particularly for noncoplanar beams,
to verify the safe delivery of treatment. This
involves confirming clearance of the beams around
the patient/immobilization device, use of fiducials
to establish target location, and IGRT confirmation. If the position of the patient is found to have
shifted in the frame, relocalization of the patient in
the frame may be necessary before treatment.

INTRACRANIAL IMMOBILIZATION
Intracranial immobilization can be divided into two
main types: invasive and noninvasive fixation. Invasive, rigid frames provide the most accurate localization, but require the entire process of immobilizing,
scanning, planning, and treating the patient to be
completed in a single day. Noninvasive, relocatable
frames may provide nearly equivalent accuracy, in
particular when combined with IGRT, and allow
the planning process to be done over several days;
they also allow for fractionated treatment. Both
invasive and noninvasive immobilizations for cranial SRS are capable of 1 mm accuracy (1–3).
SRS was first developed in 1949 by Lars Leksell,
a Swedish neurosurgeon, by adapting equipment
47

Heron_68566_PTR_04_47-52_08-23-18.indd 47

23/08/18 4:20 PM

48

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

Simulation

Verification

– Choose immobilization
based on treatment site:
– Invasive/relocatable
– Compression
– Imaging assessment
– Patient marking

– Beam clearance
– Fiducial target
localization
– IGRT confirmation

– Fiducial registration
– Beam clearance

Planning

FIGURE 4.1 Process map of immobilization in radiosurgery.
IGRT, image-guided radiation therapy.

used for cranial surgery (4). Today, the Leksell frame
(Figure 4.2) is still in use for the Gamma Knife, a
treatment unit designed specifically for intracranial
radiosurgery. The frame is securely attached to the
patient’s skull with screws to provide a rigid immobilization. The process is normally performed with
patient in conscious sedation with local anesthesia.
The frame also defines a stereotactic coordinate system, which is used to determine the tumor location
and treatment geometry. The origin is at the patient’s
right, posterior, superior corner, and the frame center
is at (100, 100, 100). There is no negative number
within the system, which eliminates possible errors
with signs. After placement of the frame, a special
helmet is used to take depth measurements at several
points to develop a model of the patient’s skull and
later to verify that the frame has not shifted before
treatment. The patient is then imaged using either
MRI or CT or both, with a fiducial box attached to
the patient’s stereotactic frame. The lesions, skull
boundary, and fiducials are all identified in the image,

and used to design the radiosurgery treatment plan.
During treatment, the patient with the stereotactic
frame is locked to the treatment couch, and the plan
parameters with respect to the frame are transferred
to the Gamma Knife treatment unit so that the beams
can be precisely delivered to the target.
The most recent Gamma Knife unit, the Icon
(5), now allows for the use of noninvasive thermoplastic masks for immobilization, and conebeam computed tomography (CBCT) imaging
for pretreatment verification. This eliminates the
need to perform the entire planning and treatment
procedure in a single day.
Linac-based radiosurgery systems also initially
adopted invasive neurosurgical head frames, using
adapters to mount them to the linac treatment couch.
Later linac-based radiosurgery systems used noninvasive head frames with bite-block systems to register
the frame to the patient’s cranium (Figure 4.3). These

FIGURE 4.3 Noninvasive bite-block frame used for reloFIGURE 4.2 Leksell head frame for radiosurgery.
Source: Image courtesy of Elekta.

Heron_68566_PTR_04_47-52_08-23-18.indd 48

catable cranial immobilization. Fiducial array attached to the
frame allows for continuous monitoring of patient motion.

Source: Image courtesy of Varian Medical Systems, Inc. All rights
reserved.

23/08/18 4:20 PM

4: PATIENT IMMOBILIZATION FOR SRS AND SBRT

systems could achieve comparable immobilization
uncertainty to invasive frames, while allowing for
fractionated delivery. Some of the frames incorporated an infrared fiducial array attached to the biteblock, which could be monitored continuously to
ensure the patient did not move during treatment (2).
More recent linac-based systems and robotic
radiosurgery systems used thermoplastic masks only,
but combined the masks with frequent image guidance (see Chapter 5) to ensure localization accuracy
throughout treatment. The masks alone may yield an
uncertainty of about 3 mm, but IGRT can reduce the
uncertainty to the accuracy of the IGRT system. For
example, the Accuray CyberKnife uses cross-firing
x-ray cameras and automated robotic alignment to
track and correct the position of the radiation beam
throughout treatment (6).

EXTRACRANIAL IMMOBILIZATION
SRS treatments outside the cranium face additional
challenges because of the nonrigid anatomy to be
treated. The general requirements for stable, comfortable, and reproducible immobilization are compounded by the need to limit internal motion (both
intra- and interfraction) and possible shifts in relative position between the target volume(s) and adjacent organs at risk. The use of IGRT in addition to
immobilization is absolutely critical for stereotactic
body radiation therapy (SBRT; see Chapter 5).
One of the original immobilization systems used
in the development of SBRT was a stereotactic body
frame developed at the Karolinska Institute (7),
later sold by Elekta (Figure 4.4), which adopted

FIGURE 4.4 Elekta body frame for stereotactic body

radiosurgery.

Source: Image courtesy of Elekta.

Heron_68566_PTR_04_47-52_08-23-18.indd 49

49

several of the features of cranial stereotactic frames,
including linear reference scales and fiducial markers for MR and CT imaging. Using this reference
system, the coordinates of an internal target could
be localized relative to the frame. The frame also
included an abdominal compression plate to minimize respiratory motion during treatment. Marks
on the patient at the chest and tibia were used to
aid in reproducing patient position in the frame at
CT and treatment. Using this frame, Blomgren et al.
reported early experience of treating 31 patients for
tumors in the lung, kidney, and liver (7).
Hamilton and Lulu (8) created an invasive body
frame that could be attached to the vertebral spinal processes with the patient in a prone position
for treatment of paraspinal lesions. The frame also
included a stereotactic fiducial system that could
be used to accurately localize the target volumes
on the basis of CT imaging. Although the authors
reported good localization accuracy (2 mm transverse and 4 mm longitudinal) with this frame,
because of its invasive nature, it could be used only
for single-fraction radiosurgery, and it was never
widely adopted.
A noninvasive body frame for spinal SRS was
developed at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center (MSKCC) (9), which created a more rigid
immobilization of patients by incorporating both
lateral and anterior pressure plates applied at bony
anatomical points. Like the Karolinska frame, this
system also incorporated fiducial markers and
scales in the frame for stereotactic localization of
body targets. The body frame was used in a special linear accelerator vault with a CT scanner. The
patients would be transferred in the body frame
from the CT couch to the linac couch for daily
CT-based localization. Patient position was verified
immediately before treatment with portal imaging.
The authors reported approximately 3-mm reproducibility in the body frame between planning and
treatment CT scans. Intratreatment motion average of 1.2 mm was reported, although this came
from only two patients.
The BodyFix frame (Elekta) uses a double vacuum system, with a standard polystyrene sphere
body cushion coupled with a cover sheet that is
deflated over the patient, producing roughly uniform
pressure to hold the patient into the frame during
treatment (Figure 4.5). Li et al. (10) found that
the device reduced intrafraction motion in patients
receiving spine SBRT over vacuum cushion alone.
With the use of IGRT, even standard frames and
masks used for conventional radiation therapy may
be used for SBRT. However, special care should be

23/08/18 4:20 PM

50

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

FIGURE 4.5 BodyFix frame for stereotactic body radiosurgery. A double vacuum system is used to form a custom
cushion under the patient and to hold the patient into the
frame with a plastic sheet.
Source: Image courtesy of Elekta.

taken to ensure the immobilization system is comfortable and stable throughout a long treatment.
Positioning the patient with arms up may be advantageous for treatments in the thorax and abdomen,
but may be very difficult for some patients to maintain. Positioning a lung cancer patient with the
contralateral arm down may improve comfort and
also beam clearance for some treatments.
Radiosurgery targets in the head and neck and
upper thorax or cervical spine are often set up
using commercial thermoplastic mask systems.
Mechalakos et al. (11), using kilovoltage imaging,
reported interfraction setup errors of 2 to 3 mm,
with intrafraction motion of less than 1 mm. The
use of custom head cushions for each patient may
reduce inter- and intrafraction motion (12).

MOTION MANAGEMENT
In conventional radiation therapy, large (1.5–2.0 cm)
margins are typically placed around targets in the
thorax and abdomen to account for respiratoryinduced motion. These large margins might greatly
increase the toxicity of high-dose SBRT treatments.
Accordingly, methods of reducing respiratoryinduced motion or restricting its effects have been
incorporated in SBRT from the very beginning.
These methods include abdominal compression,
breath hold, and gated treatment delivery.
The first stereotactic body frame (13) by Lax
et al. initially used a belt tightened to a fixed length
to restrict abdominal motion. Using fluoroscopy, the
authors noted a reduction in diaphragm motion from
1.5 to 2.5 cm without restriction to 0.5 to 1.0 cm
with restriction. This same frame, commercialized

Heron_68566_PTR_04_47-52_08-23-18.indd 50

by Elekta, later incorporated a compression plate
that was connected to an arch over the patient
via a screw. In simulation, fluoroscopy or fourdimensional (4D) imaging could be used to assess
residual motion of the diaphragm under pressure,
and adjustments could be made to restrict motion to
a desired level, for example, to reduce target or diaphragm motion to less than 0.5 cm for treatment.
There are several disadvantages to this approach.
The arch over the patient may reduce clearance
of the gantry around the patient, particularly
for noncoplanar beams. The pressure plate may
be uncomfortable, particularly for elderly, frail
patients. Also, the compression plate may create
variable distortion of the anatomy beneath the plate
during fractionated treatment (14). One method of
producing moderate pressure has been reported,
wherein the screw is tightened only until the operator observes the patient’s breathing switch from
diaphragmatic to intercostal expansion (15).
More recent body frame designs, for example, the Body Pro-Lok frame from Civco, include
options for both the rigid compression plate and a
pneumatic pressure belt. The belt can be strapped
around the patient at a fixed position and inflated
to apply a fixed, uniform pressure across the abdomen. The belt system is commonly reported to be
more comfortable than the plate. Another advantage of the belt is that the pressure is reported
on a dial gauge. As the patient lies in the frame
under pressure, he or she will often respond to the
pressure by initially tightening the muscles in his
or her abdomen. As time goes on, these muscles
will relax, and this may slightly change the effective compression being applied. If the therapists
observe a reduction in the pressure on the dial
gauge during treatment, they may halt treatment,
adjust the inflation of the belt to restore pressure,
and resume.
Another approach to reducing the effects of respiratory motion is to use breath hold, either forced
or voluntary, to minimize motion while the beam is
on. Because of the very large fractional doses and
high dose rates of stereotactic beams, breath hold,
either forced or voluntary, must be carefully monitored throughout treatment, so that the beam may
be terminated immediately if the patient cannot
maintain breath hold. Breath hold may be done at
either inspiration or expiration; patients are generally able to hold their breath longer at inspiration,
and the greater inflation of the lungs at inspiration
may reduce the volume of lung irradiated for lung
SBRT targets. The two most common methods

23/08/18 4:20 PM

4: PATIENT IMMOBILIZATION FOR SRS AND SBRT

of breath hold are the spirometry-based active
breathing coordinator (ABC) system (Elekta) and
the video-based Real-Time Position Management
(RPM) system (Varian).
The ABC system (16,17) uses a mouth piece
attached to a spirometer, with the patient’s nose
plugged so that he or she can breathe only through
the mouth piece. The spirometer is attached to a
computer so that the operators can observe the
breathing level. Once the patient breathes in to the
required threshold, valves in the spirometer close,
preventing the patient from breathing during treatment. A switch controlled by the patient will open
the valve and allow him or her to breathe.
The Varian RPM system uses an infrared camera
to monitor a marker block placed on the patient’s
abdomen. The marker block is commonly placed
near the xiphoid for breath-hold monitoring. For
deep inspiration breath hold, the patient must
voluntarily breathe in to the required level and
hold his or her breath at that point. A visual signal is sometimes provided to the patient to assist
him or her in breathing to the correct threshold.
The RPM camera then records the position of the
marker box, and the software can be set to trigger
beam hold if the block moves beyond a certain
set limit.
The breath-hold process generally requires compliant patients able to hold their breath for 15 to
20 seconds for the CT simulation process and for
treatment. Because the breath hold is used for
CT simulation, the CT images will be free of the
motion artifacts commonly seen in planning scans
of the chest and abdomen.
Finally, gating may be used to limit beam delivery to a fraction of the breathing cycle in which
respiratory motion is minimal. For gated delivery, a detailed analysis of target motion, usually
analyzed over a 4D CT scan (see Chapter 5), is
performed. The operator then determines what
fraction of the breathing cycle will limit target
motion to a defined limit. For example, it may be
determined that limiting the beam delivery to 50%
of the breathing cycle, centered around end exhalation, will limit target motion to less than or equal
to 0.5 cm. In general, the target motion is more
reproducible and more stable for a longer period
around end exhalation.
Gated treatment delivery does not require the
patient to hold his or her breath or to be compressed
in an uncomfortable frame; however, the method
is predicated on the assumption that the breathing
cycle of the patient is stable and reproducible and

Heron_68566_PTR_04_47-52_08-23-18.indd 51

51

that the target motion tracks the motion of the
external surrogate. Coaching via audio or visual
signals may be used to improve the reproducibility
of the patient’s breathing (18).

REFERENCES
1. Schell MC, Bova FJ, Larson DA, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery. AAPM Report. 1995;54:30-36.
2. Sweeney R, Bale R, Vogele M, et al. Repositioning accuracy:
comparison of a noninvasive head holder with thermoplastic mask for fractionated radiotherapy and a case report. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1998;41(2):475-483. PubMed
PMID: 9607367
3. Ryken TC, Meeks SL, Pennington EC, et al. Initial clinical
experience with frameless stereotactic radiosurgery: analysis of accuracy and feasibility. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2001;51(4):1152-1158. PubMed PMID: 11704340
4. Leksell L. The stereotaxic method and radiosurgery of the
brain. Acta Chir Scand. 1951;102(4):316. PubMed PMID:
14914373.
5. Zeverino M, Jaccard M, Patin D, et al. Commissioning of
the Leksell Gamma Knife® Icon™. Med Phys. 2017;44(2):
355-363. doi:10.1002/mp.12052
6. Adler Jr JR, Chang SD, Murphy MJ, et al. The Cyberknife:
a frameless robotic system for radiosurgery. Stereotact Funct
Neurosurg. 1997;69(1-4):124-128. doi:10.1159/000099863
7. Blomgren H, Lax I, Näslund I, et al. Stereotactic high dose
fraction radiation therapy of extracranial tumors using an
accelerator. Clinical experience of the first thirty-one patients.
Acta Oncol. 1995;34:861-870. PubMed PMID: 7576756.
8. Hamilton AJ, Lulu BA. A prototype device for linear accelerator-based extracranial radiosurgery. Acta Neurochir Suppl.
1995;63:40-43. PubMed PMID: 7502726.
9. Yenice KM, Lovelock DM, Hunt MA, et al. CT image-guided
intensity-modulated therapy for paraspinal tumors using
stereotactic immobilization. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2003;55(3):583-593. PubMed PMID: 12573745.
10. Li W, Sahgal A, Foote M, et al. Impact of immobilization on
intrafraction motion for spine stereotactic body radiotherapy using cone beam computed tomography. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;84(2):520-526. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2011.12.039
11. Mechalakos JG, Hunt MA, Lee NY, et al. Measurement of
setup deviation in IMRT head and neck patients using
an on-board kilovoltage imager. J Appl Clin Med Phys.
2007;8(4):2439. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v8i4.2439
12. Courneyea L, Mullins J, Howard M, et al. Positioning reproducibility with and without rotational corrections for 2 head
and neck immobilization systems. Pract Radiat Oncol. 2015;5(6):
e575-e581. doi:10.1016/j.prro.2015.05.003
13. Lax I, Blomgren H, Näslund I, et al. Stereotactic radiotherapy of malignancies in the abdomen. Methodological aspects.
Acta Oncol. 1994;33(6):677-683. PubMed PMID: 7946448.
14. Eccles CL, Dawson LA, Moseley JL, et al. Interfraction liver
shape variability and impact on GTV position during liver
stereotactic radiotherapy using abdominal compression. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;80(3):938-946. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2010.08.003
15. Heinzerling JH, Anderson JF, Papiez L, et al. Four-dimensional
computed tomography scan analysis of tumor and organ motion
at varying levels of abdominal compression during stereotactic treatment of lung and liver. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2008;70(5):1571-1578. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.12.023

23/08/18 4:20 PM

52

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

16. Wong JW, Sharpe MB, Jaffray DA, et al. The use of active
breathing control (ABC) to reduce margin for breathing
motion. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1999;44:911-919.
PubMed PMID: 10386650.
17. Remouchamps VM, Vicini FA, Martinez AA, et al. Reduction in heart and lung doses using deep inspirati on breath
hold with active breathing control for patients treated with

Heron_68566_PTR_04_47-52_08-23-18.indd 52

loco regional breast irradiation including the internal mammary nodes. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2002;55(2):159.
doi:10.1016/S0360-3016(02)03333-3
18. Neicu T, Berbeco R, Wolfgang J, et al. Synchronized moving
aperture radiation therapy (SMART): improvement of breathing pattern reproducibility using respiratory coaching. Phys Med
Biol. 2006;51:617-636. doi:10.1088/0031-9155/51/3/010

23/08/18 4:20 PM

C H A P T E R

5

Imaging for SRS and SBRT
Ronald J. Lalonde and Tianfang Li

In stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) and stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT), relatively small
tumor targets are treated to high, ablative doses
with minimal treatment margins. Therefore, geometric accuracy, in planning and treatment, is of
the highest importance, to avoid geographic miss
of the tumor or overdosing of adjacent normal tissues. Imaging studies of the patient must be of high
quality and high resolution for this reason.
The imaging process often begins with diagnostic imaging studies of the patient, in which the target location is determined and the need for SRS/
SBRT is first identified (Figure 5.1). Then, after
application of an appropriate immobilization technique (see Chapter 4), a treatment planning imaging study, generally a high-resolution CT scan, is
performed with the patient in treatment position.
Depending on the treatment site, additional studies
may be performed with/without contrast, or with
the application of four-dimensional (4D) imaging.
The imaging study should be carefully reviewed by
the physician before being used for treatment planning. Finally, the isocenter may be identified and
marked on the patient.
Additional studies may then be done in multiple imaging modalities to aid in localizing disease, or to exclude certain tissues at risk from the
target volume. Registration of the image volumes
(rigid or deformable) is performed, either at the
treatment planning workstation or in a separate
application. Again, the image fusion must be
carefully reviewed before proceeding with treatment planning.

After the treatment plans have been reviewed and
approved, and the patient is set up for treatment,
imaging is performed at the treatment machine to
localize the target for treatment. The imaging may
be repeated after an initial shift, particularly if the
shift is large, to confirm that the shift has been performed in the correct direction. Imaging may also
be used throughout treatment to confirm that the
patient has not moved from his or her initial setup.
Finally, imaging will be performed at intervals
after the end of treatment to evaluate the results of
the therapy and to screen for any new recurrences
of disease. Care must be taken to distinguish
between normal radiographic changes after treatment and recurrence of disease.

3D AND 4D CT IMAGING
Radiological imaging is a key step in the SRS/SBRT
treatment planning process. To achieve the goal that
potent radiation dose is precisely delivered to the target while sparing the organs at risk (OARs) via rapid
dose falloff, accuracy of target delineation is essential.
Today, the radiation therapy (RT) process is mainly
CT-based because it provides detailed information
about a patient’s anatomy as well as the tissue electron
density data that are needed for accurate dose calculation. For certain protocols, abdominal compression
may be preferred to reduce the organ motion. Metallic objects should be removed before the scan. The
CT slice thickness should be less than 3 mm, and the
scan length should be 5 to 10 cm extended beyond
the target in both superior and inferior directions
53

Heron_68566_PTR_05_53-64_08-23-18.indd 53

21/08/18 2:10 PM

54

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

Diagnostic imaging

Image registration

– Choose modalities,
use of contrast
– Identify target(s)

Follow-up imaging

– Rigid
– Deformable
– Review

– Immobilization
– Localization frame
– High-resolution CT
– 4D imaging
– Review
– Define isocenter

– Choose modality,
frequency
– Register to plan
– Review

– Choose modality,
frequency
– Register to plan
– Shift
– Review
– Verify during Tx
IGRT

CT simulation

FIGURE 5.1 Process map of imaging for radiosurgery.
4D, four-dimensional; IGRT, image-guided radiation therapy; Tx, treatment.

(15 cm if a noncoplanar plan is going to be used).
Relevant OARs should also be fully covered by the
CT scan for an accurate dose–volume analysis. One
should also note that, if there is cutoff in the CT scan,
most treatment planning systems (TPS) do not allow
beams passing through that region. If a contrast scan
is needed, a planning CT without contrast should
be acquired first, because the high CT numbers of
contrast agents may lead to incorrect dose calculation (1). For patients with metallic objects in the body
(e.g., tooth filling, prosthesis), significant metal artifacts can present in the CT image as dark and bright
streaks around the metal objects in the axial plane.
To improve the dose calculation accuracy, these artifacts can be contoured and assigned with a proper
CT value (Figure 5.2). Metal artifact reduction algorithms are also available (2). During the treatment
planning, the beam should avoid entering from the
metallic object side if possible.
When treating a moving target, for example,
SBRT of lung, liver, pancreas, or abdomen area,

(A)

traditional three-dimensional (3D) CT often presents large motion artifacts, which adversely affect
the contouring. A 4D CT scan is needed in these
situations. 4D CT imaging typically uses cine
mode, which repeatedly scans each section of
interest along the patient’s long axis for a period
slightly longer than one respiratory cycle. Multiple
images are generated for each section and tagged
with the corresponding respiratory signals, which
typically come from an external tracking device
such as Real-Time Position Management (RPM)
system or abdominal belt. The images of all sections are sorted retrospectively on the basis of the
corresponding breathing signals, and multiple 3D
CT sets are obtained, each corresponding to a particular breathing phase (Figure 5.3). 4D CT can
dramatically reduce the motion artifacts and gives
target motion information as well. During treatment planning, the planning target volume (PTV)
can be created by adding a universal 5-mm margin to the so-called internal target volume (ITV),

(B)

FIGURE 5.2 CT artifact from dental fillings: (A) original scan and (B) scan with density correction applied.

Heron_68566_PTR_05_53-64_08-23-18.indd 54

21/08/18 2:10 PM

5: IMAGING FOR SRS AND SBRT

55

FIGURE 5.3 Sorting CT images to generate a 4D CT. Cine CT images are acquired and synchronized to breathing signal.
Retrospective sorting generates full CT images at each phase of the breathing cycle.

4D, four-dimensional; RPM, real-time position management.

which is defined as the combined volume of the
target at all phases of breathing cycle (or selected
phases if gating technique is preferred). Most CT
scanners or TPS now have functions that support
generation of an ITV automatically. For example,
for solid tumors (high CT density), a maximum
intensity projection (MIP) function can be used to
create an image in which each pixel is assigned a
value equal to the maximum value among all phases
for that particular location. By doing this, the new
“target” volume in the MIP image is equivalent to
the ITV. Similarly, a minimum intensity projection
(MinIP) function can be used for targets with low
density (compared with surrounding tissues), such
as lesions in the liver.

3D AND 4D PET
Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging is
a technique to image the radioactive tracer distribution in a patient. Among many types of radioactive tracers, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG),
a radiolabeled analog of glucose, is most commonly used in the clinic. Because glucose uptake
is increased in many malignancies, 18F-FDG PET

Heron_68566_PTR_05_53-64_08-23-18.indd 55

is a sensitive method to detect lesions, to stage
disease, and to monitor the radiation response in
RT (3). For general PET procedures, 18F-FDG
radioactive pharmaceutical is injected into a patient
first, with typical dose ranging from 370 to 740 MBq
for an adult. The patient should be seated in a
quiet room for at least 45 minutes before data
acquisition. A full-body PET scan can take more
than 30 minutes. The spatial resolution of PET
imaging is significantly worse than that of CT imaging. The typical slice thickness is about 3.75 mm,
and in-plane pixel size is 5 to 8 mm. PET scanners
are designed to measure the in vivo radioactivity
concentration (kBq/mL), which is directly linked
to the FDG concentration. Most of the time, however, it is the relative tissue uptake of FDG that
is of interest. The two most significant sources of
variation that occur in practice are the amount of
injected FDG and the patient size. To compensate
for these variations, the standardized uptake value
(SUV) is commonly used as a relative measure of
FDG uptake. The basic expression for SUV is
SUV =

r ,
a´/w

21/08/18 2:10 PM

56

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

where r is the radioactivity concentration (kBq/mL)
measured by the PET scanner within a region of
interest (ROI), a' is the decay-corrected amount
of injected radiolabeled FDG (MBq), and w is the
weight of the patient (kg), which is used as a surrogate for a distribution volume of tracer.
PET imaging itself does not contain sufficient
anatomical information, so it must be registered
to other images (e.g., CT) to determine the location and extent of malignancies. Although techniques for registration of images obtained from
separate PET and CT scanners have been available for many years, having PET and CT imaging
capabilities in a single device has many apparent
advantages: It provides reliable hardware-based
registration and the CT also provides information
for PET attenuation correction (4). Combined
PET/CT devices providing both the metabolic
information and the anatomical information in a
single examination are clearly more accurate and
more efficient in evaluating patients with known
or suspected malignancies than the information
obtained from either PET or CT alone or the
results obtained from PET and CT separately but
interpreted side by side.
During the treatment planning process, the
malignancies often show high intensity (high SUVs)
in the fused PET/CT image, and these values can
be used to guide the delineation of the tumor volume. However, many factors affect the SUV, for
example, dose infiltration, time of imaging after
18F-FDG administration, type of reconstruction
algorithms, type of attenuation maps, size of the
ROI, changes in uptake by organs other than the
tumor, and methods of analysis. Sometimes there
may also be misregistration between PET and CT,
mainly because of patient motion between PET
scan and CT scan. One should always examine
the accuracy of the registration before using it for
treatment planning.
Respiratory motion results in inaccurate localization of lesions at the base and periphery of the
lungs, in the dome of the liver, or near any lung–soft
tissue interface and may result in spurious SUV
determinations. Motion correction or respiratory
gating is recommended when available. Similar
to 4D CT, 4D PET is a technique for respiratory-correlated imaging. A respiratory device (e.g.,
RPM) is used to trace the patient breathing and
send signals to the scanner. The respiratory movement is categorized into several phase bins. Once
the PET scanner receives a trigger from the respiratory device (typically at the end of inspiration),

Heron_68566_PTR_05_53-64_08-23-18.indd 56

it starts to prospectively collect data (coincidence
events) into the corresponding bins on the basis
of the time stamp in each respiratory cycle, and
reconstruct the data in each bin into a 3D image
when the acquisition is done. Although PET and
CT can be spatially registered by the hardware,
there could be large mismatch between 4D CT and
4D PET in the temporal domain when an irregular
respiratory pattern occurs.

3D AND 4D MR IMAGING
MR images are formed from signals induced by
mainly 1H nuclei (spin ½) in water (lipids) when
they precess coherently in a strong magnetic field.
Unlike CT scanning that uses ionizing radiation, the
advantage of MRI is that it uses only low-amplitude
nonionizing radio waves. But more importantly, MRI
also provides superior soft-tissue contrast. It has been
routinely used in RT for brain, head and neck, spine,
prostate, and other SRS/SBRT treatments.
In MRI, different techniques have been developed
over the years to visualize different tissue properties,
such as dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE) MRI,
diffusion tensor imaging, MR angiography (MRA),
and MR spectroscopy. The MR image quality (tissue contrast, spatial resolution) is directly affected
by the pulse sequence used, which has a number of
parameters, such as time to echo (TE), time to repetition (TR), flip angle, and inversion pulses. The
sequences can be broadly grouped as spin echo
sequences, inversion recovery sequences, gradient echo sequences, diffusion-weighted sequences,
saturation recovery sequences, echo-planar pulse
sequences, and spiral pulse sequences. However,
for nonradiologists, a simplified way of grouping
is by weighting (T1 or T2) and additional features
(e.g., fat suppressed or gadolinium enhanced).
T1-weighted MR imaging is often used with gadolinium for enhancing tumors, whereas T2-weighted
imaging is used for nonenhancing lesions (e.g., lowgrade gliomas). Multiple sequences of contrastenhanced T1- or T2-weighted imaging are often
used together in a single examination to provide
complementary information (Figure 5.4). For
brain SRS, the MRI should have a resolution at
least 1.5 mm in all directions.
In radiosurgery, the MR images are often fused
with CT images to delineate the tumor volume. For
intracranial or spine SRS, a local rigid registration
may be sufficient. For other regions like prostate, a
deformable registration may be more appropriate.
MRI can also be used as stand-alone imaging in

21/08/18 2:10 PM

5: IMAGING FOR SRS AND SBRT

(A)

57

(B)

FIGURE 5.4 MRI images of metastatic prostate cancer patient: (A) T1-weighted image with contrast and (B) T2-weighted

FLAIR image.

FLAIR, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery.
Source: Courtesy of Dr. J. Engh, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.

RT. The main advantage of MRI-based planning is
that it removes systematic errors that may occur
because of CT–MRI image registration. However,
it requires a link from MR image intensity to electron density. One approach is to use a CT atlas
and nonrigid registration to transfer CT information to the patient’s MR image. The main MRI
manufacturers are currently pursuing packages to
produce electron density estimates for RT applications at the MR console. Although still limited
to a small range of applications, this development
has enabled MR-only workflows in prostate RT (5)
(Figure 5.5).
One major challenge of using MRI in SRS/
SBRT is the potential spatial distortion of the
image because of inhomogeneities of magnetic
field, gradient field nonlinearity, and patientspecific magnetic susceptibility distribution.
Although considerable research efforts have been
made, the distortion cannot be entirely eliminated.
For example, because of air–tissue interfaces, there
may be displacements of 1 to 2 mm over very short
distances from the interface (<1 cm). Motion artifact is another problem for MRI, because a highresolution 3D MRI scan can take up to 10 minutes. A number of gating techniques can be used to
produce diagnostic MR images in the presence of
cardiac and respiratory motion. 4D MRI has also
been developed to get a full picture of motion. MRI
can generate time-resolved images by using prospective and retrospective gating techniques that
average data over several motion cycles. These MR
images will represent a mean motion state and the

Heron_68566_PTR_05_53-64_08-23-18.indd 57

(A)

(B)

(C)
FIGURE 5.5 Synthetic CT imaging from MR of the pros-

tate: (A) original T2-weighted MR image; (B) CT image; and
(C) synthetic CT image generated from image.

Source: Adapted from Kim J, Garbarino K, Schultz L, et al. Dosimetric
evaluation of synthetic CT relative to bulk density assignmentbased magnetic resonance-only approaches for prostate radiotherapy. Radiat Oncol. 2015;10:239. doi:10.1186/s13014-0150549-7

21/08/18 2:10 PM

58

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

image quality may be compromised in case of irregular motion. The recent advent of parallel imaging
and sparse sampling techniques has allowed faster
data acquisition, and it is now possible to acquire
volumetric data with high temporal resolution (6).

IMAGING FOR GAMMA KNIFE
Before Gamma Knife treatment, the patient is
imaged using either MRI or CT or both, with a
fiducial box attached to the patient’s stereotactic
frame. The lesions, skull boundary, and fiducials are
all identified in the image and are used to design
the radiosurgery treatment plan. During treatment,
the patient with the stereotactic frame is locked
to the treatment couch, and the plan parameters
with respect to the frame are transferred to the
Gamma Knife treatment unit so that the beams
can be precisely delivered to the target.
The newer Gamma Knife model Icon integrates
a stereotactic cone-beam CT (CBCT) system into
the machine, which makes it possible to perform
CT-based dose calculation and frameless radiosurgery (7). The CBCT scans a patient in treatment
position and coregisters it with the patient’s MR
image. The CBCT voxel size is 0.5 × 0.5 × 0.5 mm3,
and stereotactic coordinates are assigned to each
voxel. The CBCT provides information for dose
calculation for treatment planning and setup
verification for treatment. The Icon unit is also
equipped with an infrared camera to monitor the
patient motion in real time, and has the ability to
stop the treatment when the patient’s head moves
out of the preset limits. Typical workflow for
Gamma Knife Icon is as follows: Day 1, patient
simulation—acquisition of planning MRI/CBCT,
making mask, registering MRI and CBCT images,
and preparing treatment plan; and Day 2, treatment delivery—setting up patient, acquisition
of stereotactic CBCT images, registering CBCT
images, revising coordinates of each shot, reviewing updated dose–volume histogram (DVH), and
delivery of treatment.

IMAGE REGISTRATION IN SRS/SBRT
In SRS/SBRT, multiple image sets are often used
to better define the target volume. To use multiple image sets in treatment planning, it is necessary
to have an accurate way to map the voxels in one
image to the coordinates of a reference image set
for planning. This is especially challenging when
the images are from different modalities, or the

Heron_68566_PTR_05_53-64_08-23-18.indd 58

patient position in the reference image is different
from that in the registered image.
Image registration is used throughout the process of planning, treatment, and follow-up. Initial
diagnostic image sets are often fused to the treatment planning scan to assist in target definition.
Registration of the treatment planning scan to a
reference “atlas” data set may be used to assist
in contouring multiple organs automatically (8).
Image registration is used in daily image-guided
radiation therapy (IGRT) for SRS patients, and
may be repeated several times throughout each
fraction to track patient motion. In many systems,
like those in robotic radiosurgery, this process
is completely automated (9). Finally, follow-up
images taken after treatment may be fused to the
treatment plan, to correlate radiographic changes
after treatment with the delivered treatment dose.
Image registration may be performed using
automated registration functions, manual registration, or a combination of both. Often, an automatic
registration function is applied first, followed by
small manual adjustments. The final evaluation
of the registration is usually performed by visual
inspection, particularly focusing on the region of
the target and immediately adjacent OARs.
Registrations, automated or manual, are most
accurate between similar data sets, where the patient
is in treatment position, and the image slices are
in coincident (typically axial) planes and of similar
resolution. In less similar data sets, it is important
to focus attention on the target region, accepting
that the registration may not be as reliable in areas
well away from the target. Most image registration
software allows the user to manually define a volume of interest in which to apply the registration,
excluding information away from the target that
may reduce the accuracy of the registration.
The process of automated image registration
consists of three components: a similarity metric,
a transformation function from one image set to
another, and an optimization process. The optimization is used to find the transformation parameters
that maximize the value of the similarity metric.
Similarity metrics may include geometry-based
functions, for example, the sum of squared differences from structures derived in each image, or
intensity-based functions.
In monomodality registration (e.g., CT to CT),
one may use intensity-based metrics, such as sum
of squared differences, or the variance of a ratio
of the two images (e.g., when comparing CT with
CBCT, where the Hounsfield unit numbers are

21/08/18 2:10 PM

5: IMAGING FOR SRS AND SBRT

slightly different). Such methods may be susceptible to small regions of large contrast difference, for
example, if air or contrast agent is present in one
image but not in the other.
In multiple modality registration (e.g., MR to
CT), the relative intensities of pixels in the two
images are not similar, so some form of remapping
of image intensities, or correlation of intensities
between the two images, is required.
The simplest transformation function is a rigid
transformation between one image and the other,
including 6 degrees of freedom (translations and
rotations). In more distensible geometries, deformable registration may be applied, with up to 3N
degrees of freedom, where N is the number of
voxels in the image. Commercial deformable registration software generally includes limits on the
available deformations to avoid discontinuous or
nonphysical deformations.
In practice, a rigid registration is generally performed and saved first, followed by a separate, nonrigid registration if necessary. The image registration
request should include detailed information, including the images to be registered (including identification of the primary image), the ROI, and the
requirement for rigid or deformable registration.
Careful evaluation of the registration should
be performed by the physician, including evaluation of anatomical points or implanted fiducials
near the target that may be well localized in three
dimensions. In the cranium, a number of anatomical structures may be used for general assessment
of image fusion, including the orbits, sella turcica,
tentorium, ventricles, or patterns of sulci.
In image registration for IGRT, only rigid registration is typically performed, because deformations cannot be applied to the patient being
treated. Registration is often done in stages, starting with a broad registration of the bony anatomy,
followed by a more focused registration of soft
tissue or implanted fiducials near the target volume. Registration may include only translations, or
include one to three rotational axes, depending on
the capabilities of the treatment couch.

59

are unacceptable for SRS/SBRT. In prostate, for
example, the margin required without image guidance is greater than 10 mm, whereas daily IGRT
reduces the margin to less than 5 mm (10). The
American Association of Physicists in Medicine
(AAPM) report of Task Group 101 recommends
image guidance for SBRT to localize targets with
high confidence (11). The gold standard for targeting is radiographic imaging prior to treatment;
however, a number of new technologies have been
developed that do not rely on ionizing radiation.
These technologies include electromagnetic transponder tracking, optical surface monitoring, and
MRI. These technologies can be used to supplement radiographic imaging and to monitor target
position during radiation delivery.

X-Ray Image Guidance
X-ray imaging is the most extensively used image
guidance modality and is the gold standard for
patient positioning. X-ray image guidance systems
can be divided into two types: on-board imaging
and room-fixed imaging (12).
On-board image guidance system consists of
a kilovoltage (kV) x-ray source and a flat panel
detector mounted to a C-arm linear accelerator
gantry (Figure 5.6). The imaging axis is typically
perpendicular to the axis of the treatment beam.
The system can be used to obtain planar images
from stationary gantry positions, typically orthogonal pairs, or to construct a CBCT volumetric image
from multiple projections. On-board imagers and
CBCT have been extensively described in a review
by De Los Santos et al. (13). The x-ray source
and the imager undergo small deviations from the

IMAGING FOR TREATMENT SETUP
AND VERIFICATION
For hypofractionated and single fraction SRS/
SBRT techniques, accurate targeting has increased
importance relative to conventional fractionation,
both to achieve the desired efficacy and to limit
toxicity. Without image guidance, required margins

Heron_68566_PTR_05_53-64_08-23-18.indd 59

FIGURE 5.6 Gantry-mounted kV imaging system (Varian
OBI) capable of planar kV imaging and cone-beam CT.
Source: Image courtesy of Varian Medical Systems, Inc. All rights
reserved.

21/08/18 2:10 PM

60

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

intended position as the gantry rotates, producing
small misalignments with the treatment isocenter.
These motions are systematic and can be measured
and used to correct the image position, either
by adjusting the imager position prior to image
acquisition or by correcting the image position in
software. Both methods result in submillimeter
accuracy (14) and, for intracranial applications,
have accuracy equivalent to a stereotactic head
frame (15). For paraspinal lesions, Chang et al.
demonstrated that daily image guidance provides
~1.5-mm accuracy, whereas stereotactic body fixation alone achieved 2- to 3-mm accuracy.
Image guidance using orthogonal images can
use either bony anatomy or implanted fiducials for
target localization. In SBRT sites such as prostate,
lung, and liver, bony anatomy is a poor surrogate for
target position and thus fiducials are necessary for
accurate targeting. Cone-beam imaging should be
considered as a supplement to orthogonal imaging
when the location and shape of OARs is variable,
such as the bladder and rectum (16). When bony
anatomy is not a good surrogate for target position
and implanted fiducials are not available, orthogonal imaging should not be used without CBCT.
On-board imaging systems can be used to monitor target position during treatment. At least one
commercial system (Varian Medical Systems, Milpitas, California) has the capability to acquire kV
images during treatment at intervals defined by
respiratory cycle, gantry angle, monitor units, or
time. However, this approach has two caveats.
First, only a single projection is obtained at each
trigger and thus provides only a two-dimensional
assessment of position. Second, the collision-free
zone of the imaging system is limited to a narrow
range of table angles near 0° (IEC scale).

Room-Fixed kV Imaging
A room-fixed image guidance system is made up of
two x-ray sources and flat panel detectors mounted
such that the x-ray source central axes intersect at
isocenter at an angle sufficient to permit stereoscopic
visualization of the target anatomy (Figure 5.7) (17).
Room-fixed guidance systems are the primary
image guidance system for robotic radiation therapy systems (18) and either can provide primary
image guidance for C-arm RT linacs (19) or are
used as a supplement to on-board image guidance.
Stereoscopic systems are capable of submillimeter accuracy (20), which is comparable to that
achieved with cranial stereotactic frame (21). An
advantage of stereoscopic image guidance systems

Heron_68566_PTR_05_53-64_08-23-18.indd 60

FIGURE 5.7 Room-mounted kV imaging system (Brainlab
ExacTrac) with two cross-firing x-ray cameras set in the
floor and two imaging panels mounted to the ceiling for
treatment verification imaging.

is that they can be used for intrafraction position
verification over a wide range of gantry and table
positions (22). For table angles near 0°, room-fixed
systems have a stereoscopic view and thus can
assess positions in three dimensions. However, for
some table–gantry combinations, one of the imagers is obstructed and the view is limited to a single
projection and thus two-dimensional, rather than
3D, position assessment. Similar to planar images
obtained with an on-board imaging system, roomfixed systems are most accurate when bony anatomy or implanted fiducials are a good surrogate for
the target position.

Electromagnetic Transponders
Electromagnetic positioning systems use one or more
implanted transponders. A transceiver array excites
the transponders and determines the positions of
the transponders relative to the array position. The
position of the array relative to isocenter is tracked
using infrared cameras, allowing determination of
the transponder positions relative to isocenter
with submillimeter accuracy and precision (23).
The positions are updated rapidly, typically ~10 Hz,
providing real-time target localization both prior
to and during treatment. Electromagnetic positioning systems have been extensively used and
studied for prostate. Comparisons of electromagnetic positioning systems with kV imaging systems
have demonstrated equivalent localization and that
the transponders do not migrate over the course of
treatment (18,24,25). Although the transponders
can accurately localize the prostate, CBCT imaging

21/08/18 2:10 PM

5: IMAGING FOR SRS AND SBRT

is necessary to evaluate the shape and location of
OARs, such as the bladder and rectum (18). For
moving targets, electromagnetic systems provide
tracking accuracy equivalent to fluoroscopic monitoring (26). Electromagnetic systems have been
evaluated in lung in a research setting for tracking
respiratory motion (27). In addition to providing
localization information during treatment, dynamic
tracking of electromagnetic transponders can be
used to reduce treatment margins either by gating
the beam (28) or by using the transponder position
to alter the multileaf collimator (MLC) aperture to
track the target position in the beam’s eye view of
the treatment beam (29).
Special consideration must be made for respiratory motion when CBCT images are used for target
localization, because target volumes may be underestimated. The blurred image of the target must be
matched appropriately to the reference image—if
an end-exhalation phase image is used (as in respiratory gating), the superior edges of the reference
and CBCT targets should be matched. If an averaged CT image is used for reference, the centroids
of the targets may be matched.

Optical Image Guidance
Two types of commercially available optical systems
are used for patient positioning. The first uses infrared reflective or emissive markers affixed to the
patient (30) or to a surrogate such as a bite block
(30–32) and the marker positions are calculated in
three dimensions from images obtained with stereoscopic cameras. Marker-based systems can achieve
submillimeter accuracy (21,33); however, because
of uncertainty in repositioning the markers between
treatment planning and delivery, the accuracy of
marker systems is not sufficient for initial patient

(A)

61

positioning, and x-ray image guidance is required to
achieve stereotactic accuracy (30,32).
The second type of optical system uses a set of
cameras to capture a 3D rendering of the patient
surface that is registered to a reference surface
(Figure 5.8). Multiple cameras are used to improve
accuracy and to ensure an unobstructed view of the
patient surface of interest over the entire range of
gantry and table motion. The patient surface must
be exposed, so this approach requires an open-face
mask or other immobilization device that does not
interfere with the camera view. The reference surface is derived from the treatment planning CT or
captured at the time of treatment. Residual discrepancies of up to several millimeters are observed
between optical surface monitoring and cone-beam
image guidance (34) and so it is recommended
that radiographic image guidance be used when
stereotactic accuracy is required. However, following radiographic image guidance, optical systems
can monitor the patient position with submillimeter accuracy. Several conditions must be met to
achieve this accuracy. First, the camera coordinate
system must be accurately calibrated to the linac
coordinate system. Second, the surface ROI must
have adequate size and contain suitable features for
registration (35,36). Finally, the system must have
time to stabilize. One commercial system requires
approximately 10 minutes for the reported position
to stabilize (33).

Magnetic Resonance Image Guidance
One of the limitations of x-ray–based IGRT is poor
soft-tissue contrast. Furthermore, imaging of intrafraction motion is challenging. MRI has excellent
tissue contrast and can also be used dynamically.
However, many challenges exist to integrating MR

(B)

FIGURE 5.8 Optical image guidance system (Vision RT) for real-time optical surface monitoring.

Heron_68566_PTR_05_53-64_08-23-18.indd 61

21/08/18 2:10 PM

62

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

guidance with modern radiation delivery systems.
Two in particular are related to the presence of the
magnetic field. First is minimizing the electromagnetic coupling between the scanner and the linear
accelerator. Second, radiation transport is altered
in the high magnetic field of the scanner, requiring the development of new dose calculation algorithms. Several institutions have investigated these
challenges, and multiple approaches having different trade-offs have been developed (37–40). One
system, based on Co-60 sources rather than a linear
accelerator, MRIdian (ViewRay, Oakwood Village,
Ohio), is commercially available (40). However,
MR image-guided RT remains limited to a handful
of primarily academic centers.

Quality Assurance
Achieving and maintaining the target localization accuracy required by stereotactic techniques
requires a rigorous quality assurance program.
Each modality has unique quality assurance
requirements, extensively described in guidance
documents developed by the AAPM (41,42). The
most fundamental test, however, is common to all
modalities. The coincidence of the image guidance
coordinate system and the treatment delivery coordinate system should agree to within an acceptable
specification, typically 1 mm or less (43). The basic
test for coincidence of the isocenter reported by the
imaging system with the radiation, or treatment,
isocenter is a variant of the Winston-Lutz test, in
which the image guidance system is used to place
a test article at the isocenter and then to use the
treatment beam to assess the offset from the treatment isocenter.

(A)

IMAGING FOR TREATMENT
ASSESSMENT AFTER SRS/SBRT
Assessing tumor response after SRS/SBRT can be
difficult because of occurrence of early nonspecific
imaging changes that can represent either recurrent
or progressive tumor, or treatment-related inflammatory and/or necrotic changes. In assessing response,
it is important to know the appearance of radiationinduced changes in normal tissues, and the expected
timeline of their development and resolution.
In cranial SRS, for example, underlying processes
of radiation injury may cause a temporary increase
in contrast enhancement on MRI, termed “pseudoprogression,” making the differentiation between
true progression and radiation effects extremely
difficult (44,45) (Figure 5.9).
In lung SBRT, symptomatic radiopneumonitis
(RP) after lung treatment is uncommon, but radiographic radiation-induced lung injury (RILI) occurs
frequently, as a result of the ablative doses of
RT delivered to the peritumoral region (46). With
CT alone, benign changes may appear as an evolving mass-like opacity, easily mistaken for local
recurrence (Figure 5.10).
A systematic review of lung SBRT has identified
certain radiographic high-risk features (HRFs) suggestive of recurrence after treatment (47). These
included enlargement after 12 months and craniocaudal growth of ⱖ5 mm and ⱖ20%. The presence
of three or more HRFs predicted local recurrence
with high sensitivity and specificity (over 90%).
Functional imaging by FDG-PET can complement suspicious CT findings, although FDG avidity
can appear transiently following SBRT and even
persist at a low value for over 12 months (48).

(B)

(C)

FIGURE 5.9 Pseudoprogression after cranial radiosurgery for metastatic prostate cancer: (A) pretreatment MR image;

(B) 3 months after treatment; and (C) 8 months after treatment. Enhancing area is radiation necrosis rather than true
progression.

Source: Courtesy of Dr. J. Engh, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.

Heron_68566_PTR_05_53-64_08-23-18.indd 62

21/08/18 2:10 PM

5: IMAGING FOR SRS AND SBRT

(A)

(B)

63

(C)

FIGURE 5.10 Radiation-induced lung injury after radiosurgery: (A) pretreatment image; (B) 4 months after treatment;
and (C) 12 months after treatment.

Source: Courtesy of Dr. N. Christie, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.

Although the data are highly heterogeneous, a posttreatment SUVmax ⱖ5.0, or greater than the original pretreatment SUVmax, appears most suggestive
of recurrent disease (48).
In the liver, SBRT generally results in reduced
CT contrast enhancement and gradual decrease
in size over 6 to 9 months. However, damage to
normal liver tissue may result in complex features
that make interpretation more difficult. The addition of MRI or PET imaging may provide more
information when CT features are hard to interpret (49,50).

REFERENCES
1. Ramm U, Damrau M, Mose S, et al. Influence of CT contrast
agents on dose calculations in a 3D treatment planning system. Phys Med Biol. 2001;46(10):2631-2635. PubMed PMID:
11686279.
2. Huang JY, Kerns JR, Nute JL, et al. An evaluation of three
commercially available metal artifact reduction methods for
CT imaging. Phys Med Biol. 2015;60(3):1047-1067. doi:10
.1088/0031-9155/60/3/1047
3. Erdi YE, Macapinlac H, Rosenzweig KE, et al. Use of PET to
monitor the response of lung cancer to radiation treatment. Eur
J Nucl Med. 2000;27(7):861-866. PubMed PMID: 10952499.
4. Beyer T, Townsend DW, Brun T, et al. A combined PET/CT
scanner for clinical oncology. J Nucl Med. 2000;41:1369-1379.
PubMed PMID: 10945530.
5. Kim J, Garbarino K, Schultz L, et al. Dosimetric evaluation of
synthetic CT relative to bulk density assignment-based magnetic resonance-only approaches for prostate radiotherapy.
Radiat Oncol. 2015;10:239. doi:10.1186/s13014-015-0549-7
6. Otazo R, Kim D, Axel L, et al. Combination of compressed
sensing and parallel imaging for highly accelerated first-pass
cardiac perfusion MRI. Magn Reson Med. 2010;64:767-776.
doi:10.1002/mrm.22463
7. Zeverino M, Jaccard M, Patin D, et al. Commissioning of the
Leksell Gamma Knife® Icon™. Med Phys. 2017;44(2):355-363.
doi:10.1002/mp.12052.
8. Daisne JF, Blumhofer A. Atlas-based automatic segmentation
of head and neck organs at risk and nodal target volumes: a
clinical validation. Radiat Oncol. 2013;8:154. doi:10.1186/
1748-717X-8-154

Heron_68566_PTR_05_53-64_08-23-18.indd 63

9. Murphy MJ. An automatic six-degree-of-freedom image registration algorithm for image-guided frameless stereotaxic radiosurgery. Med Phys. 1997;24(6):857-866. doi:10.1118/1.598005
10. Mayyas E, Chetty IJ, Chetvertkov M, et al. Evaluation of multiple image-based modalities for image-guided radiation therapy
(IGRT) of prostate carcinoma: a prospective study. Med Phys.
2013;40:041707. doi:10.1118/1.4794502
11. Benedict SH, Yenice KM, Followill D, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy: the report of AAPM Task Group 101. Med
Phys. 2010;37:4078-4101. doi:10.1118/1.3438081
12. Yin F-F, Wong J, Balter J, et al. The Role of In-Room kV X-Ray
Imaging for Patient Setup and Target Localization Report of
AAPM Task Group 104. College Park, MD: American Association of Physicists in Medicine; 2009.
13. De Los Santos J, Popple R, Agazaryan N, et al. Image guided
radiation therapy (IGRT) technologies for radiation therapy localization and delivery. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2013;87:33-45. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.02.021
14. Bissonnette JP, Moseley D, White E, et al. Quality assurance
for the geometric accuracy of cone-beam CT guidance in
radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008;71:S57S61. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.06.086
15. Chang J, Yenice KM, Narayana A, et al. Accuracy and feasibility of cone-beam computed tomography for stereotactic radiosurgery setup. Med Phys. 2007;34:2077-2084.
doi:10.1118/1.2731031
16. Foster RD, Pistenmaa DA, Solberg TD. A comparison of
radiographic techniques and electromagnetic transponders
for localization of the prostate. Radiat Oncol. 2012;7:101.
doi:10.1186/1748-717X-7-101
17. Schewe JE, Lam KL, Balter JM, et al. A room-based diagnostic imaging system for measurement of patient setup. Med
Phys. 1998;25:2385-2387. doi:10.1118/1.598461
18. Chang SD, Murphy MJ, et al. The Cyberknife: a frameless
robotic system for radiosurgery. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg.
1997;69:124-128. doi:10.1159/000099863
19. Jin JY, Yin FF, Tenn SE, et al. Use of the BrainLAB ExacTrac
X-Ray 6D system in image-guided radiotherapy. Med Dosim.
2008;33:124-134. doi:10.1016/j.meddos.2008.02.005
20. Verellen D, Soete G, Linthout N, et al. Quality assurance of
a system for improved target localization and patient set-up
that combines real-time infrared tracking and stereoscopic
X-ray imaging. Radiother Oncol. 2003;67:129-141. PubMed
PMID: 12758249.
21. Gevaert T, Verellen D, Tournel K, et al. Setup accuracy of
the Novalis ExacTrac 6DOF system for frameless radiosurgery. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;82:1627-1635.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.01.052

21/08/18 2:10 PM

64

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

22. Udrescu C, Mornex F, Tanguy R, et al. ExacTrac Snap Verification: a new tool for ensuring quality control for lung stereotactic body radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2013;85:e89-e94. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2012.09.020
23. Balter JM, Wright JN, Newell LJ, et al. Accuracy of a wireless
localization system for radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2005;61:933-937. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2004.11.009
24. Lovelock DM, Messineo AP, Cox BW, et al. Continuous monitoring and intrafraction target position correction during
treatment improves target coverage for patients undergoing SBRT prostate therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2015;91:588-594. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2014.10.049
25. Ogunleye T, Rossi PJ, Jani AB, et al. Performance evaluation
of Calypso 4D localization and kilovoltage image guidance
systems for interfraction motion management of prostate
patients. Scientific World J. 2009;9:449-458. doi:10.1100/
tsw.2009.61
26. Santanam L, Malinowski K, Hubenshmidt J, et al. Fiducialbased translational localization accuracy of electromagnetic
tracking system and on-board kilovoltage imaging system.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008;70:892-899. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2007.10.005
27. Shah AP, Kupelian PA, Waghorn BJ, et al. Real-time tumor
tracking in the lung using an electromagnetic tracking system. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013;86:477-483.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2012.12.030
28. Smith RL, Lechleiter K, Malinowski K, et al. Evaluation
of linear accelerator gating with real-time electromagnetic
tracking. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2009;74:920-927.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.01.034
29. Sawant A, Smith RL, Venkat RB, et al. Toward submillimeter accuracy in the management of intrafraction motion: the
integration of real-time internal position monitoring and multileaf collimator target tracking. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2009;74:575-582. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.12.057
30. Wang LT, Solberg TD, Medin PM, et al. Infrared patient positioning for stereotactic radiosurgery of extracranial tumors. Comput
Biol Med. 2001;31:101-111. PubMed PMID: 11165218.
31. Meeks SL, Bova FJ, Wagner TH, et al. Image localization for
frameless stereotactic radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2000;46:1291-1299. PubMed PMID: 10725643.
32. Wang JZ, Rice R, Pawlicki T, et al. Evaluation of patient
setup uncertainty of optical guided frameless system for
intracranial stereotactic radiosurgery. J Appl Clin Med Phys.
2010;11:3181. PubMed PMID: 20592701.
33. Tagaste B, Riboldi M, Spadea MF, et al. Comparison between
infrared optical and stereoscopic X-ray technologies for
patient setup in image guided stereotactic radiotherapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;82:1706-1714. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2011.04.004
34. Li G, Ballangrud A, Kuo LC, et al. Motion monitoring for
cranial frameless stereotactic radiosurgery using video-based
three-dimensional optical surface imaging. Med Phys.
2011;38:3981-3994. PubMed PMID: 21858995.
35. Wiersma RD, Tomarken SL, Grelewicz Z, et al. Spatial and
temporal performance of 3D optical surface imaging for realtime head position tracking. Med Phys. 2013;40:111712.
doi:10.1118/1.4823757

Heron_68566_PTR_05_53-64_08-23-18.indd 64

36. Alderliesten T, Sonke JJ, Betgen A, et al. Accuracy evaluation of a 3-dimensional surface imaging system for guidance in deep-inspiration breath-hold radiation therapy. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013;85:536-542. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2012.04.004
37. Oelfke U. Magnetic resonance imaging-guided radiation
therapy: technological innovation provides a new vision
of radiation oncology practice. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol).
2015;27:495-497. doi:10.1016/j.clon.2015.04.004
38. Mutic S, Dempsey JF. The ViewRay system: magnetic resonanceguided and controlled radiotherapy. Semin Radiat Oncol.
2014;24:196-199. doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.2014.02.008
39. Lagendijk JJ, Raaymakers BW, van Vulpen M. The magnetic resonance imaging-linac system. Semin Radiat Oncol.
2014;24:207-209. doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.2014.02.009
40. Jaffray DA, Carlone MC, Milosevic MF, et al. A facility for magnetic resonance-guided radiation therapy. Semin Radiat Oncol.
2014;24:193-195. doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.2014.02.012
41. Bissonnette JP, Balter PA, Dong L, et al. Quality assurance for
image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies: a report of the AAPM TG-179. Med Phys. 2012;39:19461963. doi:10.1118/1.3690466
42. Willoughby T, Lehmann J, Bencomo JA, et al. Quality assurance
for nonradiographic radiotherapy localization and positioning systems: report of Task Group 147. Med Phys. 2012;39:
1728-1747. doi:10.1118/1.3681967
43. Klein EE, Hanley J, Bayouth J, et al. Task Group 142
report: quality assurance of medical accelerators. Med Phys.
2009;36:4197-4212. doi:10.1118/1.3190392
44. Patel TR, McHugh BJ, Bi WL, et al. A comprehensive review of
MR imaging changes following radiosurgery to 500 brain metastases. Am J Neuroradiol. 2011;32:1885-1892. doi:10.3174/
ajnr.A2668
45. Thibault I, Chang EL, Sheehan J, et al. Response assessment
after stereotactic body radiotherapy for spinal metastasis: a
report from the SPIne response assessment in NeuroOncology (SPINO) group. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16:e595-e603.
doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00166-7
46. Mattonen SA, Huang K, Ward AD, et al. New techniques for
assessing response after hypofractionated radiotherapy for
lung cancer. J Thorac Dis. 2014;6(4):375-386. doi:10.3978/
j.issn.2072-1439.2013.11.09
47. Huang K, Senthi S, Palma DA, et al. High-risk CT features for
detection of local recurrence after stereotactic ablative radiotherapy for lung cancer. Radiother Oncol. 2013;109:51-57.
doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2013.06.047
48. Huang K, Palma DA. Follow-up of patients after stereotactic radiation for lung cancer: a primer for the nonradiation
oncologist. J Thorac Oncol. 2015;10:412-419. doi:10.1097/
JTO.0000000000000435
49. Herfarth KK, Hof H, Bahner ML, et al. Assessment of focal
liver reaction by multiphasic CT after stereotactic single-dose
radiotherapy of liver tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2003;57(2):444-451. PubMed PMID: 12957256.
50. Price TR, Perkins SM, Sandrasegaran K, et al. Evaluation of
response after stereotactic body radiotherapy for hepatocellular
carcinoma. Cancer. 2012;118(12):3191-3198. doi:10.1002/
cncr.26404

21/08/18 2:10 PM

C H A P T E R

6

Treatment Planning
for SRS and SBRT
Ronald J. Lalonde

Originally, stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) was performed using different treatment machines than
those used for conventional external beam radiation
therapy (EBRT). When linac-based radiosurgery was
developed in the late 1980s, treatments were delivered with circular collimators and specialized accessories. Accordingly, treatment planning for these
systems was also performed on separate, dedicated
treatment planning systems. Often, all SRS treatment planning was performed by physicists, whereas
dosimetrists handled the majority of EBRT planning.
Although dedicated SRS treatment machines
and planning systems still exist today, the majority of radiosurgery, particularly stereotactic body
radiation therapy (SBRT), is now performed using
conventional linear accelerators, and planned on
the same treatment planning systems as those used
for three-dimensional (3D) EBRT. On the surface,
these treatments may appear no different than conventional EBRT treatments delivered throughout
the day. It is important to emphasize to everyone
involved in the process of planning and treatment
that these treatments are very different from conventional EBRT, and special considerations need to be
taken throughout to ensure geometric and dosimetric accuracy.
A process map for treatment planning is shown
in Figure 6.1. After import and registration of the
image volumes (see Chapter 5), the physician will
define the gross tumor volume (GTV). If there is
substantial motion of the target, the physician or
physicist should analyze four-dimensional (4D)
imaging data to define the extent of target motion.
From this analysis, an internal target volume (ITV)

is generated that includes a margin on the basis
of the internal motion of the target. Finally, an
additional margin for setup uncertainty is added to
generate a planning target volume (PTV).
The physician and physicist or dosimetrist then
contour in normal tissue anatomy, and may also add
in one or more “tuning” structures to enhance the conformity and gradient of the high-dose volume around
the target. The physician specifies target dose and
fractionation, and may also specify dose and dose volume limits to organs at risk (OARs) nearby the target.
The physicist or dosimetrist then generates one
or more treatment plans for the patient, which may
use a variety of beam arrangements including fixed
fields, conformal arcs, and intensity-modulated
radiation therapy (IMRT) or volumetric-modulated
arc therapy (VMAT) delivery. The plans may be
generated by forward planning or by optimization
on the basis of the dose constraints requested by
the physician. A large number of beams or a broad
distribution of beams is often used to ensure dose
falloff away from the target is as fast as possible.
The physician then reviews the plan(s) to ensure
that target coverage, dose gradient, and normal tissue dose sparing are within acceptable limits, and
then may suggest revisions to the plan or approve
the plan for patient-specific quality assurance (QA)
and treatment.

CONTOURING FOR SRS/SBRT
In early SRS planning systems, little or no contouring of tumor targets or normal tissue anatomy was
performed for treatment planning. Dose distributions
65

Heron_68566_PTR_06_65-72_08-23-18.indd 65

21/08/18 2:10 PM

66

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

Imaging studies

Prescription

– Diagnostic
(MR, CT, PET)
– Planning CT
– (4D imaging)
– Registration
– Target definition
– Normal tissues
– Tuning structures

Contouring

– Dose prescription
– Normal tissue
constraints
– Special instructions
(e.g., gating)
– Technique (3D,
IMRT, VMAT)
– Beam selection
– Optimization
– Review
Planning

FIGURE 6.1 Process map for SRS/SBRT treatment planning.
IMRT, intensity-modulated radiation therapy; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy; SRS, stereotactic radiosurgery; VMAT, volumetricmodulated arc therapy.

were instead evaluated directly on the patient anatomy visible in the treatment images. Modern treatment planning now typically involves extensive
contouring of target volumes, OARs, and tuning
structures and detailed evaluation of 3D dose distributions and dose–volume histograms (DVHs).

Target Volume Contouring
Target definition in SRS/SBRT is typically performed by the physician only, on the basis of
detailed 3D imaging of the patient, often in multiple imaging modalities. Target volumes should
follow the recommendations of the International
Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements
(ICRU; 1,2), starting with the definition of a GTV.
If multiple imaging modalities are used, a separate
GTV may be created in each modality, with the
final GTV being a sum of the volumes in the two
images. Clinical target volumes (CTVs), including
a margin around the GTV for microscopic extension of disease, are not typically used in SRS/SBRT
planning.
If the target is subject to substantial motion,
especially because of respiration, then 4D imaging
is often used to define the extent of target motion,
which may then be added as a margin around
the GTV to produce an ITV. This margin may be
defined by detailed analysis of a 4D CT volume, or
may be generated directly from an artificially generated image such as a maximum intensity projection
(MIP), in which each pixel in the image is replaced
by the pixel of the highest density at the pixel location in the entire 4D image data set (Figure 6.2).
This image will show the range of motion of lung
tumor targets where the tumor is denser than the
surrounding lung tissue. This sort of imaging does

Heron_68566_PTR_06_65-72_08-23-18.indd 66

FIGURE 6.2 Left: 4D CT image of lung cancer patient at
end expiration. Right: MIP image of lung cancer showing
range of target motion.

4D, four-dimensional; MIP, maximum intensity projection.

not work well when imaging tumors are surrounded
by tissues of similar or greater density. Enhanced
immobilization with abdominal compression of the
patient, or other interventions such as tumor tracking or gated delivery, may be used to limit the extent
of motion during treatment (see Chapter 4).
Finally, an additional margin for setup uncertainty
may be added to the GTV or ITV to produce a PTV.
SRS/SBRT targets are being treated to very large,
ablative fractional doses, so it is important to limit
setup uncertainty as much as possible, to limit the
size of the PTV. In cranial SRS, in which rigid fixation is often performed, treatment planning is often
done with little or no PTV margin. However, there is
some geometrical setup uncertainty even in systems
with rigid immobilization (3). If treating multiple
cranial targets with a single setup isocenter, it may
be advisable to add a larger margin of uncertainty to
targets further away from the isocenter, where any
slight rotation or translation error may result in a
larger uncertainty in positioning (4).
In extracranial SRS or SBRT, a PTV margin is typically used to account for the increased uncertainty

21/08/18 2:10 PM

6: TREATMENT PLANNING FOR SRS AND SBRT

in positioning body targets without rigid fixation.
These margins may be asymmetric, particularly if
the PTV margin includes motion of the target.
When contouring target volumes by hand, it is
important to review the target volume in multiple
plane views, including sagittal and coronal views,
to confirm that the volume has been consistently
defined in three dimensions. When contouring on
thin CT slices, it is easy to create “jagged” volumes
in three dimensions by slightly altering the position
of the contour from slice to slice. These “jagged” volumes are more difficult to conform dose to, because
of the finite beam-shaping resolution of multileaf
collimators (MLCs) and cones.

Contouring Organs at Risk
Contouring of OARs may be done by the physician
or by the physicist or dosimetrist doing the treatment planning, although all contours should be
reviewed and approved by the physician. Because
inverse planning optimization and plan evaluation
are often done on the basis of percent volume of
the OAR receiving a specified dose, it is important
to contour consistent volumes between patients
and between different planners. Detailed guidance
on contouring normal tissue anatomy for various
treatment sites is provided by the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) in a series of atlases
on their website (www.rtog.org).
Uncertainty in positioning because of internal
motion or setup error may affect OARs as well as
tumor target volumes. If the OAR is close to the target and sparing of the OAR is critical (e.g., spinal
cord, brainstem), it is advisable to include a margin around the OAR as well, creating a planning
risk volume (PRV). Again, it is important to review
OAR contours in three dimensions, particularly
for OARs close to or abutting the target volume.
“Jagged” OAR contours will make it more difficult
to conform dose away from the OAR.

Tuning Structures
Dose conformity to the target volume and dose
gradient away from the target volume are critical
parameters in SRS/SBRT planning. Special planning structures or “tuning” structures are often
used in planning to both promote dose conformity
and evaluate it after the plan has been completed.
A ring structure placed around the target volume,
either abutting the target or a small offset from the
edge of the target, may be used to keep the highdose volume from spreading beyond the edge of the
target (Figure 6.3). Additionally, concentric rings

Heron_68566_PTR_06_65-72_08-23-18.indd 67

67

Inner ring dose limit
= DPTV-2%

PTV

0.5
cm

0.5
cm

Outer ring dose limit
= 1 DPTV
2

FIGURE 6.3 Ring structures used in SRS treatment plan-

ning.

PTV, planning target volume; SRS, stereotactic radiosurgery.

may be added to define the dose gradient around
the target. For example, for small, cranial targets,
the dose in an SRS plan can be expected to fall to
50% of the prescribed dose within a distance of
about 5 mm from the edge of the target. A ring placed
5 mm from the target edge may therefore be used
as an optimization structure with a limit of 50%
of the prescribed dose to force this kind of gradient. Clark et al. (5) describe a system of multiple,
0.5-cm-thick concentric rings around cranial targets
to optimize dose conformity and dose gradient in
VMAT planning.
Rings used in this kind of planning tend to make
the dose falloff uniform in all directions from the
edge of the target. In situations in which there are
critical OARs immediately adjacent to the target, it
may be more desirable to increase the dose gradient in a single direction. In these cases, ring structures may still be used, but should be given lower
priority during optimization.
In extracranial treatments, with larger target
volumes, the dose falloff will be more gradual, and
dependent on target volume. Several RTOG protocols recommend limits on the maximum dose
anywhere 2 cm from the edge of the target; a ring
at this location may be used to limit this dose in
optimization and evaluate the dose in the final plan.
In many cases, dose limits to adjacent OARs
may limit how well the target volume may be covered by the prescribed dose. In these cases, partial
volumes of the target or the OARs may be created
to help in optimizing the plan. For example, if a
paraspinal mass is being treated to 18 Gy, but the
mass abuts the spinal cord (limit = 10 Gy), then an
optimization target may be drawn containing only
that part of the target at least 3 mm from the edge

21/08/18 2:10 PM

68

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

of the cord (Figure 6.4). This optimization target may be planned and treated to full dose while
safely respecting the dose limits to the cord.
Another situation in which partial volumes may
be used is the case in which a large organ abuts
an SRS target, but only a very small portion of the
organ will receive significant dose (e.g., the small
bowel adjacent to a pancreatic cancer). In this
case, optimizing the dose to the entire bowel may
not effectively limit its dose, because the high-dose
region may represent only a small percentage of the
total volume of the bowel. A partial volume consisting of the bowel within 2 cm of the edge of the
target will be much more effective in limiting the
bowel dose near the target.

Nonpatient Structures
It is important to include all nonpatient structures
(couch, mask, immobilization frame) in the treatment plan to correctly account for any attenuating
effects they may have on the beam or any buildup
effect they may have to the skin of the patient.
Hoppe et al. (6) reported a lung SBRT case in
which the initial dose calculation, which did not
include any couch structures, indicated a peak dose
to the skin of 50% of the prescribed target dose. The
patient sustained a Grade IV skin reaction after treatment. When the effect of the treatment couch was
added to the dose calculation, it revealed that the true
skin dose was closer to 90% of the prescribed dose.

FIELD SETUP—CRANIAL SRS
In traditional cranial SRS, a small number of standard beam arrangements could be used for almost
all plans (e.g., the fixed beam directions defined

by the openings in a Gamma Knife helmet). Small
variations could be made to deliver a more rapid
dose gradient in one direction or another. The use
of either the Gamma Knife or cone-based linac
SRS results in roughly spherical dose volumes or
“shots,” and larger or more irregular-shaped targets
would then be treated by adding together multiple
shots with different isocenters.
Similarly, in treatment delivery with the Accuray
CyberKnife, the beams used for treatment all lie along
a fixed path of the robot gantry, designed to allow the
robot to move without interfering with the patient.
The robot travels to every fixed position or “node” for
every patient, but delivers beam only from a subset of
these positions, determined during plan optimization.
The development of MLC-based linac SRS now
allows a larger variety of treatment delivery options:
fixed MLC fields, conformal arcs, IMRT, or VMAT.
The last two options also allow for inverse planning, in which plans are optimized on the basis of
specified dose goals for the target volume and dose
limits for the adjacent OARs. Inverse planning
allows better dose conformity around irregular
target volumes, and better ability to conform dose
away from specific OARs near the target.
The greater clearance of the linac gantry around
the cranium allows for the greater use of noncoplanar beams, which are commonly used in cranial
SRS. Noncoplanar geometries allow faster dose
falloff in all directions than coplanar beam arrangements. Clark et al. have examined a series of standard noncoplanar geometries for VMAT planning
for cranial SRS using one, two, three, and four
arcs (5) (Figure 6.5).
Noncoplanar beams may also be used from fixed
beam directions. Having too many unique couch
angles, however, will require a much longer time
to set up and treat the patient. At UPMC Hillman
Cancer Center, the emphasis is to limit plans to no
more than three to four unique couch angles.

FIELD SETUP—EXTRACRANIAL SRS/SBRT

FIGURE 6.4 Optimization PTV for paraspinal tumor. PTV
is cropped 3 mm away from the spinal cord to reduce dose
to the cord.
PTV, planning target volume.

Heron_68566_PTR_06_65-72_08-23-18.indd 68

In extracranial SRS/SBRT, the number of beam
directions that may be used from a conventional
linac is more limited because of the location of the
target and the risk of collision between the gantry
and the patient’s body or the treatment couch. Coplanar beam arrangements are faster and simpler to set
up, but this requires all of the dose falloff to occur in
a single, axial plane. Noncoplanar beams can make
the dose falloff more uniform in all directions, and
reduce integral dose to the patient, but may make

21/08/18 2:10 PM

6: TREATMENT PLANNING FOR SRS AND SBRT

69

border is placed at a sufficient distance from the
edge of the target to achieve relatively uniform
dose coverage of the target. If the field margin is
smaller than the beam penumbra, this will result in
inhomogeneous dose to the target, with maximum
dose 125% or more of the prescription dose, but
much faster dose falloff away from the target (7).
In either cranial SRS or extracranial SBRT, it is
important to use a sufficient number of beams, or
spread of degrees of arc, to improve dose falloff
away from the target and to ensure that the dose at
the patient’s skin surface is not excessive. At least
eight fixed beams, or at least 200° of arc, should be
used in SRS/SBRT planning.

DOSE CALCULATION FOR SRS/SBRT
FIGURE 6.5 Arc geometries for one-, two-, three-, or four-

arc VMAT plans for cranial SRS planning.

SRS, stereotactic radiosurgery; VMAT, volumetric-modulated arc
therapy.
Source: Clark GM, Popple RA, Prendergast BM, et al. Plan quality
and treatment planning technique for single isocenter cranial radiosurgery with volumetric modulated arc therapy. Pract Radiat Oncol.
2012;2(4):306–313. doi:10.1016/j.prro.2011.12.003

patient setup more difficult and time-consuming.
In addition, couch rotation tends to be the least
accurate motion in many linacs, and may introduce
additional uncertainty in patient setup unless this is
carefully checked.
For unilateral target volumes (peripheral lung
lesions, liver), targets may be treated with partial
VMAT arcs or from fixed beam directions from the
ipsilateral side. Small rotations of the treatment couch
(up to about ±20°) may be feasible for many patients,
depending on target location and patient size. There
is more flexibility when adding noncoplanar beams
with fixed beam directions than with continuous
arcs, but care must be taken to check clearance, particularly if using automatic field sequencing. A dry
run of all beams in the order in which they will be
treated is essential before treatment proceeds.
For central target volumes (spine, pancreas),
there is very little clearance for noncoplanar beams,
particularly arcs, and these cases are generally
planned with coplanar field arrangements. Again, if
noncoplanar fields are needed for an optimal plan,
it is easier to use these with fixed beam directions
than with continuous arcs.
When using fixed or conformal beams or arcs,
the MLC field border should be placed close to
the edge of the target volume. This is in contrast
to conventional radiation therapy, where the field

Heron_68566_PTR_06_65-72_08-23-18.indd 69

In the early SRS treatment planning systems, a
simplified dose model was often used to calculate
dose, using a simple, pencil beam calculation with
all tissue assumed to have a density equal to that of
water density. Although this gave acceptable results
in most parts of the cranium, this sort of calculation is not sufficient to accurately characterize SRS/
SBRT plan doses throughout the body. The dose
calculation performed for SRS/SBRT must be of
sufficient geometrical and dosimetric accuracy to
determine dose to the treatment volume to within
1 mm/5% agreement for cranial SRS, and within
2 mm/5% agreement in body SBRT.
Dose calculation in SRS/SBRT is complicated
by the difficulty of taking accurate commissioning measurements for very small fields. Errors as
large as 40% have been reported when measuring
fields smaller than 1 × 1 cm2 with inappropriate
detectors, which have led to multiple misadministrations in SRS delivery (8).
Also, most treatment planning system algorithms are created and optimized for generalized
radiation therapy, and may not be optimal for very
small fields. Some algorithms (e.g., Varian Eclipse
AAA) do not use any measured dose information
for fields smaller than 3 × 3 cm2, although they
may still be used to calculate dose for smaller fields.
When starting an SRS/SBRT program, therefore, it is necessary to test the current photon dose
algorithm for accuracy at small-field dose calculation. It may be necessary to recommission the dose
model with additional, small-field data. Bedford
et al. have reported improved results by creating
separate dose models for small fields (9).
The effects of tissue heterogeneities on very
small fields are also larger than those seen with
larger fields (10). In low-density lung tissue, the

21/08/18 2:10 PM

70

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

loss of lateral scatter equilibrium results in very
large buildup effects at lung–soft tissue interfaces.
Accurate, high-resolution calculations are required
to characterize dose in these areas correctly. Older,
pencil-beam–type algorithms are not appropriate
for SBRT, because these can result in dose errors
as large as 40% in lower density lung tissue (11).
The resolution of the dose grid can also have an
effect on the absolute dose reported by some algorithms, particularly in highly modulated IMRT/VMAT
plans. Ong et al. (12) have reported that the absolute
dose calculated by the Varian Eclipse AAA algorithm
can differ by as much as 10% between 1 and 2.5 mm
dose grid resolution. We have seen absolute dose
differences as much as 4% in AAA-calculated plans
between 1.0 and 1.25 mm dose grid resolution (Travis
McCaw, personal communication, 2016).

EFFECT OF MLC LEAF WIDTH
ON PLAN QUALITY
Several different models of MLC are available for
field shaping from different vendors. The initial
MLCs used in IMRT/VMAT used 1.0-cm leaves, and
so were not capable of field shaping for very small
targets. Newer linear accelerators use MLCs with leaf
widths between 0.25 and 0.5 cm. Wu et al. have compared plan results between 0.25- and 0.5-cm leaves
for various SRS targets in the cranium, liver, and
spine, and reported improvements in dose coverage,
conformity, and sparing of OARs with the smaller
MLC leaves (13). The improvements were larger for
the smaller targets in the cranium, and for the more
irregular target shapes in the spinal lesions. For larger,
regularly shaped lesions in the liver, the gains in
target coverage and conformity were not significant.

TREATMENT PLAN OPTIMIZATION
FOR SRS/SBRT
In early SRS treatment planning systems, plan
optimization was performed using manual trial
and error iteration, with the human planner
making small adjustments in treatment cone size
or isocenter position to improve target coverage
or avoidance of nearby structures. Many automated optimization routines are now available,
some of them specifically designed for special
applications, such as radiosurgery of multiple
brain metastases (Brainlab ElementsTM). When
optimizing plans for SRS/SBRT, it is important
to keep in mind the goals of this kind of therapy,

Heron_68566_PTR_06_65-72_08-23-18.indd 70

and how they differ from conventional fractionated radiation therapy.
The biggest difference in SRS/SBRT is the emphasis on dose conformity and dose gradient over
dose uniformity in the target. Dose optimization
constraints should therefore be set that allow for
substantial dose heterogeneity, at least 10% to 15%,
in the target volume. Emphasizing dose homogeneity
in the target volume will cause the high-dose volume
to become less conformal to the edge of the target.
In planning systems that allow variable resolution of dose calculation during optimization, it is
important to use the highest dose resolution available during optimization of SRS plans, or the final
plan result may not turn out to be optimal. Highresolution calculations may result in very long optimization times. Some planning systems also allow
for variable resolution between different structures in the plan—in this case, it may be possible
to improve optimization time by sampling only the
target and nearby OARs (or even partial OAR volumes near the target) to high resolution, and using
lower dose grid resolution away from the target.
It may also be possible to save time during dose
calculation by restricting the dose grid to a smaller
volume around the target. However, it is very
important to calculate dose to the entire patient
volume in the final calculation (or, at least, the
entire patient volume in which treatment beams
pass) to ensure that there are not hot spots on the
patient’s skin near the entrance or exit of beams
well away from the target.
When performing inverse planning for IMRT/
VMAT, a separate dose calculation algorithm is
often used for optimization to complete optimization faster. These algorithms are often based on
older, pencil-beam–type models that underestimate
the effects of the loss of lateral scatter. Plans optimized with these algorithms may be suboptimal
after the final dose calculation, particularly in lung
SBRT. Several planning systems allow an “intermediate”-dose calculation, in which the full-dose
calculation algorithm is used part-way through optimization so that the final plan is much closer to the
optimized solution. Intermediate-dose calculations
should be used for all optimized SRS/SBRT plans
that use a pencil-beam model for optimization.
Most optimization routines are based on a single
“cost function,” which attempts to minimize the difference between the requested dose goals and the final
plan. When conflicts exist between the target coverage
and dose limits to the adjacent OAR, there is often a
trade-off between these goals, weighted by the priority

21/08/18 2:10 PM

6: TREATMENT PLANNING FOR SRS AND SBRT

assigned to each goal. If there are hard constraints on
dose to a particular OAR, it may be necessary to enter
dose limits that are substantially lower than the true
constraint, to meet the final dose limit to the OAR.
Again, these dose goals may be made more effective,
particularly for larger OARs, by creating a subvolume
of the OAR adjacent to the target.

TREATMENT PLAN EVALUATION
FOR SRS/SBRT
As with any 3D-conformal treatment plan, the
dose distribution in SRS/SBRT plans should be
carefully reviewed in both the CT image volume
and in the DVH display, to ensure that the dose
goals to the target(s) and OARs have been met. In
“parallel” OARs (e.g., lung, liver), there is redundancy of function throughout the organ, and toxicity is related to total volume of the organ receiving
a high dose. In “serial” OARs (e.g., spinal cord),
toxicity is related to the peak dose received by a
small volume of the organ, or the dose that transects the entire circumference of an organ at one
location. Careful review of both the DVH (for
parallel organs) and the dose displayed on the
CT image volume (for serial organs) must be done
to ensure the SRS/SBRT plans will be safe to deliver.
Detailed discussion of SRS/SBRT OAR tolerance
doses for different treatment sites can be found in
the later chapters of this book as well as in various
RTOG protocols, and in the table by Timmerman
presented in the American Association of Physicists
in Medicine (AAPM) TG-101 (11). In addition, care
should be taken to ensure that there are no excessive
hot spots in nonspecified tissue in the body, particularly skin dose where beams enter or exit the body.
There are also standard indices that have been
used to assess dose conformity and dose gradient in
SRS/SBRT plans. If the prescribed dose = 100%,
then the conformity index (CI) is defined as the
ratio of the volume of tissue at the prescribed
dose (V100%) divided by the volume of the target
(VPTV). Ideally, the prescribed dose should cover
the target exactly and nothing else, leading to a
CI = 1.0. One limitation of this index is that it does
not address how well the target is covered by the
prescribed dose; a plan could have very poor target coverage with substantial high dose outside the
target, and still have a CI equal to or less than 1.0.
A new conformity index (nCi) has been defined for
this reason as the volume of tissue at the prescribed
dose divided by the volume of the target covered by
the prescribed dose (VPTV100%).

Heron_68566_PTR_06_65-72_08-23-18.indd 71

71

Dose gradient may also be defined in several
ways. RTOG protocols include a gradient index
defined as the ratio of the 50% isodose volume
over the 100% (prescribed) isodose volume. This
ratio is highly dependent on target size, and so the
protocols set their acceptance criteria for this index
on the basis of target volume. One planning system
defines a different gradient index by calculating
an “average” distance from the 100% to the 50%
isodose line around the target. This is calculated
by converting V100% and V50% into spheres with
the same volume, and calculating the difference
between the radii of the two spheres.

REFERENCES
1. ICRU Report 62, Prescribing, Recording and Reporting Photon
Beam Therapy (Supplement to ICRU Report 50). 1999.
2. ICRU Report 50, Prescribing, Recording and Reporting
Photon Beam Therapy. 1994.
3. Brezovich IA, Wu X, Duan J, et al. End-to-end test of spatial
accuracy in Gamma Knife treatments for trigeminal neuralgia.
Med Phys. 2014;41(11):111703. doi:10.1118/1.4896819
4. Jang S, Huq M. Dosimetric impact of rotational error on
multiple-target intensity-modulated radiosurgery (IMRS) with
single-isocenter.MedPhys.2014;41:329.doi:10.1118/1.4888783
5. Clark GM, Popple RA, Prendergast BM, et al. Plan quality
and treatment planning technique for single isocenter cranial radiosurgery with volumetric modulated arc therapy.
Pract Radiat Oncol. 2012;2(4):306-313. doi:10.1016/j.prro.
2011.12.003
6. Hoppe BS, Laser B, Kowalski AV, et al. Acute skin toxicity following stereotactic body radiation therapy for stage I non-smallcell lung cancer: who’s at risk? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2008;72(5):1283-1286. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.08.036
7. Hong LX, Garg M, Lasala P, et al. Experience of micromultileaf collimator linear accelerator based single fraction stereotactic radiosurgery: tumor dose inhomogeneity, conformity,
and dose fall off. Med Phys. 2011;38(3):1239-1247. doi:10
.1118/1.3549764
8. Das IJ, Ding GX, Ahnesjö A. Small fields: nonequilibrium radiation dosimetry. Med Phys. 2008;35(1):206-215.
doi:10.1118/1.2815356
9. Bedford JL, Childs PJ, Nordmark Hansen V, et al. Commissioning and quality assurance of the Pinnacle(3) radiotherapy
treatment planning system for external beam photons. Br J
Radiol. 2003;76:163-176. doi:10.1259/bjr/42085182
10. da Rosa LAR, Cardoso SC, Campos LT, et al. Percentage depth
dose evaluation in heterogeneous media using thermoluminescent dosimetry. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2010;11(1):117-127.
doi:10.1120/jacmp.v11i1.2947
11. Benedict SH, Yenice KM, Followill D, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy: the report of AAPM Task Group 101. Med
Phys. 2010;37(8):4078–4101. doi:10.1118/1.3438081
12. Ong CL, Cuijpers JP, Senan S, et al. Impact of the calculation
resolution of AAA for small fields and RapidArc treatment
plans. Med Phys. 2011;38(8):4471-4479. doi:10.1118/1
.3605468
13. Wu QJ, Wang Z, Kirkpatrick JP, et al. Impact of collimator
leaf width and treatment technique on stereotactic radiosurgery and radiotherapy plans for intra- and extracranial lesions.
Radiat Oncol. 2009;4(1):3. doi:10.1186/1748-717X-4-3

21/08/18 2:10 PM

Heron_68566_PTR_06_65-72_08-23-18.indd 72

21/08/18 2:10 PM

C H A P T E R

7

Overview of Technologies
for SRS and SBRT Delivery
Laura Padilla and Jatinder R. Palta

Stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) and stereotactic
body radiation therapy (SBRT) treatments require
high accuracy and precision in treatment delivery.
The importance of delivering a conformal dose to
the target while sparing surrounding critical organs
for these high-dose single-fraction or hypofractionated treatments is paramount for their success,
as discussed earlier in the book. To achieve this,
highly precise and accurate radiation treatment
delivery systems are necessary. Ideal systems will
have the following characteristics: (a) a high dose
rate so as to minimize the treatment time, thus
reducing dose uncertainties from involuntary internal motion or patient movement; (b) sharp dose
falloff to allow for delivery of high dose to the target without compromising adjacent normal tissues;
(c) high mechanical accuracy for treatment delivery;
(d) on-board three-dimensional (3D) imaging and
localization hardware and software that determines
the exact position of the target within the body;
(e) ongoing monitoring to adjust for patient movements if necessary; and (f) the stability of radiation
output with gantry rotation, collimator movement,
and dose rate variation. The evolution of SRS/
SBRT systems seeks to achieve these goals. The
more degrees of freedom (DOF) a system has available for treatment, the more feasible it becomes to
deliver a more conformal dose to the tumor with
less dose to the adjacent normal organs.

Several classes of delivery systems are available
to achieve this end, each having different salient
traits and limitations. This chapter gives an overview of the more traditional systems for SRS and
SBRT delivery in current clinical practice and
explores newer alternatives. Although ancillary
systems, such as ExacTrac and AlignRT, play a very
important role in the positioning, monitoring, and
adjustment of the patient interfraction and intrafraction motion, these are discussed only briefly
here, as they are described at length in other sections of the book.

GAMMA-RAY–BASED DELIVERY
SYSTEMS
Gamma-ray–based delivery systems were one of
the earliest clinically available machines for SRS
and have remained relevant in the field since their
inception. They are known as Leksell Gamma Knife
(LGK; Elekta Instruments AB, Stockholm, Sweden)
or gamma units; they are exclusively used for intracranial SRS, and use cobalt-60 (Co-60) as the radiation source. Co-60 has a half-life of 5.26 years
and emits two gamma rays (1.17 and 1.33 MeV)
on decay that are used for therapy. This results in
average beam energy of 1.25 MeV. The general
concept of gamma units, although the specifics of
the designs vary depending on the model, is largely

73

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 73

23/08/18 4:21 PM

74

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

the same. They have an arrangement of Co-60
sources that can be shielded and collimated with
different aperture sizes, depending on the irradiation geometry one wants to achieve. The convergence of different beams from different angles into
one focal point in the patient results in high-dose
delivery to the tumor while minimizing dose to
surrounding normal brain tissue. The beam arrangement group for a given target is referred to as a
shot. Historically, and still commonly done to this
day, patients treated with LGK would have a head
frame screwed into their head. The rigid frame provides a fixed localization and coordinate system on
which to base the treatment. This frame attaches
to the couch and facilitates accurate localization
of the tumor without imaging before treatment
to ensure correct patient positioning. However,
because hypofractionated treatments for lesions
that are too large for SRS are becoming more common, current LGK units now provide alternatives
to the traditional head frame. The LGK Perfexion
has the Extend system that allows immobilization
with a head frame on the basis of a dental suction
technique rather than the screws. This approach
is more feasible for multifraction treatments. The
newest addition to the LGK line, the Icon, has 3D
on-board imaging and patient monitoring capabilities and does not require a frame, but rather uses
a thermoplastic mask. This system is covered in
more detail later in this section.
The first Gamma Knife design, originally developed in the 1960s (1,2), consisted of 179 Co-60
sources arranged in a hemispherical fashion covering 70° in latitude and 160° in longitude (1). The
sources were collimated to rectangular beam sizes
of 2.5 × 7.5 mm2 at the focal point. This design
evolved to more modern versions with circular collimators instead of rectangular ones, and a larger
number of sources. There are several models of
LGK units in use. The older group, consisting of
models U, B, and C/4C, has been discontinued and
is briefly presented as some units might still be in
clinical use. The subsequent paragraphs expand
upon the characteristics of the newer versions, the
Perfexion and the Icon.

Models U, B, and C/4C
These LGK models have 201 Co-60 sources
arranged in a hemisphere. These units have both
an internal fixed collimator and a collimator helmet that is external and removable. These collimator helmets have collimators, one for each source,
available in four different diameters at the focus

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 74

point: 4, 8, 14, and 18 mm. Only one collimator
diameter can be used at a time. The sources that
are not used for treatment have to be “plugged”
manually by removing the collimator for those
sources and replacing them with tungsten plugs.
These units have a source-to-focus distance (SFD)
of 40 cm. The mechanical accuracy for these units
is quoted as 0.3 mm.
Models U and B are the earlier ones and they have
trunnions that can be adjusted to put the patient in
the correct treatment position. Both the treatment
times and the stereotactic coordinates have to be
manually set and there are no automatic verification checks for them or the helmet size and gamma
angle (pitch of the patient’s head) (3). Models C and
4C have the automatic positioning system (APS)
that adjusts the head position, independent of the
couch, without human interaction. This optional
feature allows for the automatic repositioning of the
patient between shots that are within a predefined
distance of a common point, usually ±2 cm (3).
These shots are grouped in “runs.” The system is
set up to retract the couch 28 cm from the radiation focus of the machine between shots to minimize the radiation dose given to the patient during
repositioning. Once the run is completed, the staff
enters the room to prepare the patient for the next
run, if necessary, by changing the helmet and the
gamma angle. This model also has improved safety
measures. It uses a patient docking indicator over
the frame prior to treatment to verify the gamma
angle and proper docking, and it prompts the user
to perform a test run prior to patient treatment (3).
At this time, the system checks clearance of all the
shots in the run. Once all these checks have passed,
the treatment can begin. The manual positioning
with trunnions can still be used. This mode still
allows the system to verify the helmet size, but the
other parameters must be verified manually.

Leksell Gamma Knife Perfexion
This system, which was released in 2006, has 192
Co-60 sources. The geometrical arrangement is
conical, instead of hemispherical, which leads to
different SFDs depending on the source position
along the cone. The SFDs range from 37.4 to
43.3 cm in contrast to 40 cm for the older models (4). Most of the sources in the LGK Perfexion
unit have a shorter SFD, so it displays slightly higher
dose rates in comparison to the other models for
sources of the same activity (5). This machine does
not have primary and secondary collimators—it does
not use collimator helmets. Instead, it has a tungsten

23/08/18 4:21 PM

7: OVERVIEW OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR SRS AND SBRT DELIVERY

collimator array, 12 cm thick, that is divided into
five concentric rings and eight independently
variable sectors (see Figure 7.1). Each sector has
24 sources, and each source has three different
circular collimator sizes of 4, 8, and 16 mm. The
collimator array is now smaller, so it leaves more
room in the radiation cavity for increased treatment
position ranges and it decreases the likelihood of
collisions between the patient’s head/frame and the
interior surface of the machine (4,5).
In this machine, the collimators no longer have
to be manually changed by changing the collimator helmets, but instead, the source moves over
the selected circular collimator size through servocontrolled motors. Aside from the three collimator size options, the source has two other positions
available: home and off. In the off position, which
is used during treatment, the source is close to the
collimators and can be quickly moved to treatment
position (<1 second) when needed (5). In the home
position, the sources are retracted several centimeters away. This is used when the machine is off or
during an emergency stop.
Another notable difference implemented in the
LGK Perfexion is the new patient positioning system (PPS), a robotic treatment couch. The patient
is positioned at the focal point location through the
use of the PPS, so APS and trunnions (manual positioning system) are no longer necessary. With this
new system, the positioning speed between coordinates is increased from 0.8 mm/sec with APS to
10 mm/sec with the PPS, and the positioning repeatability is improved from 0.3 to less than 0.05 mm
(4,5). It also enhances patient comfort as now the
whole body moves with the couch as opposed to
just adjusting the head position separately with the
APS system or trunnions (4,6). The patient can be
moved from one focus to another automatically,

FIGURE 7.1 Illustration of the Leksell Gamma Knife

even if the lesions are far apart, so the chance of
human error decreases, but the accuracy and stability of the PPS become a concern, especially because
this model does not have a way to visually confirm
the coordinates of each isocenter. However, it has
been shown in the literature that the long-term
mechanical stability and accuracy of this system is
excellent (6). The docking system for the couch is
still compatible with the standard Leksell G frame
with the use of an adaptor.
There is an additional system available for
the LGK Perfexion that allows users to perform
multifractionated treatments—the Extend system
(see Figure 7.2). This system is not a pin-based
frame; it uses the patient’s dental impression and
vacuum to create suction between that and the
patient’s palate and thus achieve immobilization
and positional reproducibility through all fractions. The level of the vacuum, or patient control
unit (PCU), is monitored as it is considered a surrogate for patient motion. If the level drops below
a certain threshold, the treatment is paused. The
LGK Perfexion does not have on-board imaging, so
the position of the Extend system is checked using
the repositioning check tool (RCT). This device
mounts on the Extend frame and allows the user
to confirm the position of the frame using linear
measurement probes in different locations.
An article by Schlesinger et al. studied the positioning uncertainty of the system in 10 patients over
a total of 36 fractions and found “an overall mean
radial setup displacement of 0.64 mm and an overall mean intra-fraction displacement of 0.47 mm,”
and recommended careful patient selection (7).
Their results are summarized in Figure 7.3, along
with a schematic of the RCT. Other studies had
similar findings (8–10).

FIGURE 7.2 Extend frame for Leksell Gamma Knife

Perfexion collimator.

Perfexion.

Source: Image courtesy of Elekta AB.

Source: Image courtesy of Elekta AB.

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 75

75

23/08/18 4:21 PM

76

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

Reposition differences: Pretreatment position vs. reference position
Anterior (mm)
Mean = 0.05
 = 0.19
 = 0.27
RMSMeans = 0.20

–1 –0.75 –0.5 –0.25 0 0.25 0.5 0.75
Positional differences (mm)

1

More

Right (mm)
Mean = 0.01
 = 0.35
 = 0.31
RMSMeans = 0.35
–1 –0.75 –0.5 –0.25

0

0.25 0.5 0.75

1 More

Positional differences (mm)

Radial difference
Mean = 0.64 mm
SD = 0.24 mm
 = 0.17 mm
 = 0.16 mm

Left (mm)
Mean = 0.09
 = 0.40
 = 0.28
RMSMeans = 0.41
–1 –0.75 –0.5 –0.25 0 0.25 0.5 0.75
Positional differences (mm)

(A)

Superior (mm)
Mean = 0.11
 = 0.26
 = 0.28
RMSMeans = 0.28 –1 –0.75 –0.5 –0.25 0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1 More

1 More

Positional differences (mm)

Reposition differences: Posttreatment position vs. pretreatment position
Anterior (mm)
Mean = 0.27
 = 0.20
 = 0.21
RMSMeans = 0.34

–1 –0.75 –0.5 –0.25 0

0.25 0.5 0.75

1

More

Positional differences (mm)

Right (mm)
Mean = 0.13
 = 0.20
 = 0.16
RMSMeans = 0.24

–1 –0.75 –0.5 –0.25

0

0.25 0.5 0.75

1

More

Positional differences (mm)

Radial difference
Mean = 0.47 mm
SD = 0.30 mm
 = 0.18 mm
 = 0.22 mm

Left (mm)
Mean = 0.09
 = 0.20
 = 0.21
RMSMeans = 0.22

(B)

–1 –0.75 –0.5 –0.25

0

0.25 0.5 0.75

1

More

Positional differences (mm)

Superior (mm)
Mean = 0.06
 = 0.23
 = 0.16
RMSMeans = 0.24 –1 –0.75 –0.5 –0.25 0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1 More
Positional differences (mm)

FIGURE 7.3 Illustration of the positional differences between prefraction and reference measurements (A) and prefraction and postfraction measurements (B) taken with the RCT for patients treated with the Extend system.
RCT, repositioning check tool; RMS, root mean square.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Schlesinger D, Xu Z, Taylor F, et al. Interfraction and intrafraction performance of the Gamma
Knife Extend system for patient positioning and immobilization. J Neurosurg. 2012;117(suppl):217–224. doi:10.3171/2012.6.GKS12989

From a treatment planning standpoint, the LGK
Perfexion allows for the combination of different
beam diameters for the same focal point setup,
which allows more optimal dose distributions (4).
It also leads to faster treatment times because
collimator changes in this system take less than

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 76

1 second, whereas the same process would add
approximately 8 minutes of treatment time per
collimator exchange in the previous models (11).
The LGK Perfexion is broadly regarded as a safer,
more efficient, and more accurate unit than its
predecessors (4–6).

23/08/18 4:21 PM

7: OVERVIEW OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR SRS AND SBRT DELIVERY

Leksell Gamma Knife Icon
The Icon is the newest model of the ones presented in this section. This new system is described
by Zeverino et al. in their 2017 publication (12).
Although the radiation unit portion of the machine
remains largely unchanged, this new system has
on-board imaging and monitoring tools, making
the unit more versatile for fractionated treatments
(see Figure 7.4). The LGK Icon no longer requires
the use of a frame; the system is compatible with
the use of thermoplastic masks. The addition of
a gantry with an x-ray source and detector panel
for cone-beam CT (CBCT) imaging and the intrafraction motion management (IFMM) system aim
to ensure that even without the use of the frame,
the accuracy level of LGK is still maintained. The
CBCT is external to the unit, so the patient has to
be imaged and repositioned outside before being
shifted into the treatment position. All throughout
imaging and treatment, the patient is monitored by
the infrared (IR) system that comprises the IFMM.
This system has an IR reference tool with four IR

77

markers in a fixed position. This tool is attached
to the couch and it is used to track any relative
motion observed between it and the patient marker
(on the patient’s nose). The system can be set up so
that when motion beyond a threshold is detected,
either the treatment is automatically paused (active
mode) or it continues, but it displays a warning
message (passive mode). Although there is little
clinical experience at this time to present in this
text because of the newness of the unit, commissioning tests performed by Zeverino et al. show
that the center of the CBCT and the center of the
treatment unit coincide within a sphere of radius
less than 0.2 mm, but the difference could increase
because of table sag from the patient’s weight (12).

LINEAR ACCELERATOR–BASED
DELIVERY SYSTEMS
Although gamma-based systems have shown great
promise for SRS treatments, the lack of flexibility of
use, source exchange requirements, and associated

(A)

(B)
FIGURE 7.4 (A) Leksell Gamma Knife Icon with the CBCT arm on the left side of the machine and the HDMM system on
the right of the couch. (B) A close-up of the HDMM system with the four infrared markers on the reference tool and one on
the patient’s nose.
CBCT, cone-beam CT; HDMM, high-definition motion management.
Source: Image courtesy of Elekta AB.

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 77

23/08/18 4:21 PM

78

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

regulatory compliance issues make these systems far
from ideal for most clinics. Linear accelerator (linac)–
based delivery systems are multipurpose and do not
use radioactive material; their development for SRS
treatments was the next logical step. Since their initial use for this purpose in the 1980s, manufacturers
have developed systems that are optimized for
SRS and SBRT treatments by having finer resolution multileaf collimator (MLC), higher dose rates,
greater mechanical accuracy, and robust integrated
image guidance for patient positioning and intrafractional monitoring. Modern linacs designed to
handle SRS/SBRT treatments now offer flattening
filter-free (FFF) beams. These beams can achieve
much higher dose rates than their flattened counterparts and have a softer energy spectrum. These high
dose rates in conjunction with noncoplanar beam
or arc arrangements yield fast conformal treatments
that allow for high-dose delivery to the target, sharp
dose gradient, normal tissue sparing, and a reduction in the likelihood of patient motion because of
the much shorter treatment times. The development of 4pi treatments with simultaneous couch
and gantry rotations is well underway, although it is
not used clinically yet (13).
Even platforms that are not specifically designed
for radiosurgery purposes can achieve those traits
through the use of add-on accessories and ancillary
systems. Fixed circular collimators, or cones, are tertiary collimators that attach to the linac and provide
smaller field sizes with sharper penumbra. They are
desired for the treatment of small brain lesions of
spherical or near-spherical shape. These cones have
field size diameters that typically range from 5 to
40 mm and an approximate height of 12 cm, with the
specific design dimensions and available field sizes
depending on the manufacturer (14,15). Because
cones attach to the gantry and come closer to the
patient’s skin than integrated MLC systems, their
penumbra is sharper. However, the reduced distance
between the cone and the patient also leads to higher
chances of collision. The use of cones is restricted
to SRS because of the smaller field sizes they provide, their circular field shape, and clearance limitations. Modern cones, such as the Integrated Conical
Collimator Verification and Interlock (ICVI) system by Varian (Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto,
California), have safety features such as automatic
jaw settings with cone insertion (16). The jaw positions need to be properly set when using cones so
that no radiation is delivered outside the outer cone
diameter. By having an automatic setting, this voids
the possibility of incorrect jaw positions that could

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 78

lead to severe overdoses of normal brain tissue. The
penumbra for 6-MV beams from cones such as the
ICVI is less than 2 mm at dmax with source-to-axis
distance (SAD) = 100 cm (17).
Available add-on devices also include MLCs.
There are many models from different vendors
available (18–20). The m3 micro-MLC (Brainlab
AG, Feldkirchen, Germany) is described here as an
example of this types of devices. The m3 is a popular model that is compatible with linacs from all the
main vendors (18). This 30-kg device can be manually mounted on the gantry, when the gantry is at
180°, using a specially designed trolley. The added
weight on the gantry has been shown to have no
significant effects on its mechanical stability (21).
The MLC has 26 leaf pairs of varying widths. The
central 14 pairs have a width of 3 mm; adjacent to
these, there are three pairs of 4.5-mm-width leaves
on either side, and the outer six pairs, three on
each side, have a width of 5.5 mm. These leaves
interdigitate, are 12 cm long and 6 cm thick, can
overtravel 5 cm, have a positional precision of
0.1 mm, and can define a maximum field size of
10.2 × 10 cm2 at isocenter (21). They travel perpendicular to the central axis of the beam with a
maximum speed of 1.5 cm/sec and their design
accounts for beam divergence through the three
straight edges of each leaf-end. The top edge
matches the beam divergence when the leaf is
fully extended, whereas the bottom edge matches
the beam divergence for a fully retracted leaf. The
center portion is straight to align with central axis.
The cross-section of the leaves is designed to match
the divergence of the beam perpendicular to the
direction of travel. When using this accessory, the
internal MLC of the linac should be fully retracted
to avoid interaction with the beam. The average
penumbra reported for 6-MV fields shaped to 2 ×
10 cm2 with the m3 is less than 2.5 mm at a dmax
with SAD = 100 cm, and the average MLC transmission and leakage are 1% to 2% and 1.2% to
2.8%, respectively, depending on the publication
(21,22). Just as described with cones, the diminished distance between the collimating device and
the patient leads to sharper penumbra but may also
result in increased treatment clearance issues. The
clearance from isocenter of the m3 system is 31 cm.
The m3 micro-MLC is integrated with the Novalis
system by Varian. The Novalis system is described
in more detail in the following text.
Ancillary devices for patient imaging, positioning, and monitoring are discussed later in the chapter. There are also respiratory motion management

23/08/18 4:21 PM

7: OVERVIEW OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR SRS AND SBRT DELIVERY

options for SBRT that aim to reduce or account for
the tumor’s movement during treatment because
of respiration. These auxiliary systems can be used
to either put the patient in breath-hold or gate the
beam. These include the Elekta Active Breathing
Coordinator and the Real-Time Position Management (RPM) system by Varian. Although these can
be useful to reduce treatment margins by minimizing tumor motion during irradiation, they should be
used with care, and proper patient selection should
be performed. The ABC is a spirometer-based system that measures the patient’s inhaled volume of
air during respiration. On the basis of this information and the air–volume threshold selected for
breath-hold, the machine engages and maintains
the patient at a specific volume of air in his or her
lungs while the beam is on. However, if air is being
exchanged outside the breathing tube, the system
will not measure it and the breath-holds will be
inconsistent. Hence, care must be taken. For RPM,
the system tracks the motion of the IR marker box
that is placed on the patient’s torso. This motion
provides the breathing trace for the patient. The
system inherently assumes that the motion of
the tumor correlates with the external surrogate
tracked by RPM. If this assumption is flawed, the
treatment will not be delivered as intended. These
systems can sometimes be interfaced with the linacs that are described next to automatically gate
the beam, or they can be used with manual gating.

Varian Systems
There are several linac models by Varian that can be
used for SRS and SBRT treatment delivery. Some
of them are specifically designed for radiosurgery,
such as the Novalis and Edge platforms, and others
can reach that capability through the use of ancillary systems such as the ones described earlier. This
section focuses on the description of the Novalis
Tx, TrueBeam STx, and Edge systems, but other
models such as Trilogy can also be used for SRS/
SBRT, especially when using ancillary devices.
The Novalis Tx system is a popular radiosurgery
platform that includes technology developed by
both Varian (Varian Medical Systems) and Brainlab (Brainlab AG). The linac in this platform is
very similar to the Trilogy with its on-board imaging capabilities (on-board imaging and MV panel),
but it comes equipped with high-definition MLC
(HDMLC) and the ExacTrac system (23). The ICVI
system can also be used, if desired. The HDMLC
has 32 inner leaf pairs of 2.5 mm width at isocenter

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 79

79

with 14 outer leaf pairs on either side (28 total)
of 5 mm width at isocenter. The leaves in this collimator can interdigitate and overtravel by 20 cm,
but adjacent leaves cannot be positioned more than
15 cm apart (24). The maximum leaf speed
is 2.5 cm/sec and the maximum carriage speed is
1.2 cm/sec. The maximum field size it provides
is 40 × 22 cm2, but when performing intensitymodulated radiation therapy (IMRT) the maximum
size is 32 × 22 cm2. Aside from the conventional
beams with dose rates up to 600 MU/min (maximum
dose rate for standard beams 6–25 MV), this platform also offers a high-dose rate (1,000 MU/min),
6-MV beam for SRS treatments. This beam has a different flattening filter that permits a higher dose rate
but restricts the field size (23). When treating with
the SRS beam, the maximum size is 15 × 15 cm2.
This machine has a clearance radius (from the
interface mount to isocenter) of 41.5 cm. The average penumbra measured for this machine parallel
to the leaf motion in a 10 × 10 cm2 field at dmax
with source-to-surface distance (SSD) = 100 cm is
2.6 mm (SRS 6 MV), 4.2 mm (6 MV), and 6.2 mm
(10 MV) (25). Penumbra values perpendicular to
the leaf motion are smaller. The positioning accuracy of the HDMLC leaves is 0.25 mm (24), and the
mean MLC transmission is less than 1.2% for 6 MV
(23,25). The isocenter accuracy between the gantry
and the collimator for this system is within a 0.5-mm
radius, and a 0.75-mm radius when including the
couch (24). The addition of the ExacTrac system in
the platform allows for accurate patient setup and
intrafraction monitoring on the basis of two x-ray
imaging panels mounted on the ceiling with their
corresponding sources built into the floor. These
allow for imaging at any couch angle, even during
treatment. It also has an optical tracking device for
IR markers. Predefined marker arrays are available
or markers can be manually placed on the patient
for position monitoring and precise couch motion.
This system is further discussed later in the chapter. If a 6-DOF couch is purchased with the system,
ExacTrac will provide the three translational and
three rotational shifts necessary to achieve the optimal treatment position. These couches usually have
a rotational range for roll and pitch of ±3°.
The TrueBeam STx is a treatment delivery
platform with three photon energies selectable
between 4 and 20 MV (4 MV, 6 MV, 6 MV FFF,
8 MV, 10 MV, 10 MV FFF, 15 MV, 18 MV, 20 MV)
and a range of electron energies from 4 to 22 MeV.
It also offers both flattened and FFF beams. The
advantage of FFF beams is their higher dose rate

23/08/18 4:21 PM

80

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

because they allow for faster treatment delivery.
The maximum dose rate for 6 MV FFF is 1,400 MU/
min and that of 10 MV FFF is 2,400 MU/min.
Although the control system for this linac (Maestro
control architecture) and a lot of the gantry elements have been redesigned for enhanced performance in comparison to previous models (26),
field shaping is still achieved with the HDMLC
formerly described for the Novalis Tx system, and
the manufacturer-provided gantry, collimator, and
couch isocenter accuracy is also the same (27). The
ICVI system is available for TrueBeam as well.
The Edge radiosurgery system is the latest model
from Varian and it is marketed toward SRS and
SBRT treatment delivery (see Figure 7.5). This platform includes a TrueBeam linac but with a smaller
profile, the purpose of which is to fit into smaller
vaults (26,28). It offers only 6 and 10 MV energies with standard and high-dose rate modes (FFF
beams). Field shaping is still performed with either
HDMLC or the ICVI system. As opposed to the
Novalis Tx system, the Edge comes with the Optical Surface Monitoring System (OSMS) instead of
the ExacTrac. The OSMS tracks the surface of the
patient for positioning and monitoring. This equipment has the same technology as AlignRT (Vision
RT, London, UK) and it is explained in more
detail later in the chapter. The Edge comes with an
integrated PerfectPitch 6-DOF couch (positional
accuracy of 0.5 mm and 0.3°); it allows for
intrafraction kV/MV imaging triggered on the basis
of gantry position, MU delivered, time, or respiratory signal, and it has a high-contrast MV imaging

FIGURE 7.5 Varian Edge with the PerfectPitch couch and
the Calypso extracranial tracking system on the right of the
image.
Source: Image courtesy of Varian Medical Systems, Inc. All rights
reserved.

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 80

mode (2.5 MV) with extended field of view (28).
It offers the Calypso system for extracranial realtime tracking. This system can be used with other
platforms as well; it is not exclusive to the Edge.
It tracks the target using the electromagnetic signal from the beacon transponders implanted in the
patient, and it can interface with the machine to
adjust the couch position or gate the beam on the
basis of the received signal.

Elekta
Elekta offers different linac models that are capable of SRS/SBRT delivery. Here we describe the
Synergy S and Versa HD.
The Elekta Synergy S (Elekta Oncology Systems,
Crawley, UK) system has on-board planar kV and
CBCT capabilities for patient position verification.
In this system, the field shaping is performed by the
beam modulator (BM) head. The BM is an MLC
that consists of 40 leaf pairs with leaves of 4 mm
width at isocenter. The leaves are 7.5 cm thick,
travel perpendicular to the beam axis, and have
rounded leaf tips. The maximum field size available
with the BM is 16 × 21 cm2. There are no movable backup jaws in the Synergy S; the field shape
is solely defined by the MLC (29). The BM leaves
are capable of interdigitation, have a maximum leaf
speed of 3 cm/sec (30), and have a position reproducibility of 0.1 mm (29). The penumbra of this
system is much larger along the direction of motion
of the leaves than perpendicular to it. These values
have been reported in the literature by Podder et
al. as approximately 4.5 and 3.3 mm, respectively,
for 4.8 × 4.8 cm2 fields at dmax and SSD = 100
cm (31). This same article measured the average
and maximum MLC leakage of the BM as 0.9%
and 1.6%, respectively. This machine has several
photon energies available but does not offer FFF
beams, so the maximum dose rate available is
600 MU/min (18).
The Versa HD linac has been designed to be an
efficient delivery system for both conventional and
SRS/SBRT treatments (see Figure 7.6). It has both
flattened and FFF photons beams (6 MV, 6 MV FFF,
10 MV, 10 MV FFF, 15 MV or 18 MV), as well as
electrons (4–15 MeV). As in the Varian machines,
the FFF beams have a maximum dose rate of
1,400 MU/min for 6 MV FFF and 2,400 MU/
min for 10 MV. The maximum field size available
is 40 × 40 cm2.
This linac comes equipped with the Agility collimator. This collimator was redesigned to improve
performance for dynamic treatments and can also

23/08/18 4:21 PM

7: OVERVIEW OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR SRS AND SBRT DELIVERY

FIGURE 7.6 The Versa HD linear accelerator.
Source: Image courtesy of Elekta AB.

be installed in other Elekta linacs, if desired. It is
installed as the upper level of collimation of the
head that allows for a clearance from isocenter of
45 cm. The Agility head has been described and
characterized by Thompson et al. in their 2014
publication (32). It has 80 interdigitating singlefocus leaf pairs with curved leaf tips. The leaves have
a thickness of 9 cm and a width of 5 mm at the isocenter (all leaves have the same width). They have
a maximum overtravel of 15 cm and a positional
uncertainty of 0.1 ± 0.2 mm over their complete
range of travel (32). The large overtravel range
is because of the dynamic leaf guides (DLGs) on
which the leaf banks are mounted. Although the
leaves themselves have a maximum extension of
20 cm, the DLG can travel an additional 15 cm.
The DLGs also allow the leaves to move faster.
The leaves have a maximum speed of 3.5 cm/sec,
but the DLG can move at 3 cm/sec. This results
in an effective leaf speed of 6.5 cm/sec (32).
The interleaf gap is designed to minimize leakage
achieving an average transmission through the MLC
profile of 0.35% with a measured maximum (corresponding to interleaf leakage) of 0.41% for 6-MV
beam (32). The penumbra reported for this collimator for a 6-MV beam at dmax and a SAD = 100
cm was 4.8 mm for a 10 × 10 cm2 field (32). Two
y-shaped sculpted diaphragms traveling perpendicular to the leaves allow for rapid field length changes
during dynamic treatments. The overtravel for the
y-diaphragms is 12 cm (33). Figure 7.7 illustrates
the Agility design. The Agility MLC, along with
the four-dimensional (4D) soft-tissue visualization
of the on-board imaging system, can be used for
dynamic real-time tracking of the tumor (34). This
functionality can result in the reduction of motionrelated margins, which would spare healthy tissue

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 81

81

FIGURE 7.7 The Agility collimator with MLC, dynamic leaf
guides, and sculpted diaphragms from the patient’s eye
view.
MLC, multileaf collimator.
Source: Image courtesy of Elekta AB.

without compromising coverage of a moving
tumor. Versa also comes equipped with planar kV
imaging, CBCT, and MV imaging capabilities. The
gantry, collimator, and treatment couch isocentricity of this machine are 1, 0.7, and 0.7 mm, respectively, as measured by Narayanasamy et al. (35).
Even though the maximum FFF beam MU rate is
the same for the Varian TrueBeam and the Versa
HD, the Versa has shorter treatment times (36).
This is because the Agility MLC can move faster
than the Varian MLC, so dose modulation in the
Versa HD does not require a decrease in the dose
rate during treatment delivery.

CyberKnife
The CyberKnife (Accuray, Inc., Sunnyvale, California) system presents an option in radiation therapy
(RT) that differs from the standard linac. It is a
linac mounted on a robotic arm that has 6 DOF
and can move in a wide range of directions to perform nonisocentric treatments. This machine can
deliver radiation from 1,200 different directions
(more than 1,600 in the G4 and M6 models) and,
as a result, is capable of achieving highly conformal
dose distributions without sacrificing dose homogeneity (37). The only positional restrictions are
dictated by the collimator assembly collision detector (38).
The X-band waveguide design makes the linac
sufficiently small and lightweight (approximately
160 kg) to be mounted on and moved by an industrial robotic arm (38). It produces 6MV FFF radiation beam with a dose rate of 1,000 MU/min at
SAD = 80 cm (39). The original system was designed
for SRS treatments and therefore it offered radiation
fields exclusively on the basis of circular collimators

23/08/18 4:21 PM

82

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

of sizes ranging from 5 to 60 mm (5, 7.5, 10, 12.5,
15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 50, and 60 mm nominal
size at SAD = 80 cm) (40,41). Newer versions
now allow for different options for beam shaping
such as the InCise MLC and the Iris variable aperture collimator. These are further described later.
Aside from the novelty of nonisocentric delivery and the flexibility of the robotic arm, the
CyberKnife also has integrated image guidance
that allows for real-time tracking and positioning
correction of the radiation beam on the basis of
the patient’s anatomy or internal fiducial markers.
This is achieved with the use of two orthogonal
x-ray systems that intersect at an imaging center
92 cm above the floor (41). Each detector panel is
mounted on either side of the treatment table. The
x-ray sources are rigidly mounted on the ceiling
facing toward their corresponding imaging detector panel. The source to imaging center distance is
220 cm (41). Older machines (G3) have smaller
amorphous silicon detectors (20 cm × 20 cm)
and they are mounted at 45° on stands that protrude 61 cm from the floor (38). This is what
resulted in the more limited number of possible
treatment directions quoted earlier for the older
model. Newer versions (G4 and M6) have 40 cm ×
40 cm amorphous silicon panels that are installed
either flush to the floor or 15.2 cm above it at 45°
(38). These imagers periodically acquire images
(every few minutes) that are compared with the
digitally reconstructed radiographs (DRRs) from
the planning CT to check the patient position
throughout the treatment. The system uses that
information to adjust the position of the radiation beam to ensure continuous accurate dose
delivery to the target (37). Translations of up to
10 mm (or 25 mm when using the respiratory
tracking system) and rotations of 1° in roll and
pitch, and 3° in yaw can be automatically corrected
by the system; anything greater than those limits
has to be corrected manually (42). There are three
tracking methods used by the CyberKnife system:
bony structure tracking (includes 6D Skull and
Xsight Spine tracking, which is used for spine targets), fiducial tracking, and soft-tissue tracking
(Xsight Lung which allows for lung tumor tracking without fiducials, on the basis of the difference
between target and lung tissue densities) (38).
Skull tracking is used when treating intracranial
lesions or tumors that are fixed relative to the skull.
The method uses high-contrast bone information
to register orthogonal images, using all of the anatomy as the region of interest, with the DRRs, and

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 82

calculates the 3D rigid transformation necessary
for alignment (43). Phantom studies for this algorithm in the CyberKnife G4 have shown a total
clinical accuracy of 0.44 ± 0.12 mm for intracranial lesions (44). The Xsight Spine algorithm, also
on the basis of high-contrast bone information,
was developed to allow for the treatment of lesions
in the spine without requiring the implantation of
fiducial markers for tracking. There are several articles studying the accuracy of this tool, as correct
positioning when treating close to the spinal cord is
crucial to the success of the treatment (42,45,46).
The basic workflow of the algorithm is to compare
the orthogonal images obtained during treatment
(every 1–1.5 minutes) (42,46) with the DRRs from
the planning CT scan and register them using a
“grid-based, automatic, nonrigid formalism” (45).
The region of interest for the registration typically
encompasses the vertebra of interest plus two
adjacent ones (43). The DRRs are created using a
0.5-mm step size to improve their quality (45), and
the skeletal structures in both sets of images are
enhanced through a series of postprocessing filters
to improve the registration (46). All three studies
showed submillimeter tracking precision.
Xsight Lung, as opposed to the two previous
methods, accomplishes patient alignment in two
steps: global alignment and tumor tracking. During
global alignment, the system uses the region of the
spine closest to the target to ensure proper overall
positioning. Second, the system moves the couch so
the target is in or close to the imaging center for
tracking. Tumor tracking is performed by registering
the periodically acquired images to the DRRs from
the planning CT. In order for this process to work
correctly, the tumor has to have sufficient contrast
relative to the surrounding lung tissue. Consequently,
both size and location of the lesion affect the reliability of the tracking method. The algorithm works
best for tumors that are larger than 1.5 cm (43).
The Xsight Lung is often paired with the Synchrony
tracking system. Synchrony uses the information
from the x-ray images to track the tumor position
while simultaneously reading the breathing trace for
the patient from the signal of three light-emitting
diodes (LEDs) on the patient’s body (47). The tumor
position is inferred using Xsight Lung or from fiducial markers (for lung tumors with borders that are
not clear enough, or tumors in other organs such
as the liver). The software then creates a model to
correlate the internal position of the target with the
external breathing trace to predict where the linac
arm should be in 115 milliseconds so it can adjust

23/08/18 4:21 PM

7: OVERVIEW OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR SRS AND SBRT DELIVERY

its position without a significant time lag as the target moves with breathing. The validity of this model
is checked by the system, and updated if necessary,
every 1 to 6 minutes (47,48). If the system detects a
deviation larger than 5 mm, treatment is interrupted
and a new correlation model has to be created (47).
Studies investigating the performance of Synchrony
are available in the literature and report varying
results (positional errors of 2–4 mm) depending on
the treatment site (47–49).
Fiducial marker tracking is also an option with the
CyberKnife platform (43). This requires the implantation of typically three to five radiopaque fiducial
markers in or close to the target approximately a week
before the planning CT scan. The time lag between
implantation and simulation allows for the markers’
position to stabilize. The positions of these markers
are known in the DRR and image registration is performed on the basis of them. The Synchrony system
can also be used with fiducial marker tracking (49).
As mentioned earlier, newer CyberKnife units
have multiple collimation options available: the
standard fixed circular collimators, the Iris variable aperture collimator, and the InCise MLC
(see Figure 7.8). The Iris was first introduced in
2008 (50). Through its two hexagonal banks of
tungsten segments offset by 30° from each other,
Iris has the ability to create fields equivalent to
those obtained with any of the fixed circular collimators. The advantage arises from the fact that
the Iris can change sizes automatically, hence easily
allowing the use of any collimator size at any angle
without penalty of extra collimator exchange time,
resulting in shortened treatment times (50).
The InCise MLC system, with leaves of 2.5 mm
width and a maximum field size of 11 cm  9.75 cm
at 80 cm SAD (39), was quickly updated to InCise
2 MLC which consists of tungsten leaf pairs that are
3.85 mm wide at 80 cm SAD, and can provide a
maximum field size of 11.5 cm  10 cm (41). The
average transmission over the MLC is less than 0.5%
and the leaves’ positional accuracy is less than
0.5 mm (39). The leaves are capable of both full overtravel and full interdigitation (41). Kathriarachchi et al.
performed a planning study on 10 prostate cancer
patients to compare the performance of the Iris with
that of the InCise for CyberKnife treatments (50).
They found that similar target coverage, conformity
index (CI), and homogeneity index were achievable
with both, but that InCise displayed a more rapid dose
falloff, illustrated by the smaller gradient index (GI)
obtained for the MLC plans. MLC-based treatment
plans had also faster delivery times (36% reduction)

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 83

83

and a smaller number of MU (42% reduction). Jang
et al. studied the effects of using InCise to replan
24 patients treated earlier for brain metastases at
their institution with CyberKnife and fixed collimator/
Iris (51). In this work, they found that target coverage and mean target dose were comparable between
the two sets of plans, but that cone/Iris plans had
slightly better CIs (see Figure 7.9). However, just like
in the previous study, the treatment time was greatly
reduced with the use of MLC, leading them to the
conclusion that it may be a useful option for multitarget treatments or treatments with delivery time
constraints. It is important to note that treatment
times with the CyberKnife, regardless of the collimation used, are considerably longer than with other
systems (52,53). This is discussed in further detail in
the section “Performance Comparisons.”

TomoTherapy
The Hi-Art I, a TomoTherapy system prototype
developed and installed at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison, was the first dedicated IMRT
machine with integrated on-board imaging (54)
introduced in the clinic in 2003 (55). Helical
TomoTherapy machines function in a way that is
analogous to imaging with helical CT scanners. In
TomoTherapy, the FFF 6-MV linac is mounted on a
slip-ring gantry that allows for its unrestricted full
rotation around the patient, using SAD technique
and a bore diameter of 85 cm. The nominal maximum dose rate at dmax, according to the product
specifications for the TomoHD unit, is 850 cGy/
min (56). As the source rotates, the couch translates through the gantry achieving a helical treatment delivery. The fan beam extends 40 cm
laterally, has a beam stopper opposite to the source
that alleviates shielding requirements, and can be
collimated by adjustable jaws (with a thickness of
13.5 cm of tungsten) to 1, 2.5, and 5 cm in the
superior–inferior dimension (56). Additional modulation is achieved with the binary 64-leaf collimator in which pneumatic drives open and close the
leaves in specific time intervals to attain the desired
dose distribution (56). These leaves are 95% tungsten, 10 cm thick, and 0.625 cm wide (55). During
treatment planning, the gantry rotation is divided
into 51 sections called projections. The treatment is
delivered inside the gantry, so the lasers for patient
setup are in a virtual isocenter that is located
70 cm from the true treatment isocenter in the
superior–inferior direction (57,58). New TomoTherapy units also allow for treatment delivery with

23/08/18 4:21 PM

84

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

(A)

(B)
FIGURE 7.8 Closeup of the CyberKnife (A) Iris collimator and (B) InCise MLC.
Source: © 2018 Accuray Incorporated. All Rights Reserved.

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 84

23/08/18 4:21 PM

7: OVERVIEW OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR SRS AND SBRT DELIVERY

85

FIGURE 7.10 Picture of a TomoTherapy system (TomoHD)
with the overlay of the internal components. Labels of main
components added to the figure for clarity.
FIGURE 7.9 Results from the study by Jang et al. (51)
showing the difference in dose distributions from an MLCbased and cone/Iris-based plan. The red contour indicates
the target. Solid lines in the DVH represent MLC and the
dashed line represents Iris plans.

DVH, dose–volume histogram; GTV, gross tumor volume; MLC,
multileaf collimator; PTV, planning target volume.
Source: From Jang SY, Lalonde R, Ozhasoglu C, et al. Dosimetric
comparison between cone/Iris-based and InCise MLC-based
CyberKnife plans for single and multiple brain metastases.
J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2016;17(5):184–199. doi:10.1120/jacmp.
v17i5.6260

static fields at discrete angles when using the TomoDirect mode. This affords users the possibility of
performing treatments with their TomoTherapy unit
using 2 to 12 different gantry angles and the level of
modulation, if any, of their choice (56). In this mode,
the gantry stays fixed while the couch moves through
it. This process is repeated for every fixed gantry angle
in the plan. TomoDirect is typically geared toward
routine treatments such as whole breast RT with tangential fields. A description of its use for treatments
such as SRS/SBRT could not be found in the literature by the authors. However, its use for prostate and
lung RT with conventional fractionation has been
investigated and the results showed that TomoDirect
delivers higher dose to the rectum in prostate treatments, but smaller lung V5 (lung volume receiving
5 Gy) in thoracic wall and lung target treatments (59).
The same study shows that use of TomoDirect did
not reduce treatment times.
TomoTherapy systems have a detector mounted
opposite to the source (source-to-detector distance [SDD] = 145 cm) to allow for image acquisition with a 3.5-MV beam (see Figure 7.10) (55).
This detector is an arc-shaped, single-row xenon

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 85

Source: © 2018 Accuray Incorporated. All Rights Reserved.

detector array with a field of view diameter
of 39 cm, and a matrix size of 512  512 pixels
(0.78 mm pixels) (56). The images are typically
acquired with a gantry rotation speed of 10 seconds
per rotation, with a nominal y-setting of 4 mm,
and different pitch settings (1, fine; 2, normal;
3, coarse) depending on the slice thickness desired
(2, 4, and 6 mm, respectively) (60,61). Volumetric reconstruction is performed with the filtered
back-projection algorithm (55) and the images are
registered to the planning CT images prior to treatment to ensure proper patient positioning. Because
the scans are acquired with MV energy, the low
contrast resolution is limited and the images are
noisier when compared to kV scans (61), but the
images are less sensitive to artifacts from high-Z
materials such as dental fillings (62). The dose
per scan depends on the selected settings, but
ranges between 1 and 3 cGy (60). The Planned
Adaptive software (TomoTherapy Inc., Madison,
Wisconsin) allows for the use of megavoltage CT
(MVCT) scans for treatment planning. This software resamples the MVCT images and combines
their information with the kilovoltage CT (kVCT)
set originally used for planning by replacing the
anatomy of the kVCT images that falls within the
MVCT field of view (FOV) with the MVCT scan
(63). This enables the option of adaptive planning
if the anatomy displays changes from simulation.
Originally, the jaw settings for TomoTherapy
treatments were fixed for a given treatment plan,
even while passing over the cranial and caudal

23/08/18 4:21 PM

86

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

(A)

(B)

FIGURE 7.11 Comparison between (A) static jaws (the original TomoTherapy jaw design) and (B) dynamic jaws (the
TomoEDGE design).

MLC, multileaf collimator.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Sterzing F, Uhl M, Hauswald H, et al. Dynamic jaws and dynamic couch in helical TomoTherapy.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;76(4):1266–1273. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.07.1686

edges of the target, which would lead to widening
of the longitudinal penumbra (64). To reduce this
effect, thinner slices (smaller jaw openings) were
used for treatment at the expense of prolonged
beam-on time. With the advent of TomoEDGE,
this issue has been mitigated as the superior and
inferior jaws can now move independently to minimize craniocaudal penumbra broadening (see
Figure 7.11) (64,65). The use of this new feature
allows for faster treatments because the 5-cm jaw
setting can be used in more cases without overcovering the target at the cranial and caudal ends
(64). Another performance enhancement in newer
machines is more stable output. Older TomoTherapy units have reported higher output variations (±2%, or higher) because of the absence of
a dose servo system (57,66). However, the newer
machines have a dose control system that suppresses output variation to within 0.5% (67).
TomoTherapy can be used for SRS and SBRT
procedures. Helical TomoTherapy allows for the
simultaneous treatment of multiple targets easily
without having to move the patient from one treatment isocenter to the next, like with conventional
systems (68). Holmes et al. performed a phantom
study to check the overall accuracy of the image
localization and treatment delivery process for
SRS with a Hi-Art II machine and found it to be
1 to 2 mm (62). In that same publication, they also

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 86

described how helical TomoTherapy is used for SRS
and lung SBRT treatments in their clinic. For SRS,
both invasive and noninvasive head frames are
used by adapting existing systems to the Hi-Art II
couch top. An IR marker monitoring system tracks
patients’ motion during treatment (for both invasive and noninvasive frames). Monitoring enables
the team to interrupt treatment and reassess the
position of the patient if a displacement vector
is greater than 1 mm. Treatment planning is performed on kVCT scans because of their higher
low-contrast resolution compared with that of
MVCT. However, MVCT is used for planning when
there are image artifacts from fillings, or other
high-Z materials (62). Soisson et al. proposed a
similar procedure for SRS delivery by performing a planning study on the basis of 20 patients
treated earlier in their clinic with cone-based linac
SRS (68). Their suggested helical TomoTherapy
SRS workflow differs from that described by
Holmes et al. only in the fact that they propose
always performing planning with pretreatment
MVCT scans, to avoid introducing discrepancies
arising from table sag effects, and only treating
SRS with head rings to avoid added positional
uncertainty of using noninvasive methods.
Hodge et al. conducted a feasibility study with
nine patients in 2006 to assess whether helical
TomoTherapy could be used for lung SBRT (69).

23/08/18 4:21 PM

7: OVERVIEW OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR SRS AND SBRT DELIVERY

They immobilized the patients with a double vacuum whole-body mold, restricted their breathing with abdominal compression, and acquired a
kVCT scan for planning determining the tumor
motion and corresponding necessary margin on the
basis of a 4D CT study. They performed an MVCT
prior to every treatment to verify alignment by
registering it to the planning images. The dose
fractionation was 12 Gy per fraction for five fractions. Results showed that treatment modality was
valid, MVCT imaging provided adequate tumor
localization, and the treatments did not present any
major limitations or acute toxicities associated with
them. The overall process for lung SBRT treatments
detailed by Holmes et al. in their 2008 publication
is very similar (62). They immobilize patients with
a BodyFix immobilization system and abdominal
compression to minimize breathing motion. They
use fluoroscopy to assess the tumor movement
during breathing under these conditions, determine
appropriate treatment margins (usually 1–2 cm),
and then perform the simulation CT scan for planning under shallow breathing. No patient outcomes
are reported.

VERO
The Vero is a collaborative product between Brainlab (Brainlab AG) and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan) typically used for SBRT.
This machine is also known as MHI TM-2000 in
Japan. It consists of a gimbaled ring gantry with
beam delivery (6 MV) and integrated kV and MV
imaging capabilities. This design allows the source
to rotate ±185° around the ring with a maximum
speed of 7° per second, whereas the ring itself
can also rotate ±60° with a maximum speed of
3° per second. The source itself can independently
pan and tilt an additional ±2.5° at any position
at a speed of 9°/per second (70). This allows for
a motion of ±4.2 cm from isocenter along the
in-plane or cross-plane directions. Ring design
allows for rotations about two axes, so the couch
in this system can move along the three translational directions, but it does not rotate about the
vertical axis—the equivalent of those rotations is
attained by the ring instead. This has been shown
to result in a higher mechanical stability as the isocenter radius for the source rotation was measured
as 0.12 mm, and the ring rotation at 0.02 mm (71),
surpassing the current couch walkout capabilities
of other linac systems (72). Couch rotations
along the lateral and longitudinal axes can also be

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 87

87

adjusted because of the inclusion of the ExacTrac
robotic couch top in the Vero.
The linac uses an inline, C-band, side-coupled
standing waveguide that is 38 cm in length and
operates at 5.7 GHz to accelerate electrons (73).
It has an aluminum filter that provides a flattened beam profile with a maximum field size of
15 ×15 cm2 and a nominal maximum dose rate of
500 MU/min. The system has a fixed primary collimator and no movable jaws, so field shaping is
achieved through 30 pairs of 11-cm-thick tungsten
alloy MLC leaves. These leaves project a width of
5 mm at isocenter (SAD = 100 cm), have round
edges, can reach travel at speeds of 5 cm/sec, have
a length of 26 cm, and are capable of interdigitation
and can travel over the isocenter 7.75 cm (70,73).
The Vero is equipped with two x-ray tubes
located 45° from the source on either side, with
two amorphous silicon panel detectors opposite to them with a SDD of 187.6 cm (73). They
can be used either for stereoscopic imaging (in
both static and fluoroscopic modes) or to acquire
a CBCT with either source–detector pair. The
CBCT acquisition is performed by collecting
images over a 225° rotation at 0.5° intervals for
reconstruction. The maximum planar image field
size is 18 × 22 cm2, whereas the maximum field
of view for the CBCT is 20 cm in diameter with
15 cm length. The stereoscopic fluoro mode
allows for dynamic tracking of the anatomy with
real-time visualization. The system also comes
with a fixed electronic portal imaging detector
(EPID) with an SDD of 221.2 cm. Another
feature of the Vero stemming from the built-in
ExacTrac system is the IR marker tracking. These
markers can be placed on the patient’s abdominal wall and used as surrogates for internal
motion as the camera tracks their position. They
can also be used to obtain the patient’s respiratory trace and derive a correlation between the
internal and the external movements through the
simultaneous acquisition of stereoscopic fluoroscopic imaging of fiducial gold markers and the
breathing trace from IR marker tracking. This is
known as dynamic tumor tracking (DTT). This
information is used to calculate a 4D modeling
function of the tumor motion that can derive the
position of the target on the basis of the external
marker motion. This function accounts for the
50-millisecond system latency and guides the
linac axis to the correct position for irradiation
of the moving object (74,75). There have been
several studies investigating the accuracy of this

23/08/18 4:22 PM

88

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

technique. An initial study assessing the performance of this method on five patients showed small
mean deviations between the observed and the
predicted positions of the markers with standard
deviations of 0.61 mm in the craniocaudal direction, 0.43 mm in the anterior–posterior direction,
and 0.22 mm laterally (75). In that same study,
the tracking error was –0.45 ± 0.95 mm in the tilt
direction and 0.25 ± 0.55 mm in the pan direction. Intrafraction baseline shifts can introduce
large uncertainties into the prediction model,
so the model has to be updated throughout the
fraction to maintain accuracy (16,75,76).
Another treatment approach possible with
the Vero is the dynamic wave arc (DWA). This
technique became clinically available recently. A
few papers have been published in the literature
describing its characterization and performance
validation (77,78), but few clinical experiences
have been reported (79). DWA allows for treatment delivery with simultaneous ring and source
rotations as well as MLC optimization. The
additional degrees of freedom achieved by this
approach theoretically allow for the delivery of
a more conformal treatment plan for the patient
compared with the coplanar volumetric-modulated arc therapy (VMAT) delivery technique. A
study by Burghelea et al. has shown that this technique produces dosimetrically comparable plans
to the standard VMAT approach with Vero, with
similar delivery times (77).
The penumbra of the Vero system in a 10 ×
10 cm2 field has been measured at 4.4 to 5.4 mm,
with an average MLC leakage over the entire field
of 0.11% to 0.13% (70,73). Localization tests with
hidden targets, performed by Solberg et al., showed
a localization accuracy (characterized by 1 standard
deviation) of 0.34 mm (anterior–posterior), 0.27 mm
(lateral), and 0.27 mm (superior–inferior), with
no significant differences between CBCT and stereo
x-ray localization (73).
Although SRS applications for Vero have been
investigated, it was seen that the conformality
achievable with this system is not as good as
with other linac-based systems for smaller targets because of the thicker MLC and inability to
deliver vertex beams (80). However, because of
its DTT capabilities, tighter mechanical accuracy
through the ring rotation rather than couch yaw,
DWA treatment delivery, and comparable dosimetric characteristics with other linac platforms,
the Vero has been successfully used for SBRT
delivery.

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 88

ViewRay
The ViewRay (ViewRay, Inc., Oakwood Village, Ohio) is the first commercially available
MR-guided RT system (81). This machine uses
three Co-60 heads, therefore avoiding the problems arising from the presence of a magnetic field
in linac-based delivery systems, and a magnetic
field strength of 0.35 T. The three Co-60 heads
are mounted 120° from each other on a rotating gantry. This setup allows for a dose rate of
550 cGy/min at isocenter with a 10.5 × 10.5 cm2
field (81). The system uses MLC for field shaping (leaves are 10 mm wide) and has a maximum
treatment field size of 27 × 27 cm2 (82). The lower
magnetic field strength reduces distortion artifacts
and minimizes dose perturbation effects (81). The
imaging volume is a 50-cm-diameter sphere around
isocenter. The ViewRay adaptive RT (ART) treatment planning system gives the user the option of
calculating doses with and without the effects of
the magnetic field (81). Furthermore, it is capable of autocontouring, Monte Carlo dose calculations, IMRT, and on-couch ART on the basis of
the daily treatment images (81). Although the size
of the MLC for this machine might restrict its use
for the smaller target treatments such as SRS, it
has characteristics that could be very beneficial
for SBRT. Its tumor tracking capabilities could
potentially allow treatment of highly mobile targets with smaller margins. This could lead to better sparing of normal organs and the possibility of
safe dose escalation to the tumor. Planning studies
investigating lung and liver SBRT delivery feasibility show clinically acceptable treatment plans,
generally comparable to linac-based plans albeit
of inferior quality in certain aspects, with similar
planning target volume (PTV) coverage but worse
CIs and larger low-dose spillage (82–84). The
advantages and disadvantages of this technology
for SBRT applications, and the best cases on which
to use it, are still being investigated, and clinical
experiences for these types of treatments have not
yet been published.

ANCILLARY SYSTEMS
As noted throughout the chapter, the quality of the
treatment delivery is dependent on not only the
characteristics of the system or the initial setup of
the patient but also how fast and accurately the
delivery system can adapt to changes in the target position. Accuracy of tumor motion analysis,

23/08/18 4:22 PM

7: OVERVIEW OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR SRS AND SBRT DELIVERY

whether on the basis of external surrogates or
internal tracking, depends on the location of the
tumor. Patient positioning and monitoring can be
achieved using different approaches. Some systems
use a combination of external marker tracking with
x-ray imaging for internal anatomy or tracking of
markers implanted inside the tumor, whereas others monitor the patient’s surface directly through
optical or laser cameras and compare it with the
reference treatment position from the planning
CT scan.
External surface tracking with surface imaging
systems is an excellent tool for monitoring and
assessing intrafraction patient motion, but positioning with it should always be verified with internal
imaging because the relative position between surface and target can change. Obviously, any internal
motion contributing to intrafraction positional variations that is not obviously reflected on the external
surface will not be detected by this type of system.
Products with an internal imaging component are
better suited for tumor tracking throughout treatment. However, surface imaging uses nonionizing
radiation, whereas x-ray imaging gives additional
dose to the patient. Both approaches have advantages and disadvantages, but they all have helped
treatment techniques evolve through maintaining
more accurate radiation treatment delivery while
allowing for immobilization options that increase
patient comfort.
The ExacTrac (Brainlab AG) system is composed of two sets of equipment: an IR-based optical

89

positioning system and two kV x-ray imaging
units. The sources for these units are installed
flush on the floor on either side of the gantry. The
amorphous silicon imaging panels are mounted
diagonally on the ceiling. A proprietary 6DOF
fusion algorithm is used to fuse orthogonal planar
images with the DRRs created from the planning CT scan (see Figure 7.12) and provide three
translations and three rotations that facilitate
accurate localization of the target. The couch
shifts obtained from imaging are tracked using
the IR markers to ensure accurate motion. Standard couches can rotate only about the vertical
axis (yaw), but all three rotations will be automatically corrected if a 6-DOF couch is available.
The main advantage of the ExacTrac x-ray imagers over others, like the linac’s On-Board Imager
(OBI) system, for instance, is that they allow for
imaging at any couch angle. They are in a fixed
position, so they are also mechanically more stable than arms that rotate with the gantry, as these
may suffer different sagging effects depending
on their position. Longer separation between
the panels and the patient’s body also decreases
the image contrast degradation from scattered
radiation from the patient. IR markers are also
used to monitor patient motion. The arrangement
of these markers depends on how the system is
being used. The vendor provides IR arrays with
a predefined marker distribution. There is a head
array available for SRS treatments and a couchmounted array that can be used for extracranial

FIGURE 7.12 Example ExacTrac images, DRRs, and matched images for patient position verification.
DRRs, digitally reconstructed radiographs.
Source: From Ma J, Chang Z, Wang Z, et al. ExacTrac X-ray 6 degree-of-freedom image-guidance for intracranial non-invasive stereotactic
radiotherapy: comparison with kilo-voltage cone-beam CT. Radiother Oncol. 2009;93(3):602–608. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2009.09.009.
Reproduced with permission.

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 89

23/08/18 4:22 PM

90

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

treatments. Markers can also be placed on the
patient and their distribution can be acquired as
the reference arrangement for that fraction. Both
the image registration and couch movements are
done automatically by ExacTrac with very little
human input, so human error and interuser variability effects are minimized. The accuracy of
this system has been shown to be adequate for
clinical use (85–88). Its utility is limited to what
can be seen in planar imaging, which is mostly
bony anatomy and fiducial markers. If bony anatomy is not a good surrogate for target positioning
and fiducial markers are not present, this system
should not be used. ExacTrac also allows for initial alignment with a CBCT acquired with the
linac’s OBI system, but subsequent imaging at
nonzero couch angles still has to be performed
using their planar kV images.
AlignRT (Vision RT) has three ceiling-mounted
pods with two stereoscopic cameras each that
detect an optical speckle pattern that is projected
onto the patient’s surface. The deformations in
this pattern are used to reconstruct the real-time
surface of the patient. This surface is then rigidly
registered to the external contour of the patient
obtained from the planning CT and the three translations and three rotations necessary to best align
the two are displayed. This capability extends to
any couch angle. For SRS, this system monitors
the patient’s facial topography during treatment to
ensure the correct treatment position is maintained
throughout the whole fraction (see Figure 7.13).
This technique has been successfully used for
frameless SRS treatments with comparable clinical
outcomes to conventional framed and frameless
techniques (89–91). This equipment is also commercialized by Varian under the name of OSMS.
Although external surface might not serve as an
adequate surrogate for tumor position for SBRT
treatments, surface imaging is still a valuable tool
to aid in patient setup and monitoring. Another
option commercially available for surface imaging is Catalyst (C-Rad AB, Sweden). This system
comes with one and three camera installations,
depending on the Catalyst model. It uses nearinvisible violet light to scan the surface of the patient,
and it performs nonrigid registration to obtain the
translations and rotations needed to achieve overall alignment. The areas that need to be individually adjusted, such as arms, are indicated with a
projection of red and yellow lights onto the patient.
Although literature on the use of Catalyst for SRS
or SBRT is limited, this system has the potential to
have the same applicability as AlignRT.

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 90

(A)

(B)
FIGURE 7.13 Elements of frameless SRS with surface
imaging: (A) patient in the treatment position with an open
mask being monitored with the AlignRT surface imaging
system; (B) region of interest shown in gray for open-mask
patient tracking.
SRS, stereotactic radiosurgery.
Source: Reproduced with the permission of Vision RT.

PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS
There have been several publications comparing the
different delivery systems for SRS/SBRT treatments.
This section describes some of the more recent work.
The performance of the CyberKnife, Gamma
Knife Perfexion, and Novalis systems was assessed
by calculating and comparing the target coverage,
CI, GI, and beam-on time with each platform for
SRS treatments (92). Ten meningioma patients,
originally treated with CyberKnife, were replanned
using the Novalis (with IMRT or dynamic conformal arcs, at the discretion of the planner) and
Perfexion systems. All of them achieved comparable target coverage but the Gamma Knife and
CyberKnife had better CI. Of the three technologies,
the Gamma Knife also showed significantly steeper
dose falloff gradients, with CyberKnife and Novalis
being comparable. Conversely, Gamma Knife had
the longest treatment times in the group. Comparisons focusing on Gamma Knife versus linac-based
VMAT treatments are also available. Liu et al. performed a planning study on patients with three to
four brain metastases comparing the dosimetric

23/08/18 4:22 PM

7: OVERVIEW OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR SRS AND SBRT DELIVERY

parameters and treatment efficiency of Gamma
Knife Perfexion with single-isocenter noncoplanar RapidArc delivery with a TrueBeam STx (93).
Similarly to the aforementioned work, the largest
difference between the systems was the much longer treatment time of Gamma Knife (mean beam-on
time of 71.6 minutes vs. 6.4 minutes). Dosimetrically, both of them provided clinically acceptable
plans with RapidArc showing significantly better
CIs and worse GIs (see Figure 7.14). CIs were
improved for linac-based SRS in this study versus
in the work presented earlier because of the use of
noncoplanar RapidArc delivery instead of coplanar
IMRT or dynamic conformal arcs.
Gallo et al. investigated the capabilities of several different treatment platforms for spine SBRT
delivery through an end-to-end test performed with
an anthropomorphic phantom (53). The systems
included in this study were TomoTherapy (using
TomoEDGE), Vero (with coplanar IMRT beams),

(A)

(B)
FIGURE 7.14 Isodose distributions of treatment plans

for the same patient with (A) single-isocenter VMAT (RapidArc) and (B) Gamma Knife Perfexion. Isodose lines shown
are for the 24-, 20-, 16-, 12-, 6-, and 3-Gy lines.

VMAT, volumetric-modulated arc therapy.
Source: From Liu H, Andrews DW, Evans JJ, et al. Plan quality and
treatment efficiency for radiosurgery to multiple brain metastases: non-coplanar RapidArc vs. Gamma Knife. Front Oncol.
2016;6:26. doi:10.3389/fonc.2016.00026

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 91

91

TrueBeam (with flattened and FFF, and RapidArc),
and CyberKnife (with three fixed circular collimators per plan). Four targets were simulated in
the thoracic region, and four in the lumbar. Doses
were measured in the phantom using a 0.007-mL
ion chamber in the thoracic region and EBT3
Gafchromic film in the lumbar targets. All treatment
plans were designed to meet Radiation Therapy
Oncology Group (RTOG) 0631 standards, and
all ion chamber measurements were within 3.3%
of the planned dose. Gamma analysis of the film
measurements also showed consistency between
planned and delivered dose distributions across
all platforms. Although the authors state that
plan characteristics were substantially different
between systems, they did not elaborate on these.
The salient variation in the study was the beamon delivery time (see Table 7.1). The TrueBeam
had the shortest treatment delivery time with
FFF beams, whereas CyberKnife took the longest
(average of 4.4 minutes vs. 46 minutes).
A similar study by Nalichowski et al. published
the following year performed the same comparison
using the Iris collimator for CyberKnife instead of
the fixed collimators and built upon it by describing the differences between the plan characteristics
(52). The results showed that, of the four systems
investigated, RapidArc and TomoTherapy had
higher dose homogeneity in the target, and Vero
and CyberKnife displayed lower cord doses and
sharper dose falloff, with CyberKnife having the
best (see Figure 7.15). Treatment times were much
shorter with RapidArc FFF and TomoTherapy than
the rest (average 4.4 and 6 minutes, respectively),
with CyberKnife taking the longest (average of
58.1 minutes). Therefore, even though recent
advances in CyberKnife collimation devices such as
the Iris variable aperture collimator or the InCise
MLC system have had a great impact on treatment
times, these times are still much longer than with
other systems. It is important to note that with noncoplanar beam delivery for the TrueBeam and Vero
systems, the dose gradient could be improved.
Studies investigating differences between systems for SBRT treatments affected by internal
organ motion have been reported in the literature.
These include planning studies that investigated
the difference between conventional and roboticbased linacs for SBRT lung treatments (94,95). The
authors examined not only the effects of the use of
delivery platform but also how respiratory motion
is handled (Synchrony for CyberKnife, 4D CT for
conventional linacs) by the different platforms.
Their results show similar target coverage and

23/08/18 4:22 PM

92

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

TABLE 7.1 Beam-On Times for the Different Treatment Platforms Studied by Gallo et al. (53)
Plan and Delivery Time (minutes)
Treatment Machine

Treatment Region

A

B

C

D

Average

TomoTherapy

Thorax

21.1

35.3

28.8

35.3

30.1

Lumbar

24.8

20.6

27.9

40.8

28.5

Total average
delivery time
Vero

TrueBeam (flattened)

TrueBeam (FFF)

Thorax

15.0

19.5

21.1

17.2

18.2

Lumbar

16.8

24.5

21.1

17.2

19.9

Total average
delivery time

19 minutes
2 seconds

Thorax

9.6

11.1

7.6

10.2

9.6

Lumbar

11.2

9.5

7.2

9.5

9.3

Total average
delivery time

9 minutes
30 seconds

Thorax

4.3

5.5

3.5

4.1

4.3

Lumbar

4.9

4.6

3.7

4.8

4.5

Total average
delivery time
CyberKnife

29 minutes
19 seconds

4 minutes
24 seconds

Thorax

50.0

44.4

44.5

46.0

46.2

Lumbar

43.9

46.9

40.8

42.6

43.5

Total average
delivery time

45 minutes
48 seconds

FFF, flattening filter-free.
Source: Gallo JJ, Kaufman I, Powel R, et al. Single-fraction spine SBRT end-to-end testing on TomoTherapy, Vero, TrueBeam, and CyberKnife
treatment platforms using a novel anthropomorphic phantom. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2015;16(1):170–182. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v16i1.5120

FIGURE 7.15 Isodose distributions for two targets with the spinal cord shown in purple. The isodose lines shown
represent the 16.8 Gy in orange, 16 Gy in black, 14.4 Gy in green, 12 Gy in light blue, and 8 Gy in dark blue.

Source: From Nalichowski A, Kaufman I, Gallo J, et al. Single fraction radiosurgery/stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) for spine
metastasis: a dosimetric comparison of multiple delivery platforms. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2017;18(1):164–169. doi:10.1002/acm2.12022

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 92

23/08/18 4:22 PM

7: OVERVIEW OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR SRS AND SBRT DELIVERY

critical organ sparing for both systems, but with
higher treatment delivery efficiency by conventional linacs (94,95). However, because of the
inherent limitations of planning studies, the effects
of tumor motion on the dose distribution with Synchrony tracking versus 4D CT can only be inferred,
not measured, from assumptions of the accuracy
and reliability of the two methods. A different
approach was taken to compare the performance
between CyberKnife and Vero for liver SBRT treatments using their respective tracking methods. The
study published by Sothmann et al. in 2016 used a
two-dimensional (2D) detector array mounted on
a 4D platform to measure the delivery differences,
on the basis of 1%/1-mm gamma analysis, with
respect to predicted versus actual tumor trajectories, and the effects of baseline drifts (96). Both
systems performed well but the CyberKnife dose
delivery to the clinical target volume (CTV) was
more sensitive to baseline drift. This was attributed
to the more infrequent motion model updates for
CyberKnife than for Vero. Because treatment times
with CyberKnife systems have been reported to be
longer than with other systems, their sensitivity to
baseline drift could become an important factor for
treatment quality.
Just from this brief literature review, it is evident
that the performance of a delivery system, such
as quality of treatment, beam characteristics, and
beam-on time, are impacted not only by the type of
machine used for RT but also by the choice of techniques used for a given treatment and accessories
used for a given system.

Future Technology
Developments of new SRS/SBRT delivery systems are focused on image guidance improvements. When delivering high doses in one to five
fractions, it is very important to be able to clearly
visualize the target for optimal alignment during
setup and ideally during delivery for real-time
tracking. MRI has better soft-tissue contrast than
CT. The improved image quality can allow for better localization and tracking of soft-tissue tumors
surrounded by critical organs of similar density.
The challenge of integrating MRI guidance with
linac-based treatment units is the mutual interaction effects between the magnetic field of the
imager and the radiofrequency (RF) signal from
the electron accelerating system of the linac. There
are also concerns regarding the interplay of the
magnetic field on the dose distribution because of
its possible influence on secondary electrons.

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 93

93

As a result of these difficulties, some institutions
have opted for a treatment suite equipped with a
diagnostic-grade MR scanner on-rails (97). The
treatment couch in this design is modified to move
the patient 3.1 m away from isocenter for MR
scanning. Once the images have been acquired,
the MR scanner is retracted into its shielded area
and the couch is moved back to isocenter. These
images can then be used analogous to how the
CBCT images are used. Although this setup allows
for MR imaging with current linac technologies,
it requires moving the patient back and forth and
it cannot be used for tumor tracking during treatment. There are other options, both clinically available and currently under development, which truly
integrate MRI into the treatment system.
There have been ongoing efforts to develop a
MR–linac system. Despite the difficulty of combining the two technologies, great progress has already
been made. ViewRay MR–linac with 0.35-T MRI
system has already been cleared for clinical use
by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and
one other from Elekta is pending approval (98,99).
Elekta MR–linac is designed with higher magnetic field strengths (1–1.5 T) compared with the
ViewRay, to achieve diagnostic quality images with
which to guide treatment. MR–linacs are designed
to still have the capabilities to meet current treatment delivery standards with rotating gantries and
MLC for field shaping. There are currently concerns on the effects of the higher magnetic field
strengths on secondary electrons and how that
could affect dosimetry.
It is also worth noting that 4pi delivery treatments with existing linac systems are also currently being investigated. These treatments would
deliver radiation through the simultaneous rotation of gantry and couch. This has been shown to
yield more conformal dose distributions and better
organ sparing (100–103). Although this is not a
new technology, rather enabling current systems to
achieve their full potential, it shows improvements
in dose delivery distributions when compared with
current standards.

PROTONS
The rationale for using proton beams is the feasibility of delivering higher doses to the tumor while
substantially reducing the total dose to critical
structures. This physical characteristic of proton
beams—their finite range—offers some theoretical
advantages over clinical photon beams that can be

23/08/18 4:22 PM

94

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

used in both single-fraction and hypofractionated
dose delivery regimens.
The use of proton and heavier charged particle
beams for cancer treatment was promoted almost
70 years ago, when Wilson wrote his seminal paper
(104). He pointed out that the fundamental difference in beam penetration of proton and heavy
charged particles in tissue, in comparison with
photons, can be exploited to achieve normal tissue
sparing both proximal and distal to the tumor. The
first proton patient was treated in 1954 at Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) and protons were routinely used as an SRS tool at Harvard
Cyclotron Laboratory (HCL) in the 1960s (105).
Ions heavier than a proton were first used for cancer therapy in the 1970s when Tobias et al. (106)
pointed out that reduced lateral scattering of heavier
ions compared with that of protons has the distinct
advantage of sharper lateral dose gradients, which
are ideal for single-fraction and hypofractionated RT.
The use of protons and heavier charged particle beams waned with the advent of computerized
linacs because it is very easy to transform a linac
to an SRS or SBRT tool with minor modifications/
additions that include the following: better immobilization (rigid or nonrigid) of the patient during
imaging and therapy, improved mechanical accuracy of the linac, special collimation, and acquisition
of special treatment planning software. Because the
majority of radiation oncology departments already
have linacs that can be adapted to deliver SRS or
SBRT, they have become the most widely used and
cost-effective technologies for these modalities.

Technical Considerations of SingleFraction and Hypofractionated
Treatments With Protons
Sharper dose falloff both distally and laterally
between the targets and surrounding normal tissues
is essential for single-fraction and hypofractionated
regimens to succeed. Even though the physics of
heavy charged particle interactions with tissue theoretically offers superior solutions to achieve this goal
compared with photons, it can be challenging in real
clinical situations. The precision and accuracy of
both the treatment planning and the delivery of proton therapy are greatly influenced by random and systematic uncertainties associated with the delineation
of volumes of interest in 3D imaging, imaging artifacts, tissue heterogeneities, patient immobilization
and setup, interfractional and intrafractional patient
and organ motion, physiological changes, and treatment delivery. Furthermore, the locations, shapes,

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 94

and sizes of diseased tissue can change significantly
because of daily positioning uncertainties and
anatomical changes during the course of radiation
treatments. Transient intrafractional changes, such
as rectal and bladder filling status, in the treatment
of prostate cancer can also introduce uncertainties
in dose delivery. Because of these changes, the 3D
CT images used for radiation treatment planning
do not necessarily correspond to the actual position
of the anatomy at the delivery time of each treatment fraction or even to the mean treatment position. Therefore, the traditional assumption that the
anatomy discerned from 3D CT images acquired for
planning purposes is applicable for every fraction is
treated with much reservation in proton therapy.
Range uncertainties, which are attributed to
inherent uncertainties in linear stopping power
uncertainties, in the formation of broad clinical
beams and range degradation in patients can have
a profound effect on dose falloff both laterally and
distally. The factors that contribute toward range
degradation in clinical charged particle beams
include patient alignment and setup in treatment
beams and relative motion of internal structures
with respect to the target volume. Furthermore, the
influence of and compensation for heterogeneities
on dose distribution is far more critical for protons
than for photons. Heterogeneities alter the penetration and lateral scattering of charged particles
in the patient. The dosimetric impacts of these two
effects in the presence of heterogeneities in proton
beams, relative to what occurs in a homogeneous
medium, can potentially be substantial because of
the sharp dose falloff characteristics of charged
particles. Finally, CT imaging remains the de facto
standard in RT treatment planning. It provides
a spatially accurate map of a patient’s anatomy
together with quantitative tissue measurements.
Unfortunately, the theoretical relationship between
protons’ relative-linear stopping powers (RLSP)
and CT Hounsfield unit (HU) numbers is complicated and difficult to evaluate analytically with clinically acceptable accuracy. ICRU Report 78 notes
that the overall accuracy of the conversion from
HU number to water-equivalent density is of the
order of 2% to 4% (1 standard deviation) (107).

Desired Proton Beam Characteristics for
Single-Fraction and Hypofractionated
Treatments
The most essential characteristic of proton beams
for SRS and SBRT is sharp dose falloff both distally and laterally, which is determined largely by

23/08/18 4:22 PM

7: OVERVIEW OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR SRS AND SBRT DELIVERY

the quality of the individual pencil beam. The dose
distribution of the pencil beam is essentially a Bragg
peak longitudinally and Gaussian transversely. The
width of the Bragg peak is representative of the
energy spread of the protons that affects the distal
falloff, whereas the sigma () of the Gaussian gives
the spot size of the beam and affects the lateral falloff. Ideally, both of these quantities would have to be
minimized to get optimal proton beam characteristic
for SRS and SBRT. Paganetti (108) points out that
the lateral dose falloff to 50% of the prescribed dose
is approximately 0.85. Therefore, a desirable  of
clinical proton beam is of the order of 3 mm.

Patient Selection for Single-Fraction and
Hypofractionated Treatments With Proton
Beams
Although protons allow for the control of dose
deposition along and laterally across the beam,
the potential of dose uncertainties in proton therapy can be quite large. Therefore, use of proton
beams for single-fraction and hypofractionated
treatments should be limited to those patients
who would potentially benefit from this modality. Proton therapy is an ideal option for patients
whose dose to normal tissue and/or organs at risk
that surround the target volume poses a problem.
Examples include spinal cord irradiation in pediatric patients and skull-based tumors that are close
to sensitive normal tissues, such as the brainstem
and optical chiasm. On the contrary, proton therapy is not optimal if there are large heterogeneities
in the beam’s path, great potential for uncertainties
in patient positioning and intrafractional internal
organ motion, or significant possibility of physiological changes throughout treatment. Therefore,
all potential candidates for proton therapy must
be carefully screened and evaluated using relevant
imaging studies that establish the clinical appropriateness of this treatment modality.

Summary
The rationale for the use of proton beams in SRS
and SBRT, which is based on their ability to provide uniform dose to the target while substantially
sparing the dose to normal tissues, is very compelling. This rationale is simply a consequence of the
physical characteristics of energy loss by protons
as they penetrate into matter. Protons have a finite
depth of penetration in material; the magnitude of
this penetration depends on the protons’ energy
and the density of the irradiated material. This

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 95

95

distinct advantage can turn into a double-edged
sword if adequate consideration is not given to the
potential sources of uncertainties in proton therapy. One must recognize that uncertainties are
an inevitable part of the planning and delivery of
any RT technique. In this regard, protons are no
different from RT delivered with photons; however, the impact of these uncertainties is much
more profound in proton therapy. For example,
patient-positioning error, patient motion, misalignment of beam modifiers, changes in tissue characteristics, and dosimetric errors in planning and
delivery can result in a dose that is very different
from what is planned for the patient. Therefore,
a comprehensive analysis of potential sources of
uncertainty for each patient should be made by
evaluating their 3D/4D imaging data and clinical
disposition before they are considered for treatment with proton therapy.

CONCLUSIONS
Several different treatment delivery systems for
SRS and SBRT have been presented here. Table 7.2
summarizes their characteristics. Although this
chapter does not encompass all the systems currently in the market, it provides the reader with
a thorough overview of the more commonly available options, future developments, and ancillary
equipment used for setup and monitoring of the
patient. As seen throughout the text, each platform
has its unique characteristics, but all with the common goal of delivering highly accurate and precise
treatments through tight mechanical tolerances,
stable outputs, and image guidance. This chapter shows that no one treatment platform has all
the ideal characteristics; when several options are
available for treatment, a decision on the basis of
the relative importance of factors such as treatment
time length versus dose gradient for the patient in
question has to be made.
It is also important to note that although a good
delivery system is a very crucial part of ensuring the
success of SRS/SBRT treatments, it is only one step
in the chain. Understanding the intricacies and challenges of small-field dosimetry during machine commissioning is one of the most important factors for
accurate dose calculations. A successful SRS/SBRT
program will also need reliable and well-thought-out
protocols, careful patient selection on the basis of
the technology available for treatment, appropriate treatment planning tools and algorithms, and a
well-designed quality management program.

23/08/18 4:22 PM

96

Gamma-Ray–Based Systems

Model C

Linear Accelerator–Based Systems
Varian
Novalis Tx

Varian
Elekta
TrueBeam
STx and Edge Synergy S

Elekta
Versa HD
Intracranial or
extracranial

Vero

Tomotherapy CyberKnife

Extracranial

Intracranial or
extracranial

Intracranial
or extracranial

SRS/SRT
SBRT

SRS/SRT
SBRT

Stereoscopic
kV, CBCT,
planar MV

Yes—MVCT

Orthogonal
kV

kV imaging

IR markers +
stereoscopic
kV imaging

No

LED
markers +
orthogonal
kV imaging

100 cm

100 cm

100 cm

85 cm

80 cm

Standard:
40×40 cm2;
BM: 16×21
cm2

Agility: 40×40 Maximum:
cm2
15×15 cm2

Maximum:
1, 2.5, or 5 ×
40 cm2 at
isocenter

Circular
collimators: 5, 7.5,
10, 12.5,
15, 20, 25,
30, 35, 40,
50, and 60
mm; MLC
maximum:
11.5 
10 cm2

Perfexion

Icon

Treatment Intracranial
site

Intracranial

Intracranial

Intracranial or
extracranial

Intracranial or
extracranial

Treatment SRS
type

SRS/SRT

SRS/SRT

SRS/SRT SBRT

SRS/SRT SBRT SRS/SRT SBRT SRS/SRT SBRT SBRT (SRS
being
investigated)

Immobilization

Frame (head
pins or dental
fixation with
Extend)

Frameless—
thermoplastic mask, or
framed

On-board No
imaging

No

Yes—CBCT (not Planar kV, CBCT, Planar
at isocenter)
planar MV
kV, CBCT,
planar MV

Planar
kV, CBCT,
planar MV

Planar
kV, CBCT,
planar MV

Motion
tracking

No

No

IR markers

ExacTrac

Surface
imaging

kV imaging

Source
to axis
distance

40 cm

Variable:
37.4–43.3 cm

Variable:
37.4–43.3 cm

100 cm

100 cm

Field sizes 4, 8, 14, 18 mm

4, 8, 16 mm

4, 8, 16 mm

Circular collimators: 4, 5, 7.5,
10, 12.5, 15,
17.5 mm; m3:
10.2×10 cm2

Circular collimators: 4, 5,
7.5, 10, 12.5,
15, 17.5 mm;
HDMLC:
40×22 cm2

Frame (head pins)

Intracranial or
extracranial

(continued)

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 96

TABLE 7.2 Summary of Select Treatment Delivery Systems Used for Stereotactic Radiosurgery and Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy

23/08/18 4:22 PM

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 97

TABLE 7.2 Summary of Select Treatment Delivery Systems Used for Stereotactic Radiosurgery and Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy (continued)
Gamma-Ray–Based Systems

Field
shaping

Varian
TrueBeam
Elekta
STx and Edge Synergy S

Tomotherapy CyberKnife

Fixed circular
collimators,
multileaf
collimator

Multileaf
collimator

Binary
multileaf
collimator

Standard:
10 mm; BM:
4 mm

Agility: 5 mm

5 mm width at 6.25 mm
SAD
width at SAD

Standard
couch:
translates and
yaws; 6-DOF
couch: translations and
three rotations

Standard
couch:
translates and
yaws; 6-DOF
couch: translations and
three rotations

Couch
translates,
pitch + roll
(no yaw)

Couch
translates

Standard
couch: It
has 5 DOF.
Robotic
couch: It
has 6 DOF

<1 mm
≤0.75 mm
radius (gantry,
collimator,
couch isocentricity per
vendor)

0.5, 0.35,
0.35 mm
radius for
gantry, collimator, couch,
respectively
(Narayanasamy
2016 [35])

0.5 mm
isocenter
accuracy per
vendor

<0.4 mm
mechanical
isocenter
stability per
vendor

0.29  0.1
mm
(Antypas
[44])

600 MU/min
FF: 600 MU/
min;
6MV FFF:
1,400 MU/min;
10MV FFF:
24,000 MU/min

FF: 600 MU/min; 500 MU/min
6MV FFF:
1,400 MU/min;
10MV FFF:
24,000 MU/min

850 MU/min

1,000 MU/
min

Icon

Circular
collimators

Circular
collimator

Circular
collimator

Fixed circular
collimators,
multileaf
collimator

Fixed circular
collimators,
multileaf
collimator

Fixed circular
collimators,
multileaf
collimator

Noncombinable

Combinable

Combinable

m3 MLC: 3, 4.5,
5.5 mm

HDMLC: 2.5,
5 mm

Automatic

Automatic

Standard couch:
translates and
yaws; 6-DOF
couch: translations and three
rotations

Standard
couch:
translates and
yaws; 6-DOF
couch: translations and
three rotations

0.2 mm (CBCT
and Treatment
isocenter
coincidence)

≤0.75 mm
radius (gantry,
collimator,
couch
isocentricity
per vendor)

Standard
beams: 600
MU/min, 6 MV.
SRS: 1,000 MU/
min

0.3 mm (mechanical <0.05 mm
accuracy)

Varies with source strength ~300 cGy/min
(Lee 2015 [109])

Elekta
Versa HD

Vero

Perfexion

Fixed
circular
collimators,
variable
aperture
collimator (Iris),
multileaf
collimator
(InCise)
MLC:
3.85 mm
width at
SAD

BM, beam modulator; CBCT, cone-beam CT; DOF, degrees of freedom; HDMLC, high-definition multileaf collimator; IR, infrared; LED, light-emitting diode; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy; SRS,
stereotactic radiosurgery; SRT, stereotactic radiotherapy.

7: OVERVIEW OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR SRS AND SBRT DELIVERY

Maximum
dose rate

Varian
Novalis Tx

Model C

Patient
Manual/automatic
positioning (limited range of
motion)

Positioning
accuracy

Linear Accelerator–Based Systems

97

23/08/18 4:22 PM

98

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

REFERENCES
1. Solberg TD, Siddon RL, Kavanagh B. Historical development
of stereotactic ablative radiotherapy. In: Lo SS, The BS, Lu JJ,
et al, eds. Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer; 2012:9-35.
2. Benedict SH, Bova FJ, Clark B, et al. Anniversary paper: the role
of medical physicists in developing stereotactic radiosurgery.
Med Phys. 2008;35(9):4262-4277. doi:10.1118/1.2969268
3. Goetsch SJ. Risk analysis of Leksell Gamma Knife Model C
with automatic positioning system. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2002;52(3):869-877. PubMed PMID: 11849813.
4. Bhatnagar JP, Novotny J, Niranjan A, et al. First year
experience with newly developed Leksell Gamma
Knife® Perfexion™. J Med Phys. 2009;34(3):141-148.
doi:10.4103/0971-6203.54848
5. Lindquist C, Paddick I. The Leksell Gamma Knife Perfexion and comparisons with its predecessors. Neurosurgery.
2007;61(3 suppl):130-140, discussion. doi:10.1227/01.
neu.0000289726.35330.8a
6. Novotny Jr J, Bhatnagar JP, Xu Y, et al. Long-term stability
of the Leksell Gamma Knife® Perfexion™ patient positioning system (PPS). Med Phys. 2014;41(3):031711.
doi:10.1118/1.4866225
7. Schlesinger D, Xu Z, Taylor F, et al. Interfraction and intrafraction performance of the Gamma Knife Extend system
for patient positioning and immobilization. J Neurosurg.
2012;117(suppl):217-224. doi:10.3171/2012.6.GKS12989
8. Devriendt D, De Smedt F, Glineur R, et al. Fivefraction Gamma Knife radiosurgery using the Extend relocatable system for benign neoplasms close to optic pathways.
Pract Radiat Oncol. 2015;5(3):e119-e125. doi:10.1016/
j.prro.2014.08.021
9. Kim T, Sheehan J, Schlesinger D. Inter- and intrafractional dose uncertainty in hypofractionated Gamma Knife
radiosurgery. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2016;17(2):487-496.
doi:10.1120/jacmp.v17i2.5851
10. Ruschin M, Nayebi N, Carlsson P, et al. Performance of a
novel repositioning head frame for gamma knife perfexion
and image-guided linac-based intracranial stereotactic radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;78(1):306-313.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.11.001
11. Meeks SL, Pukala J, Ramakrishna N, et al. Radiosurgery
technology development and use. J Radiosurg SBRT. 2011;1:
21-29. PubMed PMID: 29296294.
12. Zeverino M, Jaccard M, Patin D, et al. Commissioning of
the Leksell Gamma Knife® Icon™. Med Phys. 2017;44(2):
355-363. doi:10.1002/mp.12052
13. Hyperarc: High-definition radiotherapy. Varian Medical
Systems; 2016. https://www.varian.com/sites/default/files/
resource_attachments/HyperArcBriefOverview_RAD10424_
September2016.pdf
14. Sharma SD, Kumar S, Dagaonkar SS, et al. Dosimetric
comparison of linear accelerator-based stereotactic radiosurgery systems. J Med Phys. 2007;32(1):18-23. doi:10.4103/
0971-6203.31145
15. Fan J, Paskalev K, Wang L, et al. Determination of output factors for stereotactic radiosurgery beams. Med Phys.
2009;36(11):5292-5300. doi:10.1118/1.3232217
16. Akimoto M, Nakamura M, Mukumoto N, et al. Baseline correction of a correlation model for improving the prediction accuracy
of infrared marker-based dynamic tumor tracking. J Appl Clin
Med Phys. 2015;16(2):14-22. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v16i2.4896
17. Intracranial SRS Package. Varian Medical Systems; 2014. https://
www.varian.com/sites/default/files/resource_attachments/
SRSProductBrief_RAD10330_April2014_0.pdf

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 98

18. Tipton KN, Sullivan N, Bruening W, et al. Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy [Internet]. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality; 2011. Report No.: 10(11)-EHC058-EF.
19. Marrazzo L, Zani M, Pallotta S, et al. Comparison of stereotactic plans for brain tumors with two different multileaf
collimating systems. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2014;15(1):
27-37. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v15i1.4100
20. Fischer M, Todorovic M, Drud E, et al. Commissioning of
a double-focused micro multileaf collimator (µMLC). J Appl
Clin Med Phys. 2010;11(2):81-91. doi:10.1120/jacmp.
v11i2.3131
21. Cosgrove VP, Jahn U, Pfaender M, et al. Commissioning of a
micro multi-leaf collimator and planning system for stereotactic radiosurgery. Radiother Oncol. 1999;50(3):325-336.
PubMed PMID: 10392819.
22. García-Garduño OA, Celis MA, Lárraga-Gutiérrez JM, et al.
Radiation transmission, leakage and beam penumbra measurements of a micro-multileaf collimator using GafChromic
EBT film. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2008;9(3):2802. PubMed
PMID: 18716595.
23. Kim J, Wen N, Jin JY, et al. Clinical commissioning and use of
the Novalis Tx linear accelerator for SRS and SBRT. J Appl
Clin Med Phys. 2012;13(3):124-151. doi:10.1120/jacmp.
v13i3.3729
24. Trilogy System: Powerful Technology at Work in Clinics
Around the World Specifications. Varian Medical Systems;
2014.
25. Sharma DS, Dongre PM, Mhatre V, Heigrujam M. Physical
and dosimetric characteristic of high-definition multileaf collimator (HDMLC) for SRS and IMRT. J Appl Clin Med Phys.
2011;12(3):3475. PubMed PMID: 21844860.
26. Ouzidane M, Evans J, Djemil T. Dedicated linear accelerators for stereotactic radiation therapy. In: Benedict SH,
Schlesinger DJ, Goetsch SJ, et al, eds. Stereotactic Radiosurgery and Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy. Boca Raton,
FL: CRC Press; 2014:67-90.
27. TrueBeam STx System Specifications. Varian Medical Systems;
2015. https://varian.force.com/servlet/servlet.FileDownload?
retURL=%2Fapex%2FCpEventPresList%3Fid%
3Da0OE000000pZaMdMAK&file=00PE000000VdZ5OMAV
28. Edge Radiosurgery System Specifications. Varian Medical
Systems; 2014. https://varian.force.com/servlet/servlet.File
Download?retURL=%2Fapex%2FCpEventPresList%3Fid%
3Da0OE000000pZaMdMAK&file=00PE000000VdYjIMAV
29. Patel I, Glendinning AG, Kirby MC. Dosimetric characteristics of the Elekta Beam Modulator™. Phys Med Biol.
2005;50(23):5479. doi:10.1088/0031-9155/50/23/004
30. Wang S, Gong Y, Xu Q, et al. Impacts of multileaf collimators
leaf width on intensity-modulated radiotherapy planning for
nasopharyngeal carcinoma: analysis of two commercial elekta
devices. Med Dosim. 2011;36(2):153-159. doi:10.1016/
j.meddos.2010.02.007
31. Podder TK, Bednarz G, Yu Y, et al. Physical characterization and comparison of two commercially available
micro-MLCs. Phys Med. 2011;27(1):52-57. doi:10.1016/
j.ejmp.2010.01.005
32. Thompson CM, Weston SJ, Cosgrove VC, et al. A dosimetric
characterization of a novel linear accelerator collimator. Med
Phys. 2014:41(3):031713. doi:10.1118/1.4866228
33. Bedford JL, Thomas MDR, Smyth G. Beam modeling and
VMAT performance with the agility 160-leaf multileaf
collimator. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2013;14(2):172-185.
doi:10.1120/jacmp.v14i2.4136
34. Fast MF, Nill S, Bedford JL, et al. Dynamic tumor tracking
using the Elekta Agility MLC. Med Phys. 2014;41(11):111719.
doi:10.1118/1.4899175

23/08/18 4:22 PM

7: OVERVIEW OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR SRS AND SBRT DELIVERY
35. Narayanasamy G, Saenz D, Cruz W, et al. Commissioning an
Elekta Versa HD linear accelerator. J Appl Clin Med Phys.
2016;17(1):179-191. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v17i1.5799
36. Hansen CR, Bertelsen A, Riis HL, et al. Plan quality and
delivery accuracy of flattening filter free beam for SBRT lung
treatments. Acta Oncol. 2015;54(3):422-427. doi:10.3109/0
284186X.2014.956184
37. Hara W, Soltys SG, Gibbs IC. CyberKnife® robotic radiosurgery system for tumor treatment. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther.
2007;7(11):1507-1515. doi:10.1586/14737140.7.11.1507
38. Dieterich S, Cavedon C, Chuang CF, et al. Report of AAPM
TG 135: quality assurance for robotic radiosurgery. Med
Phys. 2011;38(6):2914-2936. doi:10.1118/1.3579139
39. Jang SY, Lalonde R, Ozhasoglu C, et al. Dosimetric comparison between cone/Iris-based and InCise MLC-based
CyberKnife plans for single and multiple brain metastases.
J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2016;17(5):184-199. doi:10.1120/
jacmp.v17i5.6260
40. Collins SP, Coppa ND, Zhang Y, et al. CyberKnife® radiosurgery in the treatment of complex skull base tumors: analysis of
treatment planning parameters. Radiat Oncol. 2006;1(1):46.
doi:10.1186/1748-717X-1-46
41. Accuray. CyberKnife Treatment Delivery System: Technical
Specifications. 2018. Available at: https://www.accuray.com/
wp-content/uploads/CK-M6-Brochure-Spec-EN-MKTCK-0317-0283.pdf
42. Fürweger C, Drexler C, Kufeld M, et al. Patient motion
and targeting accuracy in robotic spinal radiosurgery:
260 single-fraction fiducial-free cases. Int J Radiat Oncology Biology Physics. 2010;78(3):937-945. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2009.11.030
43. Kilby W, Dooley JR, Kuduvalli G, et al. The CyberKnife®
Robotic radiosurgery system in 2010. Technol Cancer Res Treat.
2010;9(5):433-452. doi:10.1177/153303461000900502
44. Antypas C, Pantelis E. Performance evaluation of a
CyberKnife G4 image-guided robotic stereotactic radiosurgery system. Phys Med Biol. 2008;53(17):4697-4718.
doi:10.1088/0031-9155/53/17/016
45. Fürweger C, Drexler C, Kufeld M, et al. Advances in
fiducial-free image-guidance for spinal radiosurgery with
CyberKnife—a phantom study. J Appl Clin Med Phys.
2010;12(2):3446. PubMed PMID: 21587167.
46. Ho AK, Fu D, Cotrutz C, et al. A study of the accuracy of
cyberknife spinal radiosurgery using skeletal structure tracking. Neurosurgery. 2007;60(2 suppl 1):ONS147-ONS156,
discussion. doi:10.1227/01.NEU.0000249248.55923.EC
47. Nuyttens JJ, van de Pol M. The CyberKnife radiosurgery
system for lung cancer. Expert Rev Med Devices. 2012;
9(5):465-475. doi:10.1586/erd.12.35
48. Hoogeman M, Prévost JB, Nuyttens J, et al. Clinical accuracy
of the respiratory tumor tracking system of the cyberknife:
assessment by analysis of log files. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys . 2009 ; 74 ( 1 ): 297 - 303 . doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.
12.041
49. Winter JD, Wong R, Swaminath A, et al. Accuracy of robotic
radiosurgical liver treatment throughout the respiratory
cycle. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015;93(4):916-924.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.08.031
50. Kathriarachchi V, Shang C, Evans G, et al. Dosimetric and
radiobiological comparison of CyberKnife M6™ InCise
multileaf collimator over IRIS™ variable collimator in
prostate stereotactic body radiation therapy. J Med Phys.
2016;41(2):135-143. doi:10.4103/0971-6203.181638
51. Jang SY, Lalonde R, Ozhasoglu C, et al. Dosimetric comparison between cone/Iris-based and InCise MLC-based
CyberKnife plans for single and multiple brain metastases.

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 99

99

J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2016;17(5):184-199. doi:10.1120/
jacmp.v17i5.6260
52. Nalichowski A, Kaufman I, Gallo J, et al. Single fraction
radiosurgery/stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) for
spine metastasis: a dosimetric comparison of multiple delivery platforms. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2017;18(1):164-169.
doi:10.1002/acm2.12022
53. Gallo JJ, Kaufman I, Powel R, et al. Single-fraction spine
SBRT end-to-end testing on TomoTherapy, Vero, TrueBeam,
and CyberKnife treatment platforms using a novel anthropomorphic phantom. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2015;16(1):
170-182. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v16i1.5120
54. Jeraj R, Mackie TR, Balog J, et al. Radiation characteristics
of helical tomotherapy. Med Phys. 2004;31(2):396-404.
doi:10.1118/1.1639148
55. Langen KM, Papanikolaou N, Balog J, et al. QA for helical
tomotherapy: report of the AAPM Task Group 148. Med
Phys. 2010;37(9):4817-4853. doi:10.1118/1.3462971
56. Accuray. TomoTherapy H Series: TomoH, TomoHD and
TomoHDA Systems Technical Specifications. 2017. Available
at: https://www.accuray.com/wp-content/uploads/501067.
a_tt_h-series-specbro.pdf
57. Broggi S, Cattaneo GM, Molinelli S, et al. Results of a
two-year quality control program for a helical tomotherapy
unit. Radiother Oncol. 2008;86(2):231-241. doi:10.1016/
j.radonc.2007.11.005
58. Balog J, Soisson E. Helical tomotherapy quality assurance.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008;71(1 suppl):S113-S117.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.10.001
59. Murai T, Shibamoto Y, Manabe Y, et al. Intensity-modulated
radiation therapy using static ports of tomotherapy (Tomo
Direct): comparison with the TomoHelical mode. Radiat
Oncol. 2013;8:68. doi:10.1186/1748-717X-8-68
60. Langen KM, Pouliot J, Anezinos C, et al. Evaluation of ultrasound based prostate localization for image-guided radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2003;57:635-644. PubMed
PMID: 14529767.
61. Westerly DC, Schefter TE, Kavanagh BD, et al. High-dose
MVCT image guidance for stereotactic body radiation therapy.
Med Phys. 2012;39(8):4812-4819. doi:10.1118/1.4736416
62. Holmes TW, Hudes R, Dziuba S, et al. Stereotactic imageguided intensity modulated radiotherapy using the HI-ART II
helical tomotherapy system. Med Dosim. 2008;33(2):
135-148. doi:10.1016/j.meddos.2008.02.006
63. Martin S, Yartsev S. KVCT, MVCT, and hybrid CT image
studies—treatment planning and dose delivery equivalence
on helical tomotherapy. Med Phys. 2010;37(6):2847-2854.
doi:10.1118/1.3432566
64. Katayama S, Haefner MF, Mohr A, et al. Accelerated tomotherapy delivery with TomoEdge technique. J Appl Clin Med
Phys. 2015;16(2):33-42. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v16i2.4964
65. Sterzing F, Uhl M, Hauswald H, et al. Dynamic jaws
and dynamic couch in helical tomotherapy. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;76(4):1266-1273. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2009.07.1686
66. Staton RJ, Langen KM, Kupelian PA, et al. Dosimetric
effects of rotational output variation and x-ray target degradation on helical tomotherapy plans. Med Phys. 2009;36(7):
2881-2888. doi:10.1118/1.3134262
67. Moutrie ZR, Lancaster CM, Yu L. First experiences in using a
dose control system on a tomotherapy Hi·Art II. J Appl Clin Med
Phys. 2015;16(3):277-284. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v16i3.5489
68. Soisson ET, Hoban PW, Kammeyer T, et al. A technique for
stereotactic radiosurgery treatment planning with helical
tomotherapy. Med Dosim. 2011;36(1):46-56. doi:10.1016/
j.meddos.2009.11.003

23/08/18 4:22 PM

100

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

69. Hodge W, Tomé WA, Jaradat HA, et al. Feasibility report
of image guided stereotactic body radiotherapy (IG-SBRT)
with tomotherapy for early stage medically inoperable
lung cancer using extreme hypofractionation. Acta Oncol.
2006;45(7):890-896. doi:10.1080/02841860600907329
70. Nakamura M, Sawada A, Ishihara Y, et al. Dosimetric characterization of a multileaf collimator for a new four-dimensional
image-guided radiotherapy system with a gimbaled x-ray
head, MHI-TM2000. Med Phys. 2010;37(9):4684-4691.
doi:10.1118/1.3480510
71. Depuydt T, Penne R, Verellen D, et al. Computer-aided analysis of star shot films for high-accuracy radiation therapy
treatment units. Phys Med Biol. 2012;57(10):2997-3011.
doi:10.1088/0031-9155/57/10/2997
72. Denton TR, Shields LB, Howe JN, et al. Quantifying isocenter
measurements to establish clinically meaningful thresholds.
J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2015;16(2):175-188. doi:10.1120/
jacmp.v16i2.5183
73. Solberg TD, Medin PM, Ramirez E, et al. Commissioning and
initial stereotactic ablative radiotherapy experience with Vero.
J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2014;15(2):205-225. doi:10.1120/
jacmp.v15i2.4685
74. Ebe K, Sugimoto S, Utsunomiya S, et al. Development of a
video image-based QA system for the positional accuracy of
dynamic tumor tracking irradiation in the Vero4DRT system.
Med Phys. 2015;42(8):4745-4754. doi:10.1118/1.4926779
75. Depuydt T, Poels K, Verellen D, et al. Initial assessment
of tumor tracking with a gimbaled linac system in clinical
circumstances: a patient simulation study. Radiother Oncol.
2013;106(2):236-240. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2012.12.015
76. Akimoto M, Nakamura M, Mukumoto N, et al. Predictive uncertainty in infrared marker-based dynamic tumor
tracking with Vero4DRT. Med Phys. 2013;40(9):091705.
doi:10.1118/1.4817236
77. Burghelea M, Verellen D, Poels K, et al. Initial characterization, dosimetric benchmark and performance validation of
Dynamic Wave Arc. Radiat Oncol. 2016;11:63. doi:10.1186/
s13014-016-0633-7
78. Burghelea M, Verellen D, Poels K, et al. Geometric verification of dynamic wave arc delivery with the Vero system using orthogonal X-ray fluoroscopic imaging. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015;92(4):754-761. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2015.02.053
79. Burghelea M, Verellen D, Dhont J, et al. Treating patients with
Dynamic Wave Arc: first clinical experience. Radiother Oncol.
2017;122(3):347-351. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2017.01.006
80. Burghelea M, Verellen D, Gevaert T, et al. Feasibility of using
the Vero SBRT system for intracranial SRS. J Appl Clin Med
Phys. 2014;15(1):90-99. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v15i1.4437
81. Mutic S, Dempsey JF. The ViewRay system: magnetic
resonance-guided and controlled radiotherapy. Semin
Radiat Oncol. 2014;24(3):196-199. doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.
2014.02.008
82. Kishan AU, Cao M, Wang PC, et al. Feasibility of magnetic
resonance imaging-guided liver stereotactic body radiation
therapy: a comparison between modulated tri-cobalt-60 teletherapy and linear accelerator-based intensity modulated
radiation therapy. Pract Radiat Oncol. 2015;5(5):330-337.
doi:10.1016/j.prro.2015.02.014
83. Merna C, Rwigema JC, Cao M, et al. A treatment planning
comparison between modulated tri-cobalt-60 teletherapy and
linear accelerator-based stereotactic body radiotherapy for
central early-stage non-small cell lung cancer. Med Dosim.
2016;41(1):87-91. doi:10.1016/j.meddos.2015.09.002
84. Park JM, Park SY, Kim HJ, et al. A comparative planning
study for lung SABR between tri-Co-60 magnetic resonance

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 100

image guided radiation therapy system and volumetric modulated arc therapy. Radiother Oncol. 2016;120(2):279-285.
doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2016.06.013
85. Gevaert T, Verellen D, Tournel K, et al. Setup accuracy of
the Novalis ExacTrac 6DOF system for frameless radiosurgery. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;82(5):1627-1635.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.01.052
86. Ackerly T, Lancaster CM, Geso M, et al. Clinical accuracy
of ExacTrac intracranial frameless stereotactic system. Med
Phys. 2011;38(9):5040-5048. doi:10.1118/1.3611044
87. Jin H, Keeling VP, Ali I, et al. Dosimetric effects of positioning shifts using 6D-frameless stereotactic Brainlab system in hypofractionated intracranial radiotherapy. J Appl
Clin Med Phys. 2016;17(1):102-111. doi:10.1120/jacmp.
v17i1.5682
88. Yuen Kan Ngar D, Lok-Man Cheung M, Koon-Ming Kam M,
et al. A novel compound 6D-offset simulating phantom and
quality assurance program for stereotactic image-guided
radiation therapy system. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2014;14(6):
100-116. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v14i6.4297
89. Cerviño LI, Detorie N, Taylor M, et al. Initial clinical experience with a frameless and maskless stereotactic radiosurgery
treatment. Pract Radiat Oncol. 2012;2(1):54-62. doi:10.1016/
j.prro.2011.04.005
90. Pan H, Cerviño LI, Pawlicki T, et al. Frameless, real-time, surface imaging-guided radiosurgery: clinical outcomes for brain
metastases. Neurosurgery. 2012;71(4):844-851. doi:10.1227/
NEU.0b013e3182647ad5
91. Lau SK, Patel K, Kim T, et al. Clinical efficacy and safety of
surface imaging guided radiosurgery (SIG-RS) in the treatment of benign skull base tumors. J Neurooncol. 2017;132(2):
307-312. doi:10.1007/s11060-017-2370-7
92. Kaul D, Badakhshi H, Gevaert T, et al. Dosimetric comparison of different treatment modalities for stereotactic radiosurgery of meningioma. Acta Neurochir (Wien). 2015;157(4):
559-564. doi:10.1007/s00701-014-2272-9
93. Liu H, Li J, Pappas E, et al. Dosimetric validation for
an automatic brain metastases planning software using
single-isocenter dynamic conformal arcs. J Appl Clin
Med Phys. 2016;17(5):142-156 . doi:10.1120/jacmp.
v17i5.6320
94. Ding C, Chang CH, Haslam J, et al. A dosimetric comparison of stereotactic body radiation therapy techniques for
lung cancer: robotic versus conventional linac-based systems.
J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2010;11(3):3223. PubMed PMID:
20717090.
95. Chan MK, Kwong DL, Law GM, et al. Dosimetric evaluation of four-dimensional dose distributions of CyberKnife
and volumetric-modulated arc radiotherapy in stereotactic
body lung radiotherapy. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2013;14(4):
136-149. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v14i4.4229
96. Sothmann T, Blanck O, Poels K, et al. Real time tracking
in liver SBRT: comparison of CyberKnife and Vero by planning structure-based -evaluation and dose-area-histograms.
Phys Med Biol. 2016;61(4):1677-1691. doi:10.1088/00319155/61/4/1677
97. Jaffray DA, Carlone MC, Milosevic MF, et al. A facility for magnetic resonance–guided radiation therapy.
Semin Radiat Oncol. 2014;24(3):193-195. doi:10.1016/
j.semradonc.2014.02.012
98. Lagendijk JJ, Raaymakers BW, van Vulpen M. The magnetic resonance imaging-linac system. Semin Radiat Oncol.
2014;24(3):207-209. doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.2014.02.009
99. Keall PJ, Barton M, Crozier S. The Australian magnetic
resonance imaging-linac program. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2014;
24(3):203-206. doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.2014.02.015

23/08/18 4:22 PM

7: OVERVIEW OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR SRS AND SBRT DELIVERY
100. Dong P, Lee P, Ruan D, et al. 4 noncoplanar stereotactic
body radiation therapy for centrally located or larger lung
tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013;86(3):407-413.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.02.002
101. Dong P, Lee P, Ruan D, et al. 4 non-coplanar liver SBRT:
a novel delivery technique. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2013;85(5):1360-1366. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2012.09.028
102. Woods K, Nguyen D, Tran A, et al. Viability of non-coplanar
VMAT for liver SBRT as compared to coplanar VMAT and
beam orientation optimized 4ϖ IMRT. Adv Radiat Oncol.
2016;1(1):67-75. doi:10.1016/j.adro.2015.12.004
103. Smyth G, Bamber JC, Evans PM, et al. Trajectory optimization for dynamic couch rotation during volumetric modulated
arc radiotherapy. Phys Med Biol. 2013;58(22):8163-8177.
doi:10.1088/0031-9155/58/22/8163
104. Wilson RR. Radiological use of fast protons. Radiology.
1946;47(5):487-491. doi:10.1148/47.5.487

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 101

101

105. Kjellberg RN. Radiation therapy. Science. 1972;176
(4039):1071. doi:10.1126/science.176.4039.1071
106. Tobias CA, Lyman JT, Chatterjee A, et al. Radiological physics characteristics of the extracted heavy ion beams of the
bevatron. Science. 1971;174(4014):1131-1134. PubMed
PMID: 5133730.
107. Kanagaki B, Read PW, Molloy JA, et al. A motion phantom study on helical tomotherapy: the dosimetric impacts of
delivery technique and motion. Phys Med Biol. 2007;52(1):
243-255. doi:10.1088/0031-9155/52/1/016
108. Paganetti H, ed. Proton Therapy Physics. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press; 2012.
109. Lee JY, Sandhu S, Miller D, et al. Higher dose rate Gamma
Knife radiosurgery may provide earlier and longerlasting pain relief for patients with trigeminal neuralgia.
J Neurosurg. 2015;123(4):961-968. doi:10.3171/2014.12.
JNS142013

23/08/18 4:22 PM

Heron_68566_PTR_07_73-102_08-23-18.indd 102

23/08/18 4:22 PM

C H A P T E R

8

Quality Management
Ning Wen, Karen Chin Snyder, Brett Miller, and Indrin J. Chetty

The good practice of a robust quality management
(QM) program involves not only the science but
also the art of dealing with a variety and complexity of human conditions. The American Association of Physicists in Medicine (AAPM) Task Group
100 (TG-100) provides guidelines to develop a
system-based QM program that can produce consistent improved outcomes for treatment processes.
Significant effort is required to move from a traditional quality assurance (QA) program that focuses
on the machine performance characteristics to a
prospective risk-analysis-based QM program to
achieve the desired quality across all activities in
the workflow. Even with sufficient QA procedures
in place, external audits can identify inconsistencies and systematic errors in an institution’s workflow (1). It is essential to develop a robust QM
program for stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) and
stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) programs because such treatments require a high level
of accuracy and precision compared with conventional three-dimensional (3D) or intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) treatments. The
development and implementation of a good QM
program can enable us to treat the patient in the
safest possible manner ensuring the best possible
outcomes, while conforming to national standards,
such that errors are minimized. In essence, quality
and safety are two sides of the same coin. Spending
time to develop a quality program will provide for
a safer environment for patient care.
Policies and procedure manuals are required by
The Joint Commission (TJC), formerly the Joint

Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations (JCAHO). These policies and procedures provide a good guideline to ensure the
entire QM team understands the workflow and
individual responsibilities. The policies and procedures should include information that extends
outside traditional machine QA and are not limited to treatment procedures, treatment planning,
or radiation safety. They should be reviewed annually by a QM committee to ensure that procedures
remain current and relevant. Documentation of the
traditional device-centric QA performed is used to
show that the devices are within specifications to
treat patients safely. Many institutions are moving
to a paperless environment, using databases and/
or Excel sheets to collect data. With large databases, data can be plotted and tracked to resolve
any trends. Proper training and documentation
of the training of personnel performing the QA
is required to ensure high-quality work from the
QA team. After an initial training period, trainees should undertake competency tests to ensure
that they can perform a given task independently.
Competencies should be designed to cover each
portion of the QM program and be repeated at
predetermined intervals.
This chapter discusses the methodologies for
establishing a risk-based QM program and the
technical specifications of treatment platform QA.
The QM of the entire clinical process needs a sound
multidisciplinary approach with close cooperation among all the team members and continuous
process analysis and reevaluation. The QM of an
103

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 103

21/08/18 2:09 PM

104

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

SRS/SBRT system must guarantee that the imaging
system, the treatment planning system (TPS), and
the treatment delivery systems are functioning
within the specifications. A complete end-to-end
(E2E) verification of the system is important to
ensure that no errors are propagated from commissioning throughout the workflow.

RISK-BASED QUALITY MANAGEMENT
PROGRAM
In 2016, the AAPM released TG-100 report:
Application of risk analysis methods to radiation
therapy quality management (2). This highly anticipated document provided physicists working in
radiation oncology guidance on how to establish
a QM program in a systematic way on the basis of
prospective approaches to risk analysis of clinical
processes.
The differences between the AAPM TG-100
report and others are not trivial. This is not a prescriptive document; rather, this report recommends
that professionals involved in the care of patients
at every institution map out clinical processes that
are appropriate to the care of these patients and
use the guidance provided in the TG-100 report
to develop a risk-based QM program that will be
unique to their institution.

Risk Assessment
The authors of TG-100 chose to focus on three
industrial engineering risk assessment tools: process mapping, failure modes and effects analysis
(FMEA), and fault tree analysis (FTA).

Process Maps
There are many ways to approach quality and
safety when developing a QM program. Two
approaches that can be used are prospective and
reactive. The reactive approach is complementary to the prospective. The prospective approach
begins with mapping out a clinical process and the
steps involved in that process. TG-100 recommends
that professionals, such as physicians, physicists,
dosimetrists, therapists, nurses, IT professionals,
and administrators, involved in the care of patients
should be involved in the design of the process map
(3–6). A process map can be regarded as a graphical representation of the steps, actions, or task of
a process arranged in a sequential, or sometimes
parallel, order. An example of the process map for

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 104

external beam radiation treatment for a patient
may consist of various subprocesses such as patient
consults, CT simulation, treatment planning, plan
checks, imaging, and treatment. Each subprocess
can further be subdivided into many steps that consist of the subprocess. An example of the various
steps for the subprocess treatment planning could
be importing images in the TPS, registration of
image datasets from multiple imaging modalities,
contouring, beam weight optimization, dose calculation, plan review, and preparation for treatment.
One of the advantages of developing a process map
is that every member of the clinical team involved
in the care of patients has the same understanding
of the process, thereby minimizing the possibilities
of errors. Figure 8.1, from TG-100, provides an
excellent example of the process map/workflow for
the IMRT treatment process from initial diagnosis
to successful treatment.
When developing a process, it is important to
pay attention to the details. If the process map is
too coarse, important details could be left out. On
the contrary, if the process map is too fine, then
the overall task of developing a risk-based QM program can become unmanageable, thereby leading
to frustrations because the task could not be completed in a timely fashion.

Failure Modes and Effects Analysis
TG-100 defines failure as not meeting the desired
level of quality. There are many different ways
in which a specific process step can fail, each of
which constitutes a failure mode. FMEA is a risk
assessment tool. It is used to identify weaknesses
or deficiencies in a process. It assesses potential
errors (unintended process step outcome that
compromises overall process success) and the
risks associated with each error inherent within a
process. It is a step-by-step approach for identifying potential failures (postulated failure modes) in
a clinical process.
One needs to start with a process map of the
process to be investigated and list each step in the
process to complete an FMEA. One then identifies
all possible ways by which a process step could
fail. These are the potential failure modes (2,7–9).
The next step is to determine the effect of the consequences and severity of each failure mode on
the patient when the failure mode occurs. This
is determined by a severity rating S that is rated
on a scale of 1 to 10. One then determines all the
potential root causes for each failure mode and the

21/08/18 2:09 PM

8: QUALITY MANAGEMENT

105

(A)
Six initial treatment
planning directive
Specify images for target/structure delineation 11
Specify protocol for delineating target and structures 17
Specify registration goals 23, 38
Indicate motion/uncertainty Management 13, 14
Suggest initial guidelines for treatment parameters
Special Instructions (pacemakers, allergies, preps, etc.) 9
Specify dose limits and goals 26
Account for previous treatments or chemotherapy 4

(B)

FIGURE 8.1 (A) An IMRT process tree and (B) a magnified view of the initial treatment planning directive branch. The red

numbers indicate (hazard ranking) the most hazardous 20% to 25% of the steps as indicated by high-risk priority number
values. Steps with high severity hazards are shown in green (see text and Section VIII in reference 64 for details). A hazard
is something that can cause harm. A risk is the chance, high or low, that any hazard will actually cause somebody harm.

IMRT, intensity-modulated radiation therapy; RTP, real-time planning.
Source: From Huq MS, Fraass BA, Dunscombe PB, et al. The report of Task Group 100 of the AAPM: application of risk analysis methods
to radiation therapy quality management. Med Phys. 2016;43(7):4209-4262. doi:10.1118/1.4947547. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1118/1.4947547/full#f1

likelihood of occurrence of the causes of the failure mode. Occurrence O is also rated on a scale of
1 to 10. The next step is to determine the likelihood
of detection of each failure mode. The detectability
rating D, also rated on a scale of 1 to 10, rates the
estimate that the controls in place will not detect
the failure mode should it occur. Table 8.1, from
TG-100, provides guidance on how to assign the
O, S, and D values for different situations.
From the values of O, S, and D, one calculates
a metric called the risk priority number (RPN),

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 105

which is given as a product of the three indices O,
S, and D. The RPN is a measure of hazard for a
given step; its value ranges from 1 to 1,000. A very
high value of RPN is a measure of a very hazardous
step. Similarly, a high value of S is an indication of
a very serious step. Once FMEA is completed for
all the steps for a given process, the hazard and
severity ranks for all the various steps can be prioritized according to their RPN and S values. This
information can then be used to develop a riskbased QM program.

21/08/18 2:09 PM

106

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

TABLE 8.1 Description of the O, S, and D Values Used in the TG-100 FMEA
Rank

Occurrence (O)

Qualitative
1
2

Failure
unlikely

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Frequency (%)

Qualitative

0.01

No effect

0.02

Minor dosimetric
error

0.05
Relatively few
failures

0.1
<0.2

Occasional
failures

Severity

<0.5
<1

Categorization

Detectability (D)
Estimated Probability
of Failure Going
Undetected (%)
0.01

Inconvenience

0.2
0.5

Limited toxicity or
tumor underdose
Potentially serious
toxicity or tumor
underdose

Repeated
failures

<2
<5

Potentially very
serious toxicity or
tumor underdose

Failures
inevitable

>5

Catastrophic

Suboptimal plan or
treatment

1.0
2.0

Wrong dose, dose
distribution, location
or volume

5.0
10
15

Very wrong dose,
dose distribution,
location or volume

20
>20

FMEA, failure modes and effects analysis; TG, Task Group.
Source: From Huq MS, Fraass BA, Dunscombe PB, et al. The report of Task Group 100 of the AAPM: application of risk analysis methods to radiation therapy quality management. Med Phys. 2016;43(7):4209-4262. doi:10.1118/1.4947547. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1118/1.4947547/full#f1

Fault Tree Analysis
During the FMEA, one identifies all the potential
failure modes (or the multiple failures) and the
causes that initiate each of the failure pathways.
Fault tree complements FMEA by adding more
detailed information to a FMEA. A fault tree
starts with a possible error (i.e., a failure mode)
and works backward in time to study what could
possibly cause that failure. At every step, the user
asks the question what could cause that particular
failure and keeps working backward until she or
he arrives at causes that are actionable. A fault tree
thus gives a visual representation of the propagation of failure in a procedure. FTA is a tool that
allows one to visualize potential locations for effective placement of efficient QM measures because
the propagation of failures through the process
is more visually illustrated in the FTA than in the
FMEA spreadsheet. A fault tree thus complements
FMEA in making a radiation therapy system safer
through using postulated failure modes, tracing
the failure pathways back, and, on the basis of the
FTA, identifying possible systemic program weaknesses so that the user can place barriers and controls (QA and quality control [QC]) to prevent the

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 106

failure from propagating through the process and
causing harm to the patient.
Figure 8.2, from TG-100, gives an example
of a fault tree for an error in calculated value for
a patient. This fault tree begins on the left in the
figure with the potential failure mode “Error in calculated value for patient” and then progresses all
the way to the right where the actionable cause for
this failure is identified as “error in data” or “error
in data input” or “error in calculation algorithm”
or “error in prescription.” Because each of these
causes can cause an error in the calculated value
for the patient, all of them are joined by what is
known as an “OR” gate. Parallel to each of these
causes is added a QC measure with an “AND” gate.
This indicates that for any of these causes (error
in data, error in data input, etc.) to pass into the
calculation process, there must be a concomitant
failure of the QC that works on the input of each
of these causes. Despite these controls, even if an
error passes through the OR gate, the QC measure
“Failure of QA” placed on the input end of “Error
in calculation” box with an “AND” gate should help
prevent the propagation of the “error in calculation”
to cause an “error in calculated value for patient.”

21/08/18 2:09 PM

8: QUALITY MANAGEMENT

107

Error in
data
Failure of
QC

Error in
data input
Failure of
QC
Error in
calculated
value for
patient

Error in
calculation
Error in
calculation
algorithm

Failure of
QA

Failure of
QC

Error in
prescription
Failure of
QC

FIGURE 8.2 Example of a fault tree. The figure shows a process with four inputs all the way to the right of the figure, each
with QC to maintain the integrity of the process and QA to provide confidence that the output of the process is correct.
The red and green symbols represent “OR” and “AND” gates, respectively. Because an error in any of the four inputs can
propagate into an error in the calculation, all of them enter into the process through an OR gate (red symbol). Parallel to
each of the boxes indicating errors in the inputs are boxes indicating failure of QC associated with the process. Each of the
“failure of QC” boxes enters an AND gate (green symbol) with its respective error in input box. This indicates that for the error in the input to pass into the calculation process, there must be a concomitant failure of the QC that works on that input.
QA, quality assurance; QC, quality control.
Source: From Huq MS, Fraass BA, Dunscombe PB, et al. The report of Task Group 100 of the AAPM: application of risk analysis methods
to radiation therapy quality management. Med Phys. 2016;43(7):4209-4262. doi:10.1118/1.4947547. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1118/1.4947547/full#f1

Program Design and Goals
Generating process maps and performing FMEA
and FTA are only the beginning of the process of
establishing a risk-based QM program. The next
step is to use the information obtained from process mapping, FMEA, and FTA to design a riskbased QM program. TG-100 recommends that
after establishing the goals of the program, one
should prioritize the potential failure modes by
considering both RPN and severity rankings and
then starting with most highly ranked hazardous
or severe steps, determined from either RPN or
severity rankings, one should place various quality measurement interventions in place to address
each failure mode. Various QM tools exist in the
literature to address failures or deficiencies. The
Institute for Safe Medical Practices (ISMP) recommended different tools on the basis of their
effectiveness. This is reproduced in Table 8.2
(2,10). As can be seen from the table, the most
effective methods of mitigation are forcing functions and constraints and automation. This does

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 107

not, however, minimize the importance of education and information such as training, which are
at the bottom of the list in the table as being the
least effective. In fact, it is essential to train all
professionals frequently on all aspects of a treatment process.
After establishing a risk-based QM program,
reevaluation of the effectiveness of the program
should be done. This is because establishment
of a prospective risk-based QM program sometimes creates unintended hazardous steps and it
is important to identify these steps. In addition,
during the reevaluation, one often identifies new
failure modes that were not thought of during the
first iteration. The frequency at which this reevaluation should be done is at the discretion of the user.

Incident Reporting
An incident is an unwanted or unexpected change
from a normal system behavior, which causes, or
has a potential to cause, an adverse effect to persons or equipment. Incident reporting aims to

21/08/18 2:09 PM

108

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

TABLE 8.2 Ranking of QM Tools Based on the
Effectiveness, With Examples, Following the Suggestions
of ISMP and TG-100
1. Forcing functions and constraints
● Interlocks
● Hard stops
2. Automation and computerization
● Bar codes
● Automated monitoring
● Computerized verification
3. Protocols, standards, and information
● Alarms
● Labels
● Signs
4. Independent double checks, other redundancies,
and checklists
● Redundant checks and calculations
● Independent review
● Comparison with standards
● Acceptance testing
5. Rule, policies, and procedures
● Priority
● Establishing lines of communication
● Mandatory pauses
● Establish QA and QC
6. Education and training
Note: The most effective tools are the lowest numbered.
ISMP, Institute for Safe Medical Practices; QA, quality assurance; QC,
quality control; QM, quality management; TG, Task Group.
Source: From Huq MS, Fraass BA, Dunscombe PB, et al. The report
of Task Group 100 of the AAPM: application of risk analysis methods
to radiation therapy quality management. Med Phys. 2016;43(7):
4209-4262. doi:10.1118/1.4947547. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1118/1.4947547/full#f1

improve quality and safety of a program through a
process that involves discovery of the occurrence of
an incident followed by reporting of the incident,
performing an investigation of the root causes of the
incident, learning from such incidents, and placement of preventive actions so that the probability
of occurrence of such incidents is minimized. It is
important to report and learn from all incidents,
regardless of whether they have a major impact on
the patient or they are near misses and had no impact
on the patient. It is also important to establish a
multidisciplinary committee whose responsibility is
to perform an expert analysis of all incidents. Implementation of preventive measures should be disseminated to all staff involved in the care of patients.

Program Audits
Program audits, both internal and external, provide valuable information that can be used to
improve the quality of a program. An audit simply

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 108

consists of having someone review the work who
is not only associated with the work or facility but
also who is knowledgeable and understands the
work to be audited. Internal audits are valuable
in that they provide a method to review processes
or products followed in the clinic. This gives the
auditor the opportunity to review data with a
fresh perspective.
External audits provide additional valuable
information about the QM program. These audits
can be performed by experts in the field, such as
Imaging and Radiation Oncology Core (IROC)
Houston; by accrediting bodies, such as the
American College of Radiology (ACR) or American
Society of Radiation Oncologists (ASTRO); or by
other knowledgeable individuals in the field capable of performing the audit. These audits should
include product audits (for example, chart review
or machine output) and process audits in which
methodologies and policies and procedures are
reviewed. They provide a completely independent
review that would not otherwise be possible.
As with the results from the process mapping,
FMEA, FTA, and incident learning, a multidisciplinary committee should take the results of internal and external audits and make recommendations
for changes to the QM program.

Vendor Customer Technical Bulletin (CTB)
Vendors periodically send out CTBs to users.
These bulletins provide users with information
about recall notices and potential safety concerns
with their products. These documents also contain
information about recommended or required
actions. The recommended action should be taken,
but doing FMEA and a mini-FTA should also be
considered (3). These steps can help identify the
pathways that could lead to the failure described
in the vendor CTB and explain how the described
failure affects the clinical process. This information will allow the user to fully understand how the
CTB impacts his or her clinic and clinical workflow
specifically.

Application of TG-100 Methodology
to SRS/SBRT
In this section, we present two simple examples
of the application of TG-100 methodology to
SRS/SBRT. This discussion is considered “simple” because it does not provide an exhaustive
description of the application of TG-100 to SRS/
SBRT. Chapter 3 gave a more detailed description

21/08/18 2:09 PM

8: QUALITY MANAGEMENT

of SRS and SBRT process following the TG-100
methodology.

Using Multiple Imaging Studies
for Treatment Planning
Often, multiple imaging datasets are used for
the treatment planning for SRS and SBRT procedures. Depending on the treatment site, these
datasets might include PET-CT dataset or multiple
MRI dataset and the planning CT dataset, which
could include a four-dimensional (4D) CT dataset
acquired at the time of simulation. Prior to planning, these datasets are fused to define the target
volume and various organs at risk. The process
of image fusion and delineation of target volumes
and organs at risk might involve many potential failure modes, which include, for example,
incorrect patient, incorrect type of imaging scan,
incorrect scan parameters, incorrect scan orientation, incorrect organs-at-risk contouring, and
incorrect treatment delivery. At the Department
of Radiation Oncology at Henry Ford Health System, these failure modes were identified as highrisk steps because of the severity of the impact of
these potential failure modes on the patient.
To minimize the likelihood of occurrence of some
of these potential failure modes and to improve
the detectability of the failure modes, should they
occur, we have implemented several QC measures.
For example, when datasets are imported into the
TPS, there is a checklist item to verify the correct
patient and orientation of the dataset. After the
image fusion is completed, a physicist reviews the
quality of image fusion prior to the contouring of
targets and organs at risk. In addition, before contouring is performed, there is a checklist item that
requires the physician to verify the correctness of
the imaging datasets and image fusion.

Pretreatment Imaging and Localization
Because of the high dose per fraction and limited
number of fractions involved in the SRS/SBRT
treatments, it is important that imaging for target localization be performed prior to delivery of
SBRT and SRS treatments. If the patient is set
up incorrectly, then there is the potential to treat
the incorrect site. Several failure modes can lead
to setting up the patient incorrectly. They include,
but are not limited to, inaccurate patient setup,
malfunctioning immobilization device, mismatch
between the radiation and imaging isocenters, and
application of incorrect shift or nonapplication of

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 109

109

a required shift. These failure modes can all lead to
treating the incorrect disease site, which could have
severe adverse effects on the patient. Again, at the
Department of Radiation Oncology at Henry Ford
Health System, these failure modes were identified as
high-risk steps because of the severity of the impact
of these failure modes on the patient and the difficulty of detecting these failure modes if they occur
if appropriate QC measures are not put into place.
To minimize the likelihood of occurrence of
some of these potential failure modes and to
improve the detectability of the failure modes,
should they occur, we have implemented several QC measures including the use of the Optical Surface Monitoring System (Varian Medical
Systems, Milpitas, CA) for initial patient setup,
acquiring a cone-beam CT (CBCT) and registering it with the planning CT for target localization, verification of the localization with a kV–kV
image pair, and intratreatment kV–kV imaging to
verify patient positioning.

Summary of Prospective Approaches
to Quality Management
When the AAPM published the much-anticipated
TG-100 report, it provided users with a methodology to improve quality and safety in the field of
radiation oncology. It is not a prescriptive document; it provides guidance on how to establish
prospective approaches to risk-based QM program
in a radiation oncology clinic. The tools for prospective assessment that TG-100 recommended
include process mapping, FMEA, and FTA. A multidisciplinary team, consisting of all professionals
(e.g., physicians, physicists, dosimetrists, therapists,
nurses, IT support, and administrators) involved in
the care of the patients, should be involved in the
design of process mapping, FMEA, and FTA. TG-100
also provides a very short discussion on retrospective aspects to QM and discusses tools that include
incident learning, root cause analysis (RCA), and
program audit. CTBs provided by the vendors also
provide a useful source of information that should
be part of the design of any QM program.

COMMISSIONING OF LINEAR
ACCELERATOR AND TREATMENT
PLANNING SYSTEMS
High-quality SRS patient treatments begin with
high-quality commissioning of the linear accelerator (linac) and TPS. Incorrect commissioning

21/08/18 2:09 PM

110

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

of the linac and TPS has the potential to generate systematic errors that propagate to the level
of the patient being treated on the machine.
Commissioning of the linac consists of radiation
safety and mechanical and dosimetry aspects that
ensure proper performance and mechanical accuracy of the machine. Commissioning of the treatment planning includes nondosimetric tests and
dosimetric tests that ensure that the TPS accurately models the treatment beam produced by
the linac.
Developing a QA program is necessary to
ensure that the accuracy and precision of the
machine used for SRS is maintained throughout
the lifetime of the machine. Performance of the
treatment platform can be affected suddenly by
catastrophic failure of an integral part or auxiliary
portion of the machine that prevents patient treatment, or slowly over time as wear-and-tear takes
its toll on the mechanical aspects of the machine.
Preventive maintenance should be performed as
required by the manufacturer, preferably by the
engineer, as well as annual, monthly, and daily
tests to assure that machine performance has
not deviated over time. The responsibility of the
machine performance should lie primarily in the
hands of the radiation oncology physicist, who in
the radiation oncology team should best understand the workflow and be able to assess the
machine tolerances needed to accurately deliver
patient treatments. However, caring for a machine
is a team effort. The team should consist of physicist; therapists, who have the most direct contact
with the machine; and the engineers, who are best
equipped to fix the machine.
AAPM TG-142 and -40 recommend tests consisting of the following: safety, mechanical, dosimetric, and imaging aspects of the machine (4,5).
These tests can be performed by any personnel on
the team who are qualified and properly trained
and must be reviewed by the radiation oncology
physicist. Daily tests include tests that have the
potential to seriously affect patient safety, positioning, and dose. These tests can often be performed by a therapist who is familiar with the
procedures and equipment used to perform these
tests. Monthly tests are generally performed by
a physicist, an engineer, or a physics assistant
who is familiar with the equipment and procedures. Annual tests are more thorough and use
specialized equipment that has greater precision
and accuracy than that used in monthly and daily
tests. They include a subsection of items that

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 110

were performed during commissioning to ensure
consistency of the performance of the machine
over the year. AAPM TG-142 outlines in detail
the minimal tests required.

MLC and Hardware
For SRS treatments, linacs are often fitted with
specialty hardware to accurately deliver high doses
of radiation to small targets. The specialty hardware used for radiosurgery can be broken down
into three major components: beam shaping,
patient positioning, and localization devices.
For a linac to be used for radiosurgery, the
basic commissioning steps must be performed.
This testing includes radiation safety, mechanical,
and dosimetric tests. However, the mechanical,
dosimetric, and positioning tolerances are often
tighter for SRS/SBRT, as recommended in AAPM
TG-142 (4).

Multileaf Collimator
The most common beam-shaping device, available
on most modern linacs, is the multileaf collimator
(MLC). The MLC is used to shape the aperture of
the beam to deliver conformal doses of radiation
to the target volume while blocking areas of normal tissue. MLCs are typically manufactured using
high-density materials (e.g., tungsten alloy) to
produce desired attenuation. They can be used to
create conformal, static apertures or used to modulate the beam such as in IMRT. In SRS, high-dose
gradients are used to minimize dose to normal tissue, and the MLCs are an integral part in achieving
rapid dose falloff.

MLC Positional Accuracy
The accuracy of the positioning of the MLC leaves
is important in SRS, especially when treating very
small lesions. In a study investigating the impact
of accurate definition of small fields in step-andshoot IMRT, it was found that the positional
accuracy of the fields can affect the output of the
beam. For a 1 × 1 cm2 field, output differences of
up to 16% and 8% were found with differences
in field size (relative to the planned field size) of
2 and 1 mm, respectively (6). The accuracy of
the absolute MLC leaf positions is of particular
importance when treating small targets. During
commissioning, several tests can be performed
to evaluate the positional accuracy of the MLC.
As an example, a test can be performed in which

21/08/18 2:09 PM

8: QUALITY MANAGEMENT

a film is irradiated with two complementary leaf
patterns (see Figure 8.3) with the goal of evaluating the matchline between the leaf tips, and the
tongue-and-groove underdosage between the two
leaves that straddle the isocenter.
Another method of verifying the absolute position of the MLC is performing a matchline uniformity test (see Figure 8.4A). This test uses a
2-cm-wide MLC opening, where the 2-cm gap is
moved in 2-cm intervals in a stepwise fashion. The
area under the leaf end will provide a dose variation of ±5% at the matchline. This method has
been found to detect MLC leaf position variation
at precision levels of 0.2 mm (7,8).
Another method involves irradiating a small
gap, at known, regular intervals (picket fence test).
The corresponding irradiated film can be visually
inspected to detect improper positioning, with a
precision of 0.5 mm (7,8) (see Figure 8.4B).

T

Leaf
motion

T

R

L

L

B

Collimator—90°
T

T
Leaf
motion

R

L

(A)

R

L

(B)
B

B

FIGURE 8.3 (Top) MLC pattern to verify misalignment
of MLC bank relative to isocenter of machine. Top right
and bottom left quadrants are irradiated with a fixed MU;
the MLCs move to the second position where top left and
bottom right quadrants are irradiated with the same
number of MUs. (Bottom) Irradiated films using MLC pattern. (A) A well-aligned MLC system, with a uniform film,
with the isocenter bisected by the vertical white line that
is underdosage from the tongue-and-groove effect and a
straight dark line that is the leakage through the tip of the
leaves (B) demonstrates a MLC system that is misaligned
in the direction of the leaf motion as well as left and right.
MLC, multileaf collimator; MU, monitor unit.
Source: From LoSasso T. IMRT delivery system QA. In: Palta J,
Mackie TR, eds. Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy: the State
of the Art. Medial Physics Monograph, Vol. 29. Colorado Springs,
CO: Medical Physics Publishing; 2003:561-591.

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 111

Light/Radiation Field Coincidence
An initial test is performed to ensure that the light
and radiation fields are congruent. Depending on
the manufacturer and design of the MLCs, an offset may exist between the two, as in the case when
the MLCs have a rounded leaf end. Users have the
option to calibrate the MLC using the light field
or radiation field. These positional tests can be
performed using film or an electronic portal imaging
device and must include the four cardinal gantry
angles because the MLC positions may be altered
by gravitational effects.

Mechanical Stability of the MLCs
The mechanical stability of the MLCs can be evaluated using a spoke test. To accomplish this, a small
gap created with the MLCs, and different axes of the
machine (collimator, gantry, and couch), is rotated to
different angles and the coincidence of the collimator,
gantry, and couch axes with isocenter is evaluated.

Leaf Transmission
R

B

111

The transmission of radiation through the MLCs
should be measured during commissioning to
ensure that the transmission through the MLCs is
within the manufacturer specifications, as well as
to measure the MLC transmission characteristics.
MLC transmission consists of two components:
interleaf and intraleaf leakage. Interleaf leakage is
the leakage between the gaps of the leaves, whereas
intraleaf leakage relates to the amount of transmission through the leaf. The overall transmission
through an MLC can be measured using film or a
cylindrical ionization chamber. If film is used, an
average value over the interleaf and intraleaf areas
is measured. For ion chamber measurements, the
ion chamber is oriented parallel to the travel of
the leaf, and transmission is measured at multiple
locations under the leaves to estimate the average
interleaf and intraleaf leakage.

MLC Dynamic Delivery
In dynamic delivery using IMRT or volumetricmodulated arc therapy (VMAT), the MLCs are
modeled in the TPS. Different manufacturers use
different methods of modeling the dynamic delivery of MLCs. Varian MLCs use an input value
called a dynamic leaf gap (DLG) that models the
amount of dose transmitted through the rounded
leaf ends. This is measured by delivering sweeping
gaps of varying widths and interpolating to a gap

21/08/18 2:09 PM

112

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

Cross Sections
120
110
100
90
Percent of dose

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

–9

–7

–5

–3

–1

1

3

5

7

9

Horizontal position (cm)

(A)

CU Values

6XFFF Static Picket Fence
at Gantry 0, 90, 180, 270

(B)

-10

G0
G 90
G 180
G 270

-5

0
x position (cm)

5

10

FIGURE 8.4 MLC positional tests. (A) Matchline uniformity tests performed on radiographic film (left) with line profile

through the higher dose areas showing location of matchline (right); (B) static picket fence performed on an electronic
portal imaging device (left) at four cardinal gantry angles with line profile through isocenter to evaluate the position of
MLCs at each gantry angle (right).

MLC, multileaf collimator.

size of 0 cm. Elekta machines also use a series of
tests in an ExpressQA package with a predefined
set of MLC shapes to be delivered. However, several studies have found that the value obtained from
vendor-recommended methods can be modified to
better match measured data using more clinically
relevant cases such as TG-119 or clinically treated
cases (9,10).

Mechanical and Radiation Isocentricity
The Winston–Lutz test is a classic test used in linacbased radiosurgery to measure the alignment
between the mechanical and radiation isocenters (11). A small, high-density metallic ball
(commonly called a BB), usually made of tungsten or steel, is aligned to the mechanical or imaging isocenter of the linac. Small fields defined
using the jaws, MLCs, or conical cones are then
delivered at a combination of collimator, couch,
and gantry angles. The difference between the

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 112

center of the BB and the center of the radiation field
represents the difference between the mechanical
and radiation isocenters (see Figure 8.5).

Cones
Cones are another beam-shaping device often used
in radiosurgery. They are also encountered on other
radiosurgery machines, such as in Gamma Knife and
CyberKnife. Cones are composed of high-density
materials, such as tungsten. The size of cones can vary
from 2 to 60 mm in diameter at the isocenter plane.

Cone Alignment
The centering of the cones is often performed after the
machine isocenter has been set and collimator rotation isocentricity has been finalized. An analog pressure gauge measuring to the thousandth of an inch
is placed inside the cone. The cone is then rotated
around the collimator axis and the cone is moved to
minimize any deviation in the pressure gauge reading.

21/08/18 2:09 PM

8: QUALITY MANAGEMENT
G: 0

C: 0

P: 0

G: 0

C: 45

P: 0

G: 0

C: 90

P: 0

G: 0

C: 270

P: 0

G: 0

C: 315

P: 0

G: 0

C: 0

P: 45

G: 0

C: 0

P: 135

Lat Shift
(mm):

-0.25

Lat Shift
(mm):

-0.04

Lat Shift
(mm):

0.07

Lat Shift
(mm):

-0.39

Lat Shift
(mm):

-0.34

Lat Shift
(mm):

-0.27

Lat Shift
(mm):

0.05

S-I Shift
(mm):

0.22

S-I Shift
(mm):

0.40

S-I Shift
(mm):

0.26

S-I Shift
(mm):

0.15

S-I Shift
(mm):

0.34

S-I Shift
(mm):

0.40

S-I Shift
(mm):

0.09

G: 0

P: 270

G: 0

G: 0

C: 0

P: 90

C: 0

C: 0

P: 315

G: 90

C: 0

P: 0

G: 180

C: 0

P: 0

G: 270

C: 0

P: 0

G: 0

C: 0

113

P: 225

Lat Shift
(mm):

-0.39

Lat Shift
(mm):

0.06

Lat Shift
(mm):

-0.06

Lat Shift
(mm):

-0.60

Lat Shift
(mm):

0.10

Lat Shift
(mm):

0.48

Lat Shift
(mm):

-0.24

S-I Shift
(mm):

0.74

S-I Shift
(mm):

0.25

S-I Shift
(mm):

0.25

S-I Shift
(mm):

-0.19

S-I Shift
(mm):

-0.46

S-I Shift
(mm):

-0.03

S-I Shift
(mm):

0.00

FIGURE 8.5 Example of jaw-based Winston–Lutz test performed at 14 gantry (G), collimator (C), and pedestal (P) angles.
The shifts in the lateral (Lat Shift) and superior to inferior (S-I Shift) directions are calculated from the center of the jawdefined field and the center of the BB. A positive discrepancy in the cross-plane direction indicates a shift to the right;
a positive discrepancy in the in-plane direction indicates an inferior shift.

To verify the centering of the cones, a Winston–
Lutz test can also be used to quantify the deviation
of the mechanical and radiation isocenters. The
Winston–Lutz BB must be fixed to a device independent of the gantry and collimator such as the
couch. Assuming the BB does not move, the position of the cone relative to the BB can be assessed
and the cone aligned to minimize any deviation.

Couch and Positioning Devices
Most modern linacs use 6 degrees of freedom (6DoF)
couches to position the patient at the correct treatment position using image guidance. QA of the positioning device should be performed to ensure that
the couch is driven to the correct treatment position
(12). One method is to offset fiducial markers at
known positions within a phantom using an arbitrary translation, pitch, roll, and yaw. After image
guidance, the couch must drive the phantom to the
correct location (on the basis of a given tolerance)
that can then be verified using redundant imaging.
Transmission and modeling of the couch and positioning devices should be verified in the TPS during
commissioning. With larger doses of radiation used
in SRS, skin dose may exceed clinical tolerance
limits if the buildup from immobilization devices is
not considered during dose calculation (13).

Small-Field Dosimetry
The use of small fields is ubiquitous in the field of
radiation oncology. Examples of treatments using
small fields include highly modulated IMRT fields

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 113

(small field segments), as well as the application of
SRS or SBRT. With the increasing use of hypofractionated radiation therapy in clinical treatments,
the use of SRS and SBRT to treat small lesions
is becoming more commonplace. Two important
reviews on the physical and technical issues associated with small fields are provided by the Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine
(IPEM) Report No. 103—Small Field MV Photon
Dosimetry (14), and by Das et al. (15). The IPEM
report defines small photon beams to exist when
penumbra regions (50%–95% equilibrium distance rather than 20%–80% distance in a small
field) occupy most of the field area (14). Das
et al. (15) note that a small field can typically
be defined as one in which the field size is less than
3 × 3 cm, but that “equilibrium factors” dependent
on energy and medium must be used to quantify
the term “small.” Small fields are often associated with nonequilibrium conditions, that is, loss
of charged particle equilibrium (CPE), which are
impacted by the following (14,15): (a) the size of
the source, projected from the detector through the
beam aperture; (b) the size of the detector used in
measurements; and (c) the electron range in the
irradiated medium, which depends on the beam
energy. Kumar et al. (16) performed careful Monte
Carlo (MC) simulations of the full linac treatment
geometry to demonstrate the significant effect of
source occlusion on output factor reduction at
field sizes less than 1 × 1 cm. They demonstrated,
by scoring kerma rather than dose (to remove the

21/08/18 2:09 PM

114

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

confounding effect of electron transport), that
the output factor was reduced significantly when
the MC simulation considered the full target geometry (realistic finite source) rather than a point
source (16). This implies that the occlusion of the
finite-sized target reduces the total bremsstrahlung
output produced, and hence the output factor. If
one considers the total output as an integral along
the width of the finite source, then if the source is
eclipsed, one would expect a reduction in the output
factor. Conditions of loss of CPE can also be created
when the field size is reduced such that the lateral
ranges of the secondary electrons become comparable to (or greater than) the field size (15). This
situation is exacerbated in tissues of density much
lower than that of water (e.g., lung or air-equivalent
tissues) where the ranges of the lateral electrons are
increased, as encountered in treatment planning of
lung cancer patients treated with SBRT (17).
Accurate measurements under conditions of
nonequilibrium, including small fields, tissue interfaces, buildup dose regions, and so forth, are fraught
with challenges (14,15,18). Under nonequilibrium
conditions, detectors introduce perturbations,
which are difficult to quantify. Investigators have
shown that under nonequilibrium conditions, there
is breakdown of the Bragg–Gray cavity theory (16),
and that the density and atomic composition of
the detector play an important role (19,20). Scott
et al. (20) showed that changes in the ratio of MCcalculated doses delivered to water and detector
voxels with field size arise primarily from differences
between the densities of the detector materials and
water, and recommend that ideal small-field relative
dosimeters should have small active volumes and
water-like density. Bouchard et al. (21) performed a
theoretical investigation invoking Fano’s theorem to
demonstrate that beam quality correction factors of
small-megavoltage photon fields are mainly caused
by differences in electron density between water
and the detector medium, and by volume averaging over the detector cavity. They also point out that
the impact of other effects, such as the presence of
extracameral components and differences in atomic
properties of the detection medium with respect to
water, may be enhanced in small photon fields relative to standard beams (21). Excellent reviews of the
perturbation conditions and other issues associated
with reliable measurements under nonstandard conditions are presented in the IPEM report on smallfield dosimetry (14) and the article by Das et al. (15).
Recently, the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and the AAPM have jointly published a Code of Practice (CoP) for dosimetry of

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 114

small static fields used in external beam radiation
therapy. This CoP, TRS483, has provided data and
recommendations for performing reference dosimetry in machine-specific reference (msr) fields and
relative dosimetry (measurements of field output
factor) in small static photon fields. The reader is
advised to consult the IAEA website to get access
to this CoP (https://www-pub.iaea.org/books/
iaeabooks/11075/Dosimetry-of-Small-StaticFields-Used-in-External-Beam-Radiotherapy).

Beam Modeling in the Treatment
Planning System
Most current commercially available TPSs are
equipped with convolution/superposition, or
MC-based algorithms for dose calculation. Beam
modeling for such algorithms involves characterization of the linac treatment head geometry, and
such models are typically measurement-driven. A
measurement-driven model is one in which the
user acquires a base set of measurements to be
used as input, to optimize the model parameters.
In a measurement-driven beam model, uncertainties associated with measurements will propagate
systematically in the dose calculation process. It
is therefore critical that the small-field measurements required for SRS and SBRT beam modeling
be performed with utmost care and attention to
detail. There have been many studies reported on
complexities and differences in detector responses
associated with accurate small-field measurements
(22–25). Consequently, it is incumbent on the
medical physicist to follow published standards
and practice guidelines on the most appropriate
and accurate detectors for small-field depth/profile
and output factor measurements (26–28).
SRS-based treatments are typically performed
using five or fewer fractions at hypofractionated
doses, implying that the margin of error associated
with SRS/SBRT treatments is much smaller than
for conventionally fractionated treatments. Therefore, dose calculations need to be as accurate as
possible. This implies that more stringent criteria
are warranted for accuracy in SRS/SBRT beam
modeling (4) than the typical 2%/2-mm criterion
for agreement between beam model calculations
and measurements for conventional beam models
(29,30). At centers offering single-fraction SRS
treatments, the criterion for agreement between
dose calculations and measurements is most commonly 1%/1 mm. The beam model must be verified carefully with attention to all aspects of the
radiation dose profiles as a function of depth in

21/08/18 2:09 PM

8: QUALITY MANAGEMENT

the phantom. As recommended in the AAPM TG
Report No. 53 (29), the depth dose profiles can
be divided into different regions, corresponding to
dose buildup, dose at depth, high dose, penumbra,
and profile tails. Criteria for agreement between
calculations and measurements are suggested in
AAPM TG-53 (29), which can be used as a guide
to validate the accuracy of the beam model. Beam
model calculations should be verified against measurements for a variety of field sizes, and should
focus on the most clinically relevant geometries.
Comparisons between calculations and measurements for large field sizes (>30 × 30 cm) can be
used to assess the accuracy of the beam energy
spectrum used in the beam model. For SRS/SBRTbased beam models, it may also be necessary to
verify calculations at very small field sizes, possibly down to 0.5 × 0.5 cm, depending on the type
of clinical application. Point dose calculations
should also be performed for a range of different
field sizes and should be verified against measurements along the central axis (CAX) as well as at
off-axis points, at multiple depths (29). Accurate
modeling of beam-modifying devices, such as the
MLC, is of central importance, particularly at small
field sizes. The IMRT guidance report published
by AAPM IMRT subcommittee provides a comprehensive review of the types of measurements
needed to verify that the MLC physical characteristics and control issues are accurately handled by
the beam model for both static and dynamic deliveries (31). Issues such as leaf calibration, inter- and
intraleaf transmission, tongue-and-groove effect,
and leaf scatter are all accentuated at small field
sizes. It is imperative that the medical physicist
performs comprehensive validation of beam model
calculations against measurements to verify that
the model accurately characterizes the physical
characteristics and motion of the MLC. Similarly,
beam model calculations for other beam-modifying
devices, such as a cone-based collimation system or
use of a dynamic wedge, will need to be validated
against measurements. In addition to calculations
in a homogeneous, water-tank-like geometry, calculations including inhomogeneities, mimicking
heterogeneous body tissues, are necessary (29,30).
Such tests can be used to validate the accuracy of
the radiation dose deposition, especially when small
fields are used in the presence of low-density tissues
(e.g., lung), where nonequilibrium conditions exist
(18). The book chapter by Seuntjens (18) includes
a useful listing of specific test examples, phantom
designs, and detector measurements, intended to
serve as a supplement to those reported in AAPM

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 115

115

TG-53 (29). These tests should be considered for
validation of the beam model under a variety of
different circumstances, including tissue heterogeneity. As recommended by the AAPM (29,31) and
ASTRO (28), it is important that redundant systems
be incorporated to validate dose calculations for
treatment planning. A redundant, second-check system, developed independently of the clinical beam
model, is a necessary quality/safety measure. It is also
recommended that the beam model, prior to clinical
use, be checked by an independent physicist or other
qualified individuals external to the institution.
Beam models in most commercially available
planning systems include a variety of input parameters, often provided by the manufacturer as “default”
settings. It is crucial that the medical physicist
verify these default parameters independently, as in
some instances, these parameters can indeed have a
significant influence on the accuracy of small-field
depth and profile calculations. An example of this
is provided in Figure 8.6, which shows the effect of
varying the source size parameter for an SRS/SBRT
beam model within the Eclipse v.11 TPS (Varian
Medical Systems, Palo Alto, California). The calculations are shown in the cross-plane direction and
were performed for a 0.5 × 0.5-cm field size, at
10-cm depth, using a 1-mm calculation grid. MC
calculations were performed using the BEAMnrc/
DOSXYZnrc code system (32) (National Research
Council of Canada [NRCC]) using a phase space
file supplied by the manufacturer for a TrueBeam-type linac (Varian Medical Systems). Collimators were modeled and were set to an aperture
of 0.5 × 0.5 cm. Figure 8.6 (left) shows the results
for the anisotropic analytic algorithm (AAA),
whereas Figure 8.6 (right) corresponds to calculations for the Acuros XB algorithm. It is clear from
these figures that the source size setting with the
Eclipse beam model has a significant influence on
the shape of the profile as well as the CAX dose.
For instance, if the default setting for AAA was
0 mm, the relative CAX dose is ~37% versus
~18% for a 3-mm source setting, corresponding
to approximately a 20% relative difference. In this
example, the MC-computed profile corresponds
to a source width of ~1.5 mm. Similarly for the
Acuros algorithm, the source size setting has a
significant effect on the 0.5 × 0.5-cm profiles. It
is also interesting to note that the profile shapes
differ between the AAA and Acuros algorithm.
This example serves to illustrate the fact that
beam model parameter settings must be validated
independently by the medical physicist, especially
under small-field circumstances.

21/08/18 2:09 PM

116

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

Rel. dose
0.5ⴛ0.5 cm
40
35
AAA 0 mm
30
AAA 1 mm
25
AAA 2 mm
20
AAA 3 mm
15
Monte Carlo
10
5
0
22
20
20.5
21
21.5
Distance from CAX (cm)

Rel. dose
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
20
20.5

0.5ⴛ0.5 cm

AcurosXB 0 mm
AcurosXB 1 mm
AcurosXB 2 mm
AcurosXB 3 mm
Monte Carlo

21
21.5
22
Distance from CAX (cm)

FIGURE 8.6 Effect of varying the source size parameter for an SRS/SBRT beam model within the Eclipse v.11 treatment
planning system (Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto, California). Calculations performed at 0.5 × 0.5 cm field size, at 10 cm
depth, using a 1-mm calculation grid, for (left) anisotropic analytic algorithm (AAA) and (right) Acuros XB algorithm. MC
calculations were performed using the BEAMnrc/DOSXYZnrc code system 20 (NRCC) using a phase space file supplied by
the manufacturer for a TrueBeam-type linear accelerator (Varian Medical Systems).
MC, Monte Carlo; NRCC, National Research Council of Canada; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy; SRS, stereotactic radiosurgery.
Source: From Henry Ford Health System.

Setting up a Treatment Planning System
QA Program
Treatment planning is one of the most important
components of the entire radiation therapy treatment process. When smaller targets and high-dose
gradients are required to achieve organ at risk (OAR)
dose constraints, as in the case of SRS treatment
planning, shortcomings in the TPS are accentuated.

Acceptance and Commissioning
Treatment planning acceptance and commissioning
can be broken down into two parts: nondosimetric
and dosimetric.

Nondosimetric Tests
Nondosimetric tests in TPS include items that are
not dose related but can lead to systematic errors
if not properly verified. This includes items such as
transfer of CT data that may include patient position (head first supine or feet first prone), contouring accuracy of 3D structures with known volumes,
correct beam descriptions, orientations, and naming
conventions. TPS vendors are required to verify
these items with the customer during acceptance.
The AAPM TG No. 53 provides guidelines for commissioning and QA of radiation therapy TPSs (29).

Dosimetric Tests
Dosimetric validation is required to verify that the
beam model is accurate for all possible conditions
under which the TPS will be used. Validation should
be performed starting from simple basic geometries to more complicated modulated fields such as

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 116

IMRT and VMAT plans. A variety of tests can be
used; however, the experimental requirements and
corresponding tolerances have been provided by the
AAPM medical physics practice guideline 5.a (33).
Basic photon beam geometries should include
simple square fields, small MLC-shaped fields, large
MLC-shaped fields, off-axis MLC-shaped fields,
asymmetrical fields, and fields at oblique incidences.
Measurements should be performed in the highdose region, penumbra, and out-of-field regions
and at various depths, such as dmax, midrange
(10–15 cm), and at depth (20–30 cm). Verification of the algorithm under conditions of tissue
heterogeneity is also a central requirement. Testing
must include validation of the CT-to-density tables,
as errors in these tables can result in systematic
errors through the treatment planning process.
Examples of experimental validation using slab-type
geometries are provided in the literature (34,35).
IMRT and VMAT validation should include
measurements using small MLC-shaped fields and
appropriate detectors. The AAPM TG-119 report
provides a set of test plans including complex,
concave-shaped targets for validating patient-like
dose distributions (36). In the AAPM TG-119 test
suite, measurements are performed in the high-dose
and low-dose regions using both an ion chamber
and a two-dimensional (2D) detector system for
planar measurements. Finally, E2E testing incorporating uncertainties at all stages of the radiation
therapy chain, including simulation, treatment planning, and delivery, should be performed. Such tests
can be performed using an anthropomorphic phantom, available commercially or through independent
auditing services, as provided by the IROC Houston.

21/08/18 2:09 PM

8: QUALITY MANAGEMENT

Periodic QA

6 MV, 1ⴛ1 cm2
1.0

Scanditronix-SFD
Scanditronix-PFD
Wellhöfer-IC4
Exradin-A16
PTW-pinpoint
PTW-diamond
PTW-0.125 cc
PTW-0.3 cc
PTW-0.6 cc
PTW-Markus

0.9
0.8
Relative dose

Periodic QA of the TPS should be performed to
verify that no system defaults have changed, as
recommended by the AAPM TG-53 and other relevant AAPM guidelines. Testing should also be
performed whenever an upgrade of a TPS occurs,
to ensure, among other factors, that beam data
and machine configuration settings have not been
modified accidentally.

117

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Equipment for QA
The equipment needed for basic and stereotactic
QA can be broken down into the following components: dosimeters, mechanical QA tools, dosimetric
phantoms, and mechanical phantoms.

0.0
0

2

4

6

8

(A)

6 MV, 40ⴛ40 cm2
1.0
Scanditronix-SFD
Scanditronix-PFD
Wellhöfer-IC4
Exradin-A16
PTW-pinpoint
PTW-0.125 cc
PTW-0.6 cc

0.9

When commissioning a linac, it is important
to properly understand the limitations of each
detector. Figure 8.7 shows scanned depth profiles
for a small 1 × 1 cm2 and a large 40 × 40 cm2
field size with different detectors. Note the position of the Scanditronix-SFD dose data relative
to the Exradin-A16 for the small and large field
sizes. Each detector responds differently because
of the manner in which each detector perturbs
the radiation field. Detector perturbations
and associated correction factors must be carefully understood especially under small-field
conditions.

Relative dose

0.8

Detectors

10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30
Depth (cm)

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0

(B)

2

4

6

8

10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30
Depth (cm)

FIGURE 8.7 Percent depth dose for a 6-MV beam for a
(A) 1 × 1 cm2 and (B) 40 × 40 cm2 field size using a variety
of commercial detectors available on the market.
Source: From Das IJ, Cheng CW, Watts RJ, et al. Accelerator beam
data commissioning equipment and procedures: report of the
TG-106 of the Therapy Physics Committee of the AAPM. Med
Phys. 2008;35:4186-4215. doi:10.1118/1.2969070

Ionization Chamber
An ionization chamber is used to measure absolute dose and calibrate the output of the machine.
Ionization chambers used for reference dosimetry
should be calibrated against a national standard
at an Accredited Dosimetry Calibration Laboratory (ADCL). The ionization chambers used
for calibration are often Farmer-type cylindrical
chambers, with average active collection volume
of 0.6 cm3. The AAPM TG-51 protocol provides
kQ factors for many of the commercially available Farmer chambers (37,38) for performing
reference dosimetry in a 10 × 10 cm2 reference
field size. The IAEA TRS483 CoP provides data
for beam quality correction factors for various
ionization chambers for performing reference
dosimetry in msr fields. It also provided data for
output correction factors for various detectors
for measurements of field output factors. Again,
the reader is advised to consult the IAEA website
to get access to TRS483 CoP.

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 117

Small chambers are optimal for stereotactic,
small-field measurements, as volume-averaging
effects are mitigated. However, these chambers have
small collection volumes, which limits signal. In
order to amplify the signal a higher Z material may
be used for the collection electrode; however, this
causes an overresponse at large fields and in the field
tail region because of the increased contribution of
lower energy, scattered photons. Ion chambers also
require auxiliary equipment such as cables, connectors, adaptors, and electrometers. The fidelity of the
cables, connectors, and adaptors should be checked
before use for any leakage or source of noise that
may interfere with measurements.

Diodes
Semiconductor diodes have relatively quick
read-out responses and spatial resolution, do not
require external bias, and are approximately tissue

21/08/18 2:09 PM

118

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

equivalent. Most diodes are constructed with
high-Z material, which may result in overresponse, especially to lower energy photons. MC
simulations have shown that shielded diodes preferentially absorb low-energy photons; however,
they also increase the primary electron fluence.
Corrected unshielded diodes were shown to have
responses comparable to or better than traditional shielded diodes (39). For small field sizes,
a daisy chain method, in which the response of
the diode is normalized to that of an ion chamber,
at a reference field size, is recommended for output factors at smaller field sizes. A typical field
reference field size is 3 × 3 cm2 (22).

Film
The resolution of film is very high because of the
inherent structure of the film, made up of either
grains or polymers. Two common types are radiographic and radiochromic film. Radiographic film
is composed of high-Z materials, silver halide
or silver bromide grains, which result in overresponse to lower energy photons. Most comercial film products such as extended dose range
(EDR) film (Kodak) saturate at ~5 Gy, limiting
application to SRS deliveries. Radiographic film
is quite sensitive and requires careful handling
to obtain good dosimetric results. The AAPM
TG-69 report is an excellent resource for radiographic film dosimetry (40). Radiographic film is
useful for measurements that involve mechanical
QA and to measure leakage from the linac treatment head during commissioning. However, use
of radiographic film is becoming less common, as
carefully controlled developer process, including
necessary chemicals, which require maintenance,
is needed to elicit reproducible results.
Radiochromic film is now more commonly
used as it is more convenient, does not require
a film room and developing chemicals, and,
moreover, is near tissue equivalent and thereby
has minor energy dependence. The use of radiochromic film for dosimetry has been widely
published (41–43).
With radiochromic film, for example, Gafchromic EBT3 (Ashland Inc. Covington, KY), one
needs to be cautious of nonuniformities of the film
scanning system, as well as differences in response
as a function of lag times between radiation dose
delivery to the film delivery and film scanning.
Studies have shown that for Gafchromic EBT3
films scanned using a flatbed scanner, dosimetric
accuracy of 2% can be achieved for doses above

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 118

5 Gy (43), with the use of a careful calibration
protocol that incorporates nonuniformities in the
scanning process. For use in radiosurgery, where
doses may range from 10 to 25 Gy, the uncertainties become greater because of the saturation
of the red channel, typically used for analysis.
A study using Gafchromic EBT3 films for SRS
and SBRT found 1.5% dose uncertainty in the
18- to 20-Gy range (44). A newer film, Gafchromic EBT-XD (Ashland Inc.), has been designed
for use in higher doses. Preliminary studies have
shown good agreement and stability at these high
doses (45).

Diamond and Plastic Scintillation Detectors
Other specialty detectors used in SRS include
diamond detectors and plastic scintillation detectors (PSDs). Diamond detectors are solid-state
semiconductor detectors. They are very similar
to diode devices, as they are tissue equivalent
and have high response and high spatial resolution. They have shown good performance when
used for scanning and relative dosimetry (46).
However, because they are difficult to manufacture, they are more expensive than other detector
types.
PSDs also are well suited for use in the radiosurgery setting. They have high spatial resolution;
are water equivalent, energy independent, and
nearly temperature independent; and have good
dose reproducibility and linearity. With PSDs,
photons impinging on the scintillating material
excite atoms that when decayed produce photons
in the visible spectrum (47). The photons are then
guided to a photodetector and are converted into
an electric signal that is read out by an electrometer. One issue with PSDs is the presence of blue
Cerenkov radiation, which is emitted for electron
energies greater than 146 keV impinging on plastic and is interspersed with the scintillation signal.
Cerenkov light can be subtracted or filtered from
the signal.

Phantoms

Scanning Tank
A scanning tank is used in conjunction with
detectors and electrometers to obtain beam data.
Modern scanning tanks are very accurate; however,
before use, simple QA should be performed to
ensure the mechanical integrity of the scanner, as
well as to prevent any errors while acquiring beam
data. AAPM TG-106 (48) provides guidance to test

21/08/18 2:09 PM

8: QUALITY MANAGEMENT

the mechanical axes and travel of the chamber prior
to scanning. Other example tests for initial commissioning and acceptance of a scanning tank are
provided elsewhere (49).

Anthropomorphic Phantoms
During commissioning of a TPS, anthropomorphic
phantoms can be used to verify dose measurements
in heterogeneous materials such as in the thorax,
in areas of low-density lung tissue, and in highdensity, rib-like structures. They can be used for
E2E tests to evaluate the overall accuracy of the
treatment planning workflow. They can also be
useful when implementing new treatment techniques that require measurements prior to implementation in the clinic.

Miscellaneous Phantoms
For periodic QA, such as monthly and daily
QA, other phantoms can be used to expedite and
collate tests. This includes solid water phantoms
that can be used for easy output measurements.
Other phantoms with embedded BBs and scribes
located at the center of the BB, such as a Winston–
Lutz jig, can be used for localization and imaging.
A variety of commercially available phantoms can
be used to improve workflow.

Patient-Specific QA
Patient-specific QA is necessary to ensure that the
plan created in the TPS is deliverable, and that the
delivered and planned dose distributions are in
agreement.

2D/3D Measurements
For small targets and high dose gradients in radiosurgery, spatial resolution is extremely important.
As such, film is an ideal detector for such measurements. However, film is very labor intensive,
requiring lag time to allow for film self-developing
and scanning, and needing a careful calibration
protocol, in which scanner nonuniformities are
properly accounted for (44). The 2D detector
arrays, consisting of ion chambers or diodes, can
be also be used; however, one needs to be cautious
of the spatial resolution of such systems especially for very small targets. The 3D measurement
devices such as gel dosimetry can be used to capture the dose distributions in all three dimensions;
however, gel dosimeters are currently not commonly used in the clinic.

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 119

119

A common method of quantitatively assessing differences between the measured and the
planned dose is the gamma analysis (50). A pass
rate percentage such as 90% or higher is recommended for a given criterion, such as 3% dose difference and 3-mm distance to agreement. In SRS
in which high dose gradients are commonplace,
gamma analysis may not be sensitive enough to
detect all errors.

Dynalog Files and Dose–Volume Histograms
(DVH) Recalculation
Other methods to assess differences between
planned and delivered dose distributions include
evaluation of the Dynalog (dynamic treatment log)
file, which provides the actual delivered MLC positions (51), as well as exit dosimetry, in which the
exit dose measured using a detector system is back
projected to estimate the actual dose delivered to
the patient (52).

QUALITY MANAGEMENT OF IMAGING
SYSTEMS
The goal of the QM program of imaging systems
is to evaluate the imaging system performance
in relation to manufacturer specifications and
guideline documents. The AAPM Task Report
No. 66 addresses in detail a QA program for
the CT simulator (53). The AAPM TG-142
report provides recommendations on QA for
imaging devices that are part of the linac including x-ray imaging, portal imaging, and CBCT (4).
The ACR committee’s manual on MRI QC helps
establish and maintain a QC program for magnetic resonance (MR). The following sections
discuss the image quality characterization for
CT, CBCT, and MRI and the E2E tests to assess
the systematic accuracy of image-guided treatment platform.

Image Quality and Imaging Dose
Assessment for CT and CBCT
Image quality tests should include analysis of the
following parameters: low contrast resolution,
spatial resolution, uniformity index (UI), contrastto-noise ratio (CNR), signal-to-noise ratio, and
accuracy of the image slice width. The Catphan
phantom (Phantom Laboratory, Salem, New York)
is one of the most commonly used phantoms for
assessing CBCT image quality. This cylindrical
phantom has multiple modules including one with

21/08/18 2:09 PM

120

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

Spatial Resolution

eight inhomogeneity inserts, one containing a uniform water equivalent disk, one with 21 line pairs/
cm, one with a tungsten-carbide beam, and one
with inserts of varying contrast.

The modulation transfer function (MTF) can be
used to characterize the spatial resolution of an
imaging system in the frequency domain. A bar pattern target with a variety of low and high spatial
frequencies (lines/mm) is typically used to determine the MTF. The MTF is generated by calculating modulation of the bar patterns at these various
frequencies. Intensity profiles along the bar patterns are acquired and fit with a Gaussian function.
The MTF is determined by the Fourier transform
of this Gaussian curve (56). An alternative way to
calculate MTF is to analyze the system response to
a small tungsten bead to mimic a point source input
(57). The bead has a finite size, so a correction at
each spatial frequency should be made to obtain the
final MTF curve (58). Gardner et al. compared the
image quality characteristics of the OBI and XVI systems with a GE LightSpeed scanner for both small
(26 cm) and large (46 cm) field-of-view (FOV) settings (54). The OBI system has comparable spatial
resolution as the GE scanner considering that both
have similar detector size (~194 µm) and image
pixel size (~0.5 mm for head protocol and 0.9 mm
for body protocol). The XVI system offers less spatial resolution because of relative larger detector
size (~400 µm) and pixel size (~1.0 mm). The CBCT
systems also exhibit slightly lower spatial resolution as the phantom thickness increases. Table 8.3
shows the number of visible line pair objects for
each system. The MTF curves for all imaging
systems are shown in Figure 8.9.

Uniformity Index
Intensity profiles can be used to visually check the
uniformity. The UI is defined as follows:
UI = HUmax – HUmin
The uniformity depends on the imaging protocol and
patient size and it generally degrades as the patient
size increases especially for the low kVp protocols.
Gardner et al. compared the UI of three imaging
systems: GE LightSpeed 16 slice, Varian On-Board
Imager (OBI), and Elekta x-ray volume imaging
(XVI), using multiple imaging protocols and two different phantom sizes (54). Figure 8.8 shows the UI
for each system and horizontal intensity profiles. The
fan-beam CT system has greater uniformity than the
CBCT system because the CBCT images are more
prone to ring artifacts and cupping effects (55). The
average CT number for water in the sampled region
should be 0 ± 4 HU. The uniformity of CBCT/OBI
head protocol shows higher dependence on phantom size, whereas the uniformities of the pelvis,
thorax, and spotlight protocols are similar between
two different phantom sizes. On the XVI system, the
uniformity decreases as the phantom size increases.
The OBI system is more susceptible to ring artifacts,
whereas the XVI system exhibits cupping artifacts as
shown in the horizontal intensity profiles (54).

120

100

Nominal thickness—20.5 cm

0

With ring—30.5 cm

80

–100
HU value

Uniformity index

100

60

GE—nominal
GE—with ring
OBI pelvis—nominal
OBI pelvis—with ring
XVI pelvis M20—nominal
XVI pelvis M20—with ring

–200

40
–300
20
–400

XV

IP

S

S1

0

20

20

tM
ch

XV
I

el
Ip

es

vi
s

M

S2
0

ht

N

lig
H

XV

BI
O

XV
I

or
ax

sp

th
BI
O

ot

lv

is

d
ea

pe
BI

O

lv
is
pe

BI
h
O

E
G

G

E

he

ad

0
–500

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

Distance along profile (pixels)

FIGURE 8.8 (Left) Uniformity index for each of the three imaging systems, including results for nominal Catphan phantom
thickness (20.5 cm) and results with additional phantom thickness (30.5 cm total thickness). The error bars represent the
standard deviation. (Right) Horizontal intensity profiles through the uniformity module of the Catphan phantom.

Source: From Gardner SJ, Studenski MT, Giaddui T, et al. Investigation into image quality and dose for different patient geometries
with multiple cone-beam CT systems. Med Phys. 2014;41(3):031908. doi:10.1118/1.4865788. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/wol1/
doi/10.1118/1.4865788/full

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 120

21/08/18 2:09 PM

8: QUALITY MANAGEMENT

121

TABLE 8.3 Qualitative Spatial Resolution Data for the GE LightSpeed 16 Slice, Elekta XVI, and Varian OBI Systems
GE

OBI
LP (cm)

XVI
LP (cm)

LP (cm)

Protocol

Nominal

With
Ring

Protocol

Nominal

With Ring

Protocol

Nominal

With
Ring

Head

8 ± 0.5

7 ± 0.5

Head

8 ± 0.5

7 ± 0.5

Head and
neck S20

3 ± 0.5

2 ± 0.5

Pelvis

6 ± 0.5

6 ± 0.5

Pelvis

6 ± 0.5

5 ± 0.5

Pelvis M20

4 ± 0.5

3 ± 0.5

Thorax

6 ± 0.5

5 ± 0.5

Chest M20

4 ± 0.5

4 ± 0.5

Spotlight

8 ± 0.5

8± 0.5

Prostate
seed S10

4 ± 0.5

3± 0.5

OBI, On-Board Imager; XVI, x-ray volume imaging.

1
0.9
0.8

Modulation transfer function

Modulation transfer function

Source: From Gardner SJ, Studenski MT, Giaddui T, et al. Investigation into image quality and dose for different patient geometries with multiple
cone-beam CT systems. Med Phys.2014;41(3):031908. doi:10.1118/1.4865788. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/wol1/doi/10.1118/1.4865788/full

GE—head
GE—visual

0.7
0.6
0.5

OBI—head
OBI—visual
XVI—visual

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Frequency (cycles/mm)

1

1
0.9
0.8

GE—plevis
GE—visual
OBI—plevis

0.7
0.6
0.5

OBI—visual
XVI—pelvis
XVI—visual

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

0.1

0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Frequency (cycles/mm)

0.6

FIGURE 8.9 (Left) The MTF curves for the head protocol for GE LightSpeed 16 slice and Varian OBI. (Right) The MTF
curves for the pelvis protocol for all three imaging systems.
MTF, modulation transfer function; OBI, On-Board Imager.
Source: From Gardner SJ, Studenski MT, Giaddui T, et al. Investigation into image quality and dose for different patient geometries
with multiple cone-beam CT systems. Med Phys. 2014;41(3):031908. doi:10.1118/1.4865788. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/wol1/
doi/10.1118/1.4865788/full

Contrast-to-Noise Ratio
CNR determines the low contrast detectability of
an imaging system and is defined as follows:
CNR =

|x−i − x−0|
s−

Hounsfield Unit Accuracy

0

¯

where x i represents the mean Hounsfield unit in
the region of interest (ROI), whereas x0 and ␴0
represent the mean and standard deviation of the
background. Fan-beam CT has better low contrast
detectability than CBCT because of less photon scattering and better uniformity of the images. As the
phantom size increases, the noise is also increased,
hence reducing the CNR. Figure 8.10 shows the low
contrast detectability at various gantry speeds of the

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 121

OBI system. As the gantry speed increases from 1 to
6° per second, low contrast detectability decreases
linearly with CNR ranging from 4.80 to 1.82 (56).

¯

¯

Figure 8.11 shows the Hounsfield unit sensitivity
for three imaging systems using the Catphan 504
phantom. When changing the phantom thickness
by 10 cm (i.e., comparing nominal thickness of
20.5 cm with thicker phantom with 30.5 cm thickness), the average change in Hounsfield unit for
a typical pelvis helical CT scan with GE unit was
less than 2% (16 HU). The full trajectory scan
with half-fan bow-tie filter of the OBI system is
also dependent on the phantom thickness. Santoso
et al. investigated the variations of Hounsfield

21/08/18 2:09 PM

122

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING
0.1

6

0.09

∗
∗

4
CNR

∗
∗ ∗

0.08

∗

0.07

∗

3

∗

CNR/兹苶
mAs

5

∗
∗

2

∗

∗

0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02

1

0.01
0
0

1

2

(A)

3
4
5
Gantry speed (°/sec)

6

0

7

0

2000

(B)

4000

6000

mAs

FIGURE 8.10 CNR for CBCT. All values were calculated over 10 individual slices and then averaged. Error bars represent

standard error. (A) CNR exhibits a linear trend as a function of gantry speed (R2 = 0.988) and (B) CNR normalized to the
square root of milliampere-second.
CBCT, cone-beam CT; CNR, contrast-to-noise ratio.

2

2

1.8

1.8

1.6

1.6

1.6

1.4

1.4

1.4

1.2
1
0.8

OBI pelvis—nominal

0.6

OBI thorax—nominal

0.4

OBI head—nominal

0.2

OBI spotlight—nominal

0
–1000 –800 –600 –400 –200

0

1.2
1

Electron density

2
1.8

Electron density

Electron density

Source: From Santoso AP, Song KH, Qin Y, et al. Evaluation of gantry speed on image quality and imaging dose for 4D cone-beam
CT acquisition. Radiat Oncol. 2016;11:98. doi:10.1186/s13014-016-0677-8. http://ro-journal.biomedcentral.com/articles/
10.1186/s13014-016-0677-8

1.2
1
0.8

0.8

XVI pelvis M20—nominal

0.6

XVI chest M20—nominal

0.6

GE pelvis—nominal

0.4

XVI HN S20—nominal

0.4

GE head—nominal

0.2

XVI PS S10—nominal

0.2

0
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 –1000 –800 –600 –400 –200

CT number (HU)

0

200 400 600 800 1000 1200

CT number (HU)

0
–1000 –800 –600 –400 –200

0

200 400 600 800 1000 1200

CT number (HU)

FIGURE 8.11 Hounsfield unit sensitivity data for each imaging system using the Catphan phantom. CT–electron density
curves are constructed for each scan protocol of Varian OBI system (left), Elekta XVI system (middle), and LightSpeed
scanner (right).
OBI, On-Board Imager; XVI, x-ray volume imaging.
Source: From Gardner SJ, Studenski MT, Giaddui T, et al. Investigation into image quality and dose for different patient geometries
with multiple cone-beam CT systems. Med Phys. 2014;41(3):031908. doi:10.1118/1.4865788. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/wol1/
doi/10.1118/1.4865788/full

unit-electron density curves at different gantry
speeds (from 1 to 6°/sec) using the Varian OBI
system. The average Hounsfield unit values
acquired at each gantry speed were within one
standard deviation of each other (56). The XVI system shows relatively higher dependence on scanning protocols and patient thickness.

Imaging Dose
Volume CT dose index (CTDIvol) is the primary CT
scanner dose descriptor and is also the key parameter used by multiple accreditation agencies including

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 122

the ACR for CT scanner accreditation. CTDIvol is
obtained by using a 100-mm-long pencil-shaped
ionization chamber in one of the two circular
plastic reference phantoms: a 16-cm phantom for
pediatric and adult head and a 32-cm phantom for
adult torso measurement. CTDIvol is directly proportional to tube current time product. The relationship between CTDIvol and pitch depends on
the vendor settings. Automatic exposure control
(AEC) aims to achieve a specified image quality
across a range of patient sizes through automatic
adjustment of tube current. AEC decreases CTDIvol

21/08/18 2:09 PM

8: QUALITY MANAGEMENT

with decreasing size of the patients. An advantage
of CTDIvol is that it measures the radiation output
of a CT scanner in a consistent manner. However,
it can be used only as a surrogate for patient dose
because it lacks corrections for patient size. To
estimate patient dose more accurately, a known
exponential correction between patient size and
absorbed dose should be applied (59). CTDI
should be measured during the commissioning and
on an annual basis with a tolerance of ±20% of the
manufacturer specification.
Imaging dose of the CBCT system is generally
measured with calibrated ion chambers in the kV
energy range (60), thermoluminescent dosimeters
(TLDs), optically stimulated luminescent dosimeters (OSLDs), or Gafchromic film (61–63). The
AAPM TG-61 report provides recommendations
on how to calculate the absolute dose in the kV
range (60). Santoso et al. measured dose rate of
3.0 × 10–3 cGy/mAs at isocenter within a thorax phantom (CIRS Inc., Norfolk, Virginia) of
the CBCT on the TrueBeam linac (Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto, California) (56). Gardner
et al. used Gafchromic films to measure the CBCT
dose on a Wellhofer Scanditronix phantom and
reported isocenter doses of (2.72 ± 0.11) × 10–3
cGy/mAs (54). The imaging dose decreases as the
patient thickness increases. The imaging dose for
the OBI system is on the order of ~2 cGy for the
pelvis protocol, ~0.5 cGy for the thorax protocol,
and ~1 cGy for the half-trajectory spotlight protocol. For the XVI system, the imaging dose is about
2 cGy for the pelvis M20 and chest M20 protocol
and 0.5 cGy for the prostate seed S10 protocol.

Summary
A summary of QA recommendations distributed
among daily, monthly, and annual QA is as follows.
Daily QA (image quality is assessed for CBCT
only) is used to verify:
1. CT number for water, 0 ± 5 HU
2. Field uniformity within ±5 HU
3. Image noise within manufacturer tolerance
4. In-plane spatial integrity within ±1 mm

Monthly QA is used to verify:
1. CT number accuracy
2. In-plane spatial integrity in x and y direc-

tions (±1 mm)
3. Radiation profile width within manufacturer

specifications

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 123

123

4. Accuracy of the electron density to CT num-

ber conversion
5. Spatial resolution (using the MTF)
6. Contrast resolution (low-contrast test)

Annual QA is used to verify:
1. CTDIvol from scanning within ±20% of the

manufacturer specifications

Image Quality and Geometric
Distortion Assessment for MRI
As radiation oncology departments start incorporating MRI into routine clinical workflow, there
is a demand to develop a robust QM program
to ensure accuracy and avoid errors. The AAPM
TG-117 has been working on providing guidance
for optimization of MRI protocols with high spatial accuracy, and proposing QM tests to ensure
safe implementation of MRI data in treatment
planning and stereotactic procedures. The AAPM
TG-284 has been addressing the acceptance,
commissioning, and QA procedures for MR simulators in radiation therapy. However, currently
there is a lack of guidance documents describing
the unique radiation therapy QA activities associated with MRI for simulation and treatment.
The ACR MRI accreditation program provides
clinical image quality guidance on topics such as
exam pulse sequences, image contrast, imaging
planes, spatial/temporal resolution, and imaging
artifacts. Even though the facility may not pursue accreditation from the ACR, it is still helpful
to implement an effective QA program following
the ACR phantom tests and recommended acceptance criteria (64).

The American College of Radiology Phantom
The ACR MRI phantom is a hollow cylinder
of acrylic plastic that is filled with a solution
of nickel chloride and sodium chloride. The
phantom has seven structures to determine the
performance level of MR systems: geometric
accuracy, high-contrast spatial resolution, slice
thickness and position accuracy, slice position
accuracy, image intensity uniformity, percentage signal ghosting, and low-contrast object
detectability.
Five image sets are usually acquired to evaluate
scanner performance: a sagittal localizer using a
20-mm-thick single-slice spine-echo acquisition,
T1- and T2-weighted axial series defined by the

21/08/18 2:09 PM

124

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

upper left and a lower right hole array, each of
which comprises four columns of four holes. The
hole diameter of the left pair is 1.1 mm, the center
pair 1.0 mm, and the right pair 0.9 mm. A resolution of 1.0 mm or better in both row and column
directions is recommended.

Slice Thickness Accuracy
The slice thickness insert has two crossing signal
ramps with positive and negative slopes of 10 to 1
with respect to the image plane. Therefore, the ramps
shown in the image are 10 times the thickness of
the slice. The slice thickness is calculated with the
following formula:
FIGURE 8.12 Sagittal localizer of the ACR phantom. Two
pairs of 45° wedges lie at each end of the phantom.
ACR, American College of Radiology.

ACR, and T1- and T2-weighted axial series used
by the site. Figure 8.12 shows a sagittal localizer
with two pairs of 45° wedges lying at each end of
the phantom. The 11 axial slices span between the
vertices of the two pairs of wedges with 5-mm slice
thickness and 5-mm gap.

Geometric Accuracy
The length of the ACR phantom is 148 mm and the
diameter is 190 mm. The length is measured along
a line at the center of the phantom in the sagittal
localizer. The diameter is measured in four directions in the axial slices: top-to-bottom, left-to-right,
and two diagonals. The measured lengths should
be within 2 mm of the true values.

High-Contrast Spatial Resolution
Figure 8.13 shows an image of axial slice with
three pairs of arrays of holes in the resolution
insert. Each pair of hole arrays consists of an

Slice thickness = 0.2 × (length of top ramp ×
length of bottom ramp)/(length of top ramp +
length of bottom ramp)
For example, as shown in Figure 8.14, the top
ramp length is 50.2 mm and the bottom length
is 55.9 mm. The slice thickness is 0.2 × (50.2 ×
55.9)/(50.2 + 55.9) = 5.29 mm. The measured
slice thickness using the ACR series should be
within 5.0 ± 0.7 mm.

Slice Position Accuracy
The slice position accuracy test assesses the difference between the prescribed and actual positions
at both inferior and superior ends of the phantom.
These two axial slices are aligned with the vertices
of the crossed wedges, which appear as a pair of
vertical bars at the anterior side of the phantom.
If the slice is displaced superiorly (inferiorly) with
respect to the vertex of the wedges, the bar at the
right (left) side will be longer. The recommended
bar length difference should be within 5.0 mm.
Figure 8.15 shows that the right bar is 2.8 mm
longer than the left bar, implying that the slice is
dispositioned superiorly.

FIGURE 8.13 Three pairs of arrays of holes (left: 1.1 mm; middle: 1.0 mm; right: 0.9 mm) in the resolution insert. The
1.0-mm array is visible in both row and column directions.

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 124

21/08/18 2:09 PM

8: QUALITY MANAGEMENT

125

four axial slices with the contrast values of 1.4%,
2.5%, 3.6%, and 5.1%. The passing score is 37
complete spokes over four slices for a 3-T MRI system and nine for a scanner with less than 3-T field
strength. Figure 8.15 shows the circle of lowcontrast objects with a score of 10 spokes.
Slice thickness Insert

Distance: 5.02 cm

Distance: 5.59 cm

Resolution Insert

FIGURE 8.14 The slice thickness insert with two crossed
signal ramps. The top ramp length is 5.02 cm and the bottom length is 5.59 cm. The slice thickness is calculated on
the basis of these two measures.

FIGURE 8.15 The insert for slice position accuracy test

and low-contrast object detectability. The vertices of the
crossed wedges are aligned in this slice that appears as
a pair of vertical bars at the anterior side. The bar length
difference tells how much the phantom is dispositioned.
The center of the slice shows the low-contrast objects with
spokes of small disks radiating from the center of a circle.
All 10 spokes are visible in this image.

Low-Contrast Object Detectability
The low-contrast objects have spokes of small
disks radiating from the center of a circle. There
are 10 spokes with the disk diameter ranging from
7.0 to 1.5 mm. The low-contrast objects appear on

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 125

Geometric Fidelity Test
The inhomogeneity in the static magnetic field and
nonlinearities in the spatial encoding gradients contribute to system-level distortions. The system-level
geometric accuracy should be evaluated using a 3D
phantom (commissioning and annual QA) and a
2D phantom (daily or weekly QA) considering the
high geometric fidelity requirement in radiation
oncology. The phantom used to characterize distortion contains a grid of phantom markers with a
dimension in the order of 30 to 40 cm. Considering
the phantom size, a body coil that is integrated into
the MR system can be used for phantom scanning.
A planar phantom is usually used for 2D distortion
evaluation and it is scanned in each of three planes
to verify the amount of in-plane distortion. The
vendor typically provides a package for routine 2D
distortion characterization including the phantom,
exam card, and image analysis software package.
Deviations between the expected and measured
values for each marker are calculated and a distortion map is derived in a defined ROI. Figure 8.16
shows a vendor-provided geometric planar distortion phantom scanned in axial, sagittal, and coronal planes. The isocontours ranging from 2 to
6 mm are interpolated in the image on the basis
of the calculated deviations on each plane. In this
manner, 2D distortion can be assessed qualitatively
and quantitatively on a regular basis.
A more systematic evaluation of 3D distortion
and correction has been investigated and reported
in the literature (65–70).

Summary
In addition to the ACR-recommended image quality QA test, other tests should include characterization of static magnetic homogeneity, receiver
gain (to amplify and digitize the signal), transmitter gain (the radiofrequency energy to apply a
90° pulse), and central frequency. This information can be extracted from the scanner’s log files
directly. Tests needed include the offset distance
between external laser and imaging isocenter, the
3D gradient distortion, the couch position accuracy, and the residual errors for patient simulation
and treatment localization.

21/08/18 2:09 PM

126

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

Axial

Sagittal

Coronal

FIGURE 8.16 (Top) 2D phantom provided by the manufacturer for 2D distortion evaluation; (bottom) distortion plots
with isocontours ranging from 2 to 6 mm.

2D, two-dimensional.
Source: From Glide-Hurst CK, Wen N, Hearshen D, et al. Initial clinical experience with a radiation oncology dedicated open 1.0T
MR-simulation. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2015;16(2):218-240. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v16i2.5201. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1120/
jacmp.v16i2.5201/full

End-to-End Tests

Volumetric and Spatial Fidelity

The Winston–Lutz test has become a standard test
to evaluate the isocentricity of conventional linacs
(11). The E2E test procedure should be performed
during the commissioning and should be tested on
an annual basis to check the geometric and dosimetric uncertainties of the SRS system. Modern
E2E test phantoms consist of a comprehensive
package for multimodality image acquisition and
fusion tests, image quality QA, geometric isocenter evaluation, and dose calculation accuracy QA.
E2E tests can incorporate the volumetric and spatial fidelity between different image modalities,
the coincidence of each image modality with the
radiation center, the coincidence of gantry, collimator, and couch axes with the radiation isocenter, and the dosimetric accuracy of delivery.

The E2E test phantom typically has MRI/PET/CT
target inserts to compare shapes and volumes using
different imaging modalities, and to evaluate the
accuracy of image registration including deformable image registration. For PET or MR imaging,
the target cavity is filled with compatible liquids
with known volumes. Figure 8.17 shows the insert
appearance of volumetric inserts of a Lucy phantom (Standard Imaging, Middleton, Wisconsin)
acquired with a CT scanner (120 kVp, 284 mAs)
and 1.0-T MR simulator (3D T1-weighted fast
field echo, TR = 25 milliseconds, TE = 6.9 milliseconds) (65). The difference between the scanned
volumes and manufacturer-stated volumes can be
computed to evaluate volumetric fidelity of each
imaging system.

FIGURE 8.17 Lucy 3D QA Phantom CT-SIM, MR-SIM, image fusion, and volumetric comparisons.
3D, three-dimensional; MR, magnetic resonance; QA, quality assurance; SIM, simulator.

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 126

21/08/18 2:09 PM

8: QUALITY MANAGEMENT

A 3D spatial distortion grid can be used to evaluate spatial fidelity, image registration accuracy, and
image distortion across the multiple modalities.
The grid consists of an array of orthogonal wires
embedded in an acrylic box. It is filled with MR- or
PET-compatible liquids. The grid spacing is usually
in the order of 10 mm. After the image sets from
CT, MR, or PET dataset are fused together, the displacement for each marker between the two image
sets can be computed to assess the fusion accuracy
and spatial fidelity. The measured grid dimensions
can be used to evaluate the image distortion.

Evaluation of the Localization Accuracy
To evaluate the coincidence of imaging to radiation
isocenter, the phantom should be localized with
the imaging modality used for patient localization.
After the couch correction is made on the basis of
the image registration results, the Winston–Lutz
test can be performed using a combined gantry,
collimator, and couch angles to quantify systematic and random errors of the localization accuracy.
MLC-defined field size, jaw-defined field size, and
cone-defined field size should be tested individually
to evaluate the targeting accuracy of each collimation
system. Figure 8.5 shows Winston–Lutz results with
a 2 × 2 cm2 MLC-defined field sizes taken at a combination of 14 gantry, collimator, and couch angles
using the portal imager. Deviation was calculated
by measuring radial distance between the center of
the central BB and the full width at half-maximum
of the radiation field. If multiple imaging modalities
are available for patient localization, the localization accuracy should be evaluated for each imaging
system. Wen et al. measured the targeting accuracy
of the Edge radiosurgical platform (Varian Medical
Systems, Palo Alto, California). The radial distance
at a combination of gantry, collimator, and couch
angles was 0.44 ± 0.25, 0.47 ± 0.26, and 0.43 ±
0.13 mm with jaw-, MLC-, and cone-defined field
sizes, respectively, using CBCT-based localization (66). The localization accuracy was 0.03 ±
0.11, 0.05 ± 0.11, and 0.04 ± 0.08 mm along
the lateral, longitudinal, and vertical directions,
respectively, for the optical surface management
system, and –0.04 ± 0.07, 0.00 ± 0.20, and –0.03 ±
0.38 mm, respectively, for the Calypso system. The
image resolution of simulation CT has impact on
the localization accuracy. Murphy reported that
the localization accuracy was improved by a factor of 2 when the CT slice thickness was reduced
from 3.0 to 1.5 mm on a CyberKnife unit (67).

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 127

127

High-resolution digitally reconstructed radiographs (DRRs) generated from finer CT slice
thickness could improve the fusion accuracy of
2D–3D image registration algorithm. However,
no further improvement was noticed as the slice
thickness was reduced from 2 to 0.625 mm (68).
There was no correlation between the CBCT slice
thickness and the localization accuracy because
of redundant information provided from CBCT
images for 3D–3D image registration (69).

Independent Verification With IROC Houston
Phantom and OSLD Measurements
After commissioning, an independent verification
should be performed to verify that no systematic
or dosimetric errors occurred during commissioning. Independent verification can be performed in
multiple ways by using an independent measurement device, having an independent user perform
measurements, having a consulting group do independent verifications, having an audit performed
by another party, or performing irradiations of
a dosimeter to be read out by a third party. The
IROC Houston Quality Assurance Center at MD
Anderson is an excellent resource to perform independent measurements (70).

OSLD Measurements
IROC Houston uses OSLD devices to perform
independent external dosimetry audits of photon
and electron beams. The OSLDs are shipped from
IROC Houston to the requesting institution where
they are irradiated by the institution.

Anthropomorphic Phantom Irradiation
IROC Houston also has available a variety of
anthropomorphic phantoms for irradiation used for
independent verification, including the following:
an SRS head phantom, an IMRT head and neck
phantom, a spine phantom, a thorax phantom, a
liver phantom, and a pelvis/prostate phantom. Each
phantom is used to simulate a specific clinical site
and treatment and can be used to validate the treatment workflow at a given institution (Figure 8.18).
Typical acceptable TLD/OSLD deviations are
±5% or 7%, given that the dosimetric precision
of the TLD is 3%. Depending on the phantom, the
film gamma passing criteria range from 7%, 4 mm
for the head and neck phantom to 5%, 3 mm for
the spine phantom, where the acceptable pass rate
is above 85%.

21/08/18 2:10 PM

128

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

FIGURE 8.18 Axial cross-section of a selection of IROC Houston phantoms including (A) head and neck IMRT phan-

tom; (B) SRS phantom; (C) thorax phantom for spine, lung, and spine/lung irradiations; and (D) liver phantom showing
axial cut through PTV2.

IMRT, intensity-modulated radiation therapy; IROC, Imaging and Radiation Oncology Core; PTV, planning target volume; SRS, stereotactic
radiosurgery.

Daily Localization QA
The Winston–Lutz test and imaging and treatment
coordinate coincidence should be evaluated on a
daily basis with 1-mm tolerance for SRS/SBRT QA.
An integrated daily test was proposed by Wen et al.
to assess the overall accuracy of image-based localization and treatment delivery in one setting (71).
The phantom was set up on top of an acrylic base
plate and fixed to the pegs of an indexing bar for
consistent setup (vertical: 10.0 cm; longitudinal:
98.5 cm; lateral: 0.0 cm, pitch: 0.5°, and roll: 0.5°).
The optical system was first used to localize the
phantom surface and CBCT images were acquired
and six-dimensional fusion shifts were recorded
and applied after CT and CBCT image fusion. The
phantom position in the optical system after correction was recorded to compare the results against the
initial setup. An orthogonal MV/kV image pair was
taken and 2D–3D image registration was performed
to quantify the residual errors. Twelve 2 × 2 cm2,
MLC-defined portal images were acquired at four
gantry, four couch, and four collimator angles to
verify the isocenter targeting accuracy. Figure 8.19
shows the phantom setup and images acquired from
optical system and CBCT. Using this phantom, the
coincidence between different imaging modalities
(optical system vs. CBCT, CBCT vs. MV/kV), the

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 128

accuracy of 6DoF correction of the couch, the coincidence between the imaging system and the radiation isocenter, and the Winston–Lutz test can all be
assessed efficiently on a daily basis.

Summary
The AAPM TG-142 report summarized the
machine tolerances for SRS deliveries (27). The
net uncertainty in target localization and treatment
delivery was 2.4 mm when considering all the
factors including the mechanical position uncertainty of a stereotactic frame, the CT/MRI image
resolution, and the isocentric alignment accuracy.
The uncertainty has been further reduced with
the improvement of CT/MRI image resolution.
It is essential to assess the cumulative errors of
linac-based, image-guided frameless SRS with a
robust E2E test procedure on a regular basis to
ensure high accuracy required for SRS.
A robust QM program is essential for safe and
effective treatment of patients using SRS/SBRT.
The program should be developed with input from
all practicing team members, including physicists,
physicians, dosimetrists, and other relevant professionals. The program should include comprehensive
tests for commissioning, daily, monthly, and annual
QA, patient-specific QA, as well as checklists to

21/08/18 2:10 PM

8: QUALITY MANAGEMENT

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

(E)

(F)

129

FIGURE 8.19 The QA phantom (A) on top of an acrylic base plate. The localization (B) of phantom surface using the
optical system. The difference (delta) between the current position of the Optical Surface Monitoring System (OSMS)
phantom and its reference position is shown in 6DoF. The 6° automatic fusion (C) between planning CT and CBCT after
adjusting the contrast of the acquired image and reference image to achieve optimal visualization of the BBs. An orthogonal MV (D)/kV (E) image set is taken and 2D–3D image fusion is performed to quantify the residual error. Four representative (F) MLC-defined portal images of the Winston–Lutz test.

CBCT, cone-beam CT; DoF, degrees of freedom; MLC, multileaf collimator; OSMS, optical surface monitoring system; QA, quality assurance.
Source: From Wen N, Li H, Song K, et al. Characteristics of a novel treatment system for linear accelerator-based stereotactic radiosurgery. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2015;16(4)125-148. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v16i4.5313. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1120/jacmp.
v16i4.5313/full

capture the salient safety checks needed during
simulation, planning, and treatment. Independent
checks of commissioning, linac calibration, and
routine QA procedures are strongly recommended.
An auditing program to ensure proper updates of
regular QA procedures, as well as reporting of potential errors or near misses, is strongly recommended.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the American Cancer Society under a Research Scholar Grant
RSG-15-137-01-CCE.

REFERENCES
1. Kry SF, Molineu A, Kerns JR, et al. Institutional patientspecific IMRT QA does not predict unacceptable plan delivery.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2014;90:1195-1201. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2014.08.334
2. Huq MS, Fraass BA, Dunscombe PB, et al. The report of Task
Group 100 of the AAPM: application of risk analysis methods
to radiation therapy quality management. Med Phys. 2016;43:
4209. doi:10.1118/1.4947547
3. Miller B, Movsas B, Siddiqui M, et al. FMEA and fault tree
ananlysis applied to vendor customer technical bulletins. Med
Phys. 2013;40:493. doi:10.1118/1.4815600
4. Klein EE, Hanley J, Bayouth J, et al. Task Group 142 report:
quality assurance of medical accelerators. Med Phys. 2009;
36:4197-4212. doi:10.1118/1.3190392

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 129

5. Kutcher GJ, Coia L, Gillin M, et al. Comprehensive QA for radiation oncology: report of AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee
Task Group 40. Med Phys. 1994;21:581-618. doi:10.1118/
1.597316
6. Sharpe MB, Miller BM, Yan D, et al. Monitor unit settings
for intensity modulated beams delivered using a step-andshoot approach. Med Phys. 2000;27:2719-2725. doi:10
.1118/1.1328383
7. Chui CS, Spirou S, LoSasso T. Testing of dynamic multileaf collimation. Med Phys. 1996;23:635-641. doi:10.1118/1.597699
8. Low DA, Sohn JW, Klein EE, et al. Characterization of a
commercial multileaf collimator used for intensity modulated radiation therapy. Med Phys. 2001;28:752-756. doi:10
.1118/1.1367863
9. Kielar KN, Mok E, Hsu A, et al. Verification of dosimetric accuracy on the TrueBeam STx: rounded leaf effect of
the high definition MLC. Med Phys. 2012;39:6360-6371.
doi:10.1118/1.4752444
10. Snyder M, Halford R, Knill C, et al. Modeling the Agility
MLC in the Monaco treatment planning system. J Appl
Clin Med Phys. 2016;17:190-202. doi:10.1120/jacmp.
v17i3.6044
11. Winston KR, Lutz W. Linear accelerator as a neurosurgical
tool for stereotactic radiosurgery. Neurosurgery. 1988;22:
454-464. PubMed PMID: 3129667.
12. Schmidhalter D, Fix MK, Wyss M, et al. Evaluation of a new
six degrees of freedom couch for radiation therapy. Med Phys.
2013;40:111710. doi:10.1118/1.4823789
13. Olch AJ, Gerig L, Li H, et al. Dosimetric effects caused by couch
tops and immobilization devices: report of AAPM Task Group
176. Med Phys. 2014;41:061501. doi:10.1118/1.4876299
14. Aspradakis MM, Byrne JP, Palmans H, et al. Institute of physics and engineering in medicine (IPEM) report no. 103 - small
field MV photon dosimetry. 2010.

21/08/18 2:10 PM

130

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

15. Das IJ, Ding GX, Ahnesjö A. Small fields: nonequilibrium
radiation dosimetry. Med Phys. 2008;35:206-215. doi:10
.1118/1.2815356
16. Kumar S, Fenwick JD, Underwood TS, et al. Breakdown
of Bragg-Gray behaviour for low-density detectors under
electronic disequilibrium conditions in small megavoltage
photon fields. Phys Med Biol. 2015;60:8187-8212. doi:10
.1088/0031-9155/60/20/8187
17. Ding GX, Duggan DM, Lu B, et al. Impact of inhomogeneity corrections on dose coverage in the treatment of lung
cancer using stereotactic body radiation therapy. Med Phys.
2007;34:2985-2994. doi:10.1118/1.2745923
18. Seuntjens J. Measurement issues in commissioning and
benchmarking of monte carlo treatment planning systems.
In: Curran BH, Balter JM, Chetty IJ, eds. Integrating New
Technologies into the Clinic: Monte Carlo and Image-Guided
Radiation Therapy. Vol. 32. Madison, WI: Medical Physics
Publishing; 2006:117-144.
19. Fenwick JD, Kumar S, Scott AJ, et al. Using cavity theory
to describe the dependence on detector density of dosimeter response in non-equilibrium small fields. Phys Med Biol.
2013;58:2901-2923. doi:10.1088/0031-9155/58/9/2901
20. Scott AJ, Kumar S, Nahum AE, et al. Characterizing the
influence of detector density on dosimeter response in nonequilibrium small photon fields. Phys Med Biol. 2012;57:
4461-4476. doi:10.1088/0031-9155/57/14/4461
21. Bouchard H, Seuntjens J, Duane S, et al. Detector dose response
in megavoltage small photon beams. I. Theoretical concepts.
Med Phys. 2015;42:6033-6047. doi:10.1118/1.4930053
22. Kim J, Wen N, Jin JY, et al. Clinical commissioning and use of
the Novalis Tx linear accelerator for SRS and SBRT. J Appl
Clin Med Phys. 2012;13:3729. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v13i3.3729
23. Laub WU, Wong T. The volume effect of detectors in
the dosimetry of small fields used in IMRT. Med Phys.
2003;30:341-347. doi:10.1118/1.1544678
24. McKerracher C, Thwaites DI. Assessment of new smallfield detectors against standard-field detectors for practical
stereotactic beam data acquisition. Phys Med Biol. 1999;44:
2143-2160. PubMed PMID: 10495110.
25. Qin Y, Zhong H, Wen N, et al. Deriving detector-specific
correction factors for rectangular small fields using a scintillator detector. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2016;17:379-391.
doi:10.1120/jacmp.v17i6.6433
26. Benedict SH, Yenice KM, Followill D, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy: the report of AAPM Task Group 101. Med
Phys. 2010;37:4078-4101. doi:10.1118/1.3438081
27. Schell MC, Bova FJ, Larson DA, et al. AAPM Report No. 54:
Stereotactic Radiosurgery. Report of Task Group no. 42 of the
American Association of Physicists in Medicine. 1995. http://
www.aapm.org/pubs/reports/RPT_54.pdf. Accessed July 22, 2016.
28. Solberg TD, Balter JM, Benedict SH, et al. Quality and safety
considerations in stereotactic radiosurgery and stereotactic
body radiation therapy: executive summary. Pract Radiat
Oncol. 2012;2:2-9. doi:10.1016/j.prro.2011.06.014
29. Fraass B, Doppke K, Hunt M, et al. American Association of Physicists in Medicine Radiation Therapy
Committee Task Group 53: quality assurance for clinical radiotherapy treatment planning. Med Phys. 1998;25:1773-1829.
doi:10.1118/1.598373
30. Van Dyk J, Barnett RB, Cygler JE, et al. Commissioning and
quality assurance of treatment planning computers. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1993;26:261-273. PubMed PMID:
8491684.
31. Ezzell GA, Galvin JM, Low D, et al. Guidance document
on delivery, treatment planning, and clinical implementation
of IMRT: report of the IMRT Subcommittee of the AAPM

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 130

Radiation Therapy Committee. Med Phys. 2003;30:2089-2115.
doi:10.1118/1.1591194
32. Rogers DW, Faddegon BA, Ding GX, et al. Beam: a Monte
Carlo code to simulate radiotherapy treatment units. Med
Phys. 1995;22:503-524. doi:10.1118/1.597552
33. Smilowitz JB, Das IJ, Feygelman V, et al. AAPM medical
physics practice guideline 5.a.: commissioning and QA of
treatment planning dose calculations - megavoltage photon
and electron beams. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2016;17:457.
doi:10.1120/jacmp.v17i1.6166
34. Carrasco P, Jornet N, Duch MA, et al. Comparison of dose
calculation algorithms in phantoms with lung equivalent
heterogeneities under conditions of lateral electronic disequilibrium. Med Phys. 2004;31:2899-2911. doi:10.1118/
1.1788932
35. Fragoso M, Wen N, Kumar S, et al. Dosimetric verification
and clinical evaluation of a new commercially available monte
carlo-based dose algorithm for application in stereotactic body
radiation therapy (SBRT) treatment planning. Phys Med Biol.
2010;55:4445-4464. doi:10.1088/0031-9155/55/16/S02
36. Ezzell GA, Burmeister JW, Dogan N, et al. IMRT commissioning: multiple institution planning and dosimetry comparisons, a report from AAPM Task Group 119. Med Phys.
2009;36:5359-5373. doi:10.1118/1.3238104
37. Almond PR, Biggs PJ, Coursey BM, et al. AAPM’s TG-51
protocol for clinical reference dosimetry of high-energy photon and electron beams. Med Phys. 1999;26:1847-1870.
doi:10.1118/1.598691
38. McEwen M, DeWerd L, Ibbott G, et al. Addendum to the
AAPM’s TG-51 protocol for clinical reference dosimetry of
high-energy photon beams. Med Phys. 2014;41:041501. doi:10
.1118/1.4866223
39. Eklund K, Ahnesjö A. Spectral perturbations from silicon
diode detector encapsulation and shielding in photon fields.
Med Phys. 2010;37:6055-6060. doi:10.1118/1.3501316
40. Pai S, Das IJ, Dempsey JF, et al. TG-69: radiographic film
for megavoltage beam dosimetry. Med Phys. 2007;34:
2228-2258. doi:10.1118/1.2736779
41. Lewis D, Micke A, Yu X, et al. An efficient protocol for
radiochromic film dosimetry combining calibration and measurement in a single scan. Med Phys. 2012;39:6339-6350.
doi:10.1118/1.4754797
42. Ramani R, Lightstone AW, Mason DL, et al. The use of
radiochromic film in treatment verification of dynamic stereotactic radiosurgery. Med Phys. 1994;21:389-392. doi:10
.1118/1.597385
43. Devic S, Seuntjens J, Sham E, et al. Precise radiochromic
film dosimetry using a flat-bed document scanner. Med Phys.
2005;32:2245-2253. doi:10.1118/1.1929253
44. Wen N, Lu S, Kim J, et al. Precise film dosimetry for stereotactic radiosurgery and stereotactic body radiotherapy quality
assurance using Gafchromic™ EBT3 films. Radiat Oncol.
2016;11:132. doi:10.1186/s13014-016-0709-4
45. Miura H, Ozawa S, Hosono F, et al. Gafchromic EBT-XD
film: dosimetry characterization in high-dose, volumetricmodulated arc therapy. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2016;17:
312-322. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v17i6.6281
46. Vatnitsky S, Järvinen H. Application of a natural diamond
detector for the measurement of relative dose distributions
in radiotherapy. Phys Med Biol. 1993;38:173-184. PubMed
PMID: 8381236.
47. Beddar AS. Plastic scintillation dosimetry and its application
to radiotherapy. Radiat Meas. 2006;41(suppl 1):S124-S133.
doi:10.1016/j.radmeas.2007.01.002
48. Das IJ, Cheng CW, Watts RJ, et al. Accelerator beam data
commissioning equipment and procedures: report of the

21/08/18 2:10 PM

8: QUALITY MANAGEMENT
TG-106 of the Therapy Physics Committee of the AAPM.
Med Phys. 2008;35:4186-4215. doi:10.1118/1.2969070
49. Mellenberg DE, Dahl RA, Blackwell CR. Acceptance testing of an automated scanning water phantom. Med Phys.
1990;17:311-314. doi:10.1118/1.596510
50. Low DA, Harms WB, Mutic S, et al. A technique for the
quantitative evaluation of dose distributions. Med Phys.
1998;25:656-661. doi:10.1118/1.598248
51. Agnew CE, King RB, Hounsell AR, et al. Implementation of
phantom-less IMRT delivery verification using Varian Dynalog files and R/V output. Phys Med Biol. 2012;57:6761-6777.
doi:10.1088/0031-9155/57/21/6761
52. Wendling M, McDermott LN, Mans A, et al. A simple backprojection algorithm for 3D in vivo EPID dosimetry of
IMRT treatments. Med Phys. 2009;36:3310-3321. doi:10
.1118/1.3148482
53. Mutic S, Palta JR, Butker EK, et al. Quality assurance
for computed-tomography simulators and the computedtomography-simulation process: report of the AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 66. Med Phys.
2003;30:2762-2792. doi:10.1118/1.1609271
54. Gardner SJ, Studenski MT, Giaddui T, et al. Investigation into
image quality and dose for different patient geometries with
multiple cone-beam CT systems. Med Phys. 2014;41:031908.
doi:10.1118/1.4865788
55. Hunter AK, McDavid WD. Characterization and correction
of cupping effect artefacts in cone beam CT. Dentomaxillofac
Radiol. 2012;41:217-223. doi:10.1259/dmfr/19015946
56. Santoso AP, Song KH, Qin Y, et al. Evaluation of gantry
speed on image quality and imaging dose for 4D cone-beam
CT acquisition. Radiat Oncol. 2016;11:98. doi:10.1186/
s13014-016-0677-8
57. Garayoa J, Castro P. A study on image quality provided by
a kilovoltage cone-beam computed tomography. J Appl Clin
Med Phys. 2013;14:3888. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v14i1.3888
58. Nickoloff EL. Measurement of the PSF for a CT scanner:
appropriate wire diameter and pixel size. Phys Med Biol.
1988;33:149-155. PubMed PMID: 3353449.
59. Turner AC, Zhang D, Khatonabadi M, et al. The feasibility of
patient size-corrected, scanner-independent organ dose estimates for abdominal CT exams. Med Phys. 2011;38:820-829.
doi:10.1118/1.3533897
60. Ma CM, Coffey CW, DeWerd LA, et al. AAPM protocol
for 40-300 kV x-ray beam dosimetry in radiotherapy and
radiobiology. Med Phys. 2001;28:868-893. doi:10.1118/
1.1374247

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 131

131

61. Giaddui T, Cui Y, Galvin J, et al. Comparative dose evaluations between XVI and OBI cone beam CT systems using
Gafchromic XRQA2 film and nanoDot optical stimulated
luminescence dosimeters. Med Phys. 2013;40:062102.
doi:10.1118/1.4803466
62. Kim S, Yoo S, Yin FF, et al. Kilovoltage cone-beam CT: comparative dose and image quality evaluations in partial and
full-angle scan protocols. Med Phys. 2010;37:3648-3659.
doi:10.1118/1.3438478
63. Wen N, Guan H, Hammoud R, et al. Dose delivered from
Varian’s CBCT to patients receiving IMRT for prostate
cancer. Phys Med Biol. 2007;52:2267-2276. doi:10.1088/
0031-9155/52/8/015
64. American College of Radiology. Phantom Test Guidance
for the ACR MRI Accreditation Program. 2005. https://
www.acraccreditation.org/-/media/ACRAccreditation/
Documents/MRI/LargePhantomGuidance.pdf?la=en.
Accessed April 22, 2015.
65. Glide-Hurst CK, Wen N, Hearshen D, et al. Initial clinical
experience with a radiation oncology dedicated open 1.0T
MR-simulation. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2015;16:5201. doi:10
.1120/jacmp.v16i2.5201
66. Wen N, Snyder KC, Scheib SG, et al. Technical Note: evaluation of the systematic accuracy of a frameless, multiple
image modality guided, linear accelerator based stereotactic radiosurgery system. Med Phys. 2016;43:2527. doi:10
.1118/1.4947199
67. Murphy MJ. The importance of computed tomography slice
thickness in radiographic patient positioning for radiosurgery.
Med Phys. 1999;26:171-175. doi:10.1118/1.598500
68. Verbakel WF, Lagerwaard FJ, Verduin AJ, et al. The accuracy
of frameless stereotactic intracranial radiosurgery. Radiother
Oncol. 2010;97:390-394. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2010.06.012
69. Kim J, Jin JY, Walls N, et al. Image-guided localization accuracy of stereoscopic planar and volumetric imaging methods
for stereotactic radiation surgery and stereotactic body radiation therapy: a phantom study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2011;79:1588-1596.
70. Kerns JR, Followill DS, Lowenstein J, et al. Technical Report:
reference photon dosimetry data for Varian accelerators based
on IROC-Houston site visit data. Med Phys. 2016;43:2374.
doi:10.1118/1.4945697
71. Wen N, Li H, Song K, et al. Characteristics of a novel treatment system for linear accelerator-based stereotactic radiosurgery. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2015;16:125-148. doi:10.1120/
jacmp.v16i4.5313

21/08/18 2:10 PM

Heron_68566_PTR_08_103-132_08-23-18.indd 132

21/08/18 2:10 PM

C H A P T E R

9

Patient Safety
Peter B. Dunscombe and M. Saiful Huq

PATIENT SAFETY
Although new, advanced techniques such as stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) have demonstrated the ability to improve treatment outcomes
for certain disease conditions, they entail a level
of complexity that makes assuring the quality and
safety of such treatments challenging to say the
least. Involving, as they do, the delivery of highly
conformal treatments with sharp dose gradients
outside small, and maybe moving, targets, using one
or a few very large dose fractions, the margin for
both dose and localization error is much reduced for
SBRT treatments compared with traditional, fractionated radiation therapy. Particularly in the early
days of stereotactic radiotherapeutic techniques,
several high-profile incidents were reported and
have been described in detail elsewhere (1). Most of
these incidents resulted from a lack of understanding by the users of the technical complexities of these
new techniques and associated technologies. A common problem arose from the difficulty of measuring
radiation output in small fields for which electronic
equilibrium is not established. Other reported incidents involved laterality errors particularly in symmetrical structures such as the brain. Recognizing
the challenges of SBRT, the American Association
of Physicists in Medicine (AAPM) has been able to
offer guidance on these and other critical SBRT topics through its Report of Task Group 101 (TG-101)
(2), which if understood and followed should minimize errors and maximize treatment quality.

Reports in the popular press, and even in the scientific press, tend to focus on catastrophic incidents
with consequences that are apparent at the individual patient level. Such incidents represent such a
severe degradation of quality that the effect is manifested on an individual affected patient. It makes no
sense, however, to assume that patients who do not
suffer from these widely publicized, catastrophic
events all receive optimum, high-quality treatment.
For a population of patients there must be a continuous distribution of departures from quality ranging
from no departure, that is, the treatment is delivered
exactly as prescribed, to such a deviation in dose or
location (both of which could be four-dimensional)
that a patient suffers identifiable injuries. If this
supposition is correct, then there must surely be
patients who receive suboptimal radiation therapy
that compromises outcome through reduced longevity or unnecessary side effects but to a degree that
would be apparent only in a cohort of patients and
could not be unambiguously identified on any one
individual member of that cohort. When we think
about patient safety, we tend to think about those
highly publicized incidents that result in detailed
investigations, publications by authoritative bodies,
and, frequently, finger pointing. What we should be
thinking about is how to minimize any degradation
of quality, whether catastrophic or not, as any level
of degradation of quality has the potential to impair
the patient’s quantity and quality of life. It is artificial
and not helpful to imagine a firm boundary between
safety and quality. They are interrelated concepts

133

Heron_68566_PTR_09_133-138_08-23-18.indd 133

21/08/18 2:09 PM

134

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

and, generally, enhancing quality will inevitably lead
to safer radiation therapy.
So, if our goal is to enhance safety (and quality), where do we start? Many strategies have been
described in the literature but it is increasingly recognized that individual strategies will not exhibit
sustainable success unless overlaid on a solid
Safety Culture within the organization. So the next
question is the following: What is Safety Culture?
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) in the
United States has given this particular issue considerable thought. It succinctly defines (nuclear)
Safety Culture as the “core values and behaviors
resulting from a collective commitment by leaders
and individuals to emphasize safety over competing goals to ensure protection of people and the
environment” (3). Two key words in this definition
are “behaviors” and “commitment.” In the case of
the former, the NRC’s definition makes it clear that
merely making warm, fuzzy statements about safety
is by no means sufficient to convince a regulator, or
anyone else, of the existence of a Safety Culture.
There have to be behaviors and tangible activities
to substantiate any claim that a Safety Culture
exists in an organization. The NRC discusses what
appropriate activities might be and we return to
this discussion later in this chapter. The second
key word is “commitment.” Again, words alone
will not suffice to establish commitment. The only
meaningful evidence of commitment is the allocation of resources to the endeavor of interest—in
this case the development and maintenance of a
Safety Culture. And resources could be as simple
as some protected time particularly for those leading the initiative to focus on safety/quality issues.
A further point to note is that the word “culture”
is meaningful only when applied to a group of people such as an organization. Buy-in from the whole
team is essential for a credible Safety Culture.
Let us assume that an enlightened administration has allocated some resources to establish and
maintain an effective Safety Culture. The next natural question that arises is the following: Where
do we go from here? For any venture to be successful there has to be leadership that accepts the
responsibility for the venture, is empowered with
the necessary degree of authority, and is ultimately
accountable to the provider of the resources. A
common misconception is that leaders have to
be senior figures in an organization. In reality,
everyone is endowed with some degree of leadership ability. So in thinking about Safety Culture,
it would be fitting to consider members from any
of the radiation therapy disciplines provided they

Heron_68566_PTR_09_133-138_08-23-18.indd 134

have credibility with their colleagues and are vested
with the appropriate degree of authority over safety
issues. Although the authority of the Safety Culture
leader should be clear to all members of the team,
sustainable progress is likely to be made only if
that authority is never or only rarely used. In the
modern environment, reasoned arguments leading to consensus decisions are far more likely to
be successful than barking out orders! So how do
we get consensus decisions in a radiation therapy
department of maybe 30 or more busy people? We
pick representatives from the various professional
groups and get input from them to advise the leader
on safety/quality issues. We have thus established
our department’s Safety Committee. These representatives would ideally have leadership and communication abilities too as they are the conduits
between their professional groups and the safety
leader. An important feature of the Safety Committee and its leader is that the reporting relationships
should, as far as possible, be separated from routine clinic operations. The NRC is very clear on this
point. Should a conflict exist between safety and
operational issues, safety takes precedence. Separation of reporting relationships will minimize the
probability of such conflicts.
Any committee, including the Safety Committee,
needs to have a clear mandate; otherwise, progress
and success cannot be monitored. So what might
the mandate of the Safety Committee be? A good
place to start might again be a modified version of
the work of the U.S. NRC (3). So, for example, the
mandate could be “To establish a Safety Culture
defined as the core values and behaviors resulting from a collective commitment by leaders and
individuals to emphasize safety over competing
goals to ensure protection of patients, people and
the environment.” We have introduced “patients”
into the NRC definition, as they will remain the
primary concern of all radiation oncology facilities.
One advantage of turning to the NRC for help with
a safety initiative is that they have elaborated, in
general terms, many of the key features of a meaningful Safety Culture. It is true that the focus of the
NRC Safety Culture–related documents is on the
nuclear industry. However, very little imagination
is required to adapt their discussion of the topic to
the radiation therapy clinic.
The NRC has identified a nonexhaustive list
of nine traits that it associates with Safety Culture: Leadership Safety Values and Actions,
Work Processes, Questioning Attitude, Problem
Identification and Resolution, Environment for
Raising Concerns, Effective Safety Communication,

21/08/18 2:09 PM

9: PATIENT SAFETY

Respectful Work Environment, Continuous Learning, and Personal Accountability. A good place for
a Safety Committee to start its work is to consider
each of these traits in some detail and to explore
opportunities for strengthening each of them in the
clinic. We now take a look at some initiatives that
are used in clinics around the world and associate
them with the NRC’s Safety Traits. Two important
national initiatives are incident learning (Problem
Identification and Resolution) and prospective
error management (Work Processes); these two
traits are deferred for a more detailed discussion
later in this chapter.
If upper management has allocated resources to
the Department Safety Committee, this already constitutes a level of commitment to safety (Leadership
Safety Values and Actions). To solidify this commitment, upper management should take an active
interest in the workings of the committee such as
occasionally appearing at committee meetings.
Leadership at the Committee level could take the
form of organizing regular safety rounds and recommending to management that some form of recognition be implemented for staff members who have
made significant contributions to the Safety Culture.
Time-outs are being increasingly adopted as
a useful strategy to encourage the practitioner to
question himself or herself as well as to question
others on the salient features of the exercise about
to be conducted (Questioning Attitude). In radiation therapy, there are many activities of interest.
These activities typically involve the planning and
delivery of a treatment but could equally concern
the calibration of a beam. A routine time-out might
or might not be accompanied by a checklist. Ideally,
one of the staff would require active confirmation
from others present that the exercise, for example,
dose delivery, could safely begin. Instituting routine
time-outs should be a relatively straightforward
initiative for a Safety Committee to promote and
that could immediately establish the relevance and
credibility of the Safety Committee. In addition to
routine time-outs, the culture should be such that
every member of the team feels comfortable calling
a time-out at any time when he or she is uncertain
about some aspect of the activity at hand. In fact,
a good way of obtaining a measure of the depth
of a Safety Culture is to ask a new member of staff
after 2 months in the clinic whether he or she feels
empowered to call a time-out irrespective of who is
present. A negative answer suggests that more work
might need to be done in this area. The diagnosis
of the problem could involve Power Distance issues
to be discussed briefly later.

Heron_68566_PTR_09_133-138_08-23-18.indd 135

135

Time-outs also partially address the trait of
Environment for Raising Concerns. The NRC document emphasizes that negative responses to the
raising of concerns, such as intimidation or harassment, have no place in an effective Safety Culture.
Another opportunity for strengthening this trait is
to encourage staff to raise concerns through a representative on the Safety Committee. As the Safety
Committee ideally reports outside the clinic operations organizational structure, the staff member
raising a concern should be protected from any
possible retribution. Strong interpersonal and communication skills on the part of the Safety Committee members will contribute to an Environment for
Raising Concerns.
There are many aspects to Effective Safety Communication, which the Safety Committee could
explore. Perhaps the simplest communication pathway would be to make the agendas and minutes of
the Safety Committee meetings available for all staff
to peruse. Another opportunity would be to make
Safety Committee meetings open to all, although
there is a slight risk here that those unfamiliar with
the workings of the committee might, for whatever
reason, introduce topics not within the charge of
the committee. Perhaps the most effective means
for safety communication are department-wide and
regularly scheduled safety rounds. To maximize the
efficiency of such meetings, they need to be structured and not become a free-for-all, although participation by the audience should be encouraged.
Developing an agenda for such a meeting is not
difficult. For example, recent actual or near-miss
incidents in the clinic could be discussed as well as
reviews of recent literature in the area. Keeping an
attendance sheet will reinforce the importance of
attending such meetings.
Hofstede developed the concept of Power Distance Index in the 1970s. Power Distance Index
measures the extent to which the less powerful members of organizations and institutions accept and
expect that power is distributed unequally (4). In
other words, in a high Power Distance environment,
there is a clear hierarchy within the organization
and everyone accepts that you do not question your
“superiors” and you do not expect to be questioned
by those lower down the hierarchical tree. A high
Power Distance conflicts with a Respectful Work
Environment in which all members feel empowered
to contribute to safety issues. If a high Power Distance environment exists in an organization, it can
be very difficult to change, as those higher up the
ladder are likely to be comfortable with, and possibly have a vested interest in, the situation as it

21/08/18 2:09 PM

136

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

is. Probably the best the Safety Committee can do
is to make conscious efforts to reduce the Power
Distance from their level down. Ingrained cultures
within organizations are very difficult to change but
that is not a reason for not trying.
A quick low-resource investment, which will
strengthen the trait of Respectful Work Environment, is the establishment of No Interruption
Zones. These can be in space or time and indicate
that a critical activity, for example, a chart check,
is underway and the person conducting the activity is not to be distracted. Distractions are widely
recognized as conducive to errors. Instituting
No Interruption Zones is relatively straightforward to do.
A well-functioning Safety Committee that has
open lines of communication with all staff of the
Department goes a long way toward strengthening
the safety trait of Continuous Learning. The NRC
describes this particular trait from both the organization’s and the individual’s perspectives. The
Safety Committee represents the organization and,
if effective, will learn continuously from its own
deliberations. Regularly scheduled safety meetings
are obviously forums for individual members of
staff to develop their knowledge of safety issues.
The Safety Committee can encourage all members of staff to take Personal Accountability for
their contributions to safety issues but would not
have the authority to monitor compliance with
this trait. However, the Safety Committee could
recommend to upper management that some suitably worded statement reflecting this safety trait be
included in all letters of offer of employment. Compliance with this trait could be further strengthened
through incorporating a specific component on
safety in regular staff performance appraisals.
The two safety traits that are still left to be
discussed in this chapter are the following: Problem Identification and Resolution and Work
Processes.
One aspect of Problem Identification and Resolution can be efficiently handled using an Incident
Learning System (5). This is a retrospective approach
to error management in which we learn from untoward events that actually happened, or nearly happened, and we use that learning to improve our Work
Processes. The quickest way to get Incident Learning up and running is to participate in an existing
system such as Radiation Oncology Incident Learning System (RO-ILS) (6), Center for Assessment of
Radiological Sciences (CARS) (7), or Safety in Radiation Oncology (SAFRON) (8). An alternative is to
develop an in-house system. This would be a topic

Heron_68566_PTR_09_133-138_08-23-18.indd 136

on which the Safety Committee should have a view.
It will be the Safety Committee, or a group under its
supervision, that will undertake the investigation of
reported incidents.
Incident Learning Systems have been discussed
in detail elsewhere (9). We just touch on a few
of the salient features of such a system here. It is
important to recognize that all events that actually
happened or nearly happened (i.e., near misses)
at a given facility should be captured. In fact,
near misses are also known as free lessons and
there should be many more of these than of actual
events. In an effective Incident Learning environment, all individuals within a facility are encouraged to report all incidents. A question that is often
asked is the following: Should the reporter of an
incident be identified or not? Anonymous reporting, while protecting the reporter from any negative consequences, makes it impossible to follow
up and hence to clarify details of the incident. A
better alternative is confidential reporting in which
the Safety Committee knows the identity of the
reporter but the report is anonymized before dissemination to a wider audience. To implement such
an approach requires the Safety Committee to be at
an arm’s length from the operational infrastructure,
which is likely to involve the reporter’s superiors.
The investigation of an incident should culminate in the identification of root causes and
contributory factors. Armed with knowledge of
the root causes and contributory factors, we can
institute appropriate preventive actions to avoid a
recurrence of the incident.
Another important question is the following:
How do we know that incident learning, which,
of course, consumes resources, is effective? A
successful incident learning system will display
two features. First, the number of reports coming
in will be high and relatively constant over time,
and second, the actual or potential severity of the
reported incidents will be dropping (10). Maintaining a high level of reporting requires all the staff to
be fully engaged, and to achieve this, constant feedback is essential. If staff ever get the impression
that their reporting efforts just go into a black hole
from which nothing emerges, they will soon lose
interest and the reporting frequency will drop off.
An important function of the Safety Committee is
to maintain momentum, interest, and relevance,
and this requires some effort.
The complementary approach to retrospective
incident learning is prospective and is based on
postulating what might go wrong in the future and
developing a quality/safety program to minimize the

21/08/18 2:09 PM

9: PATIENT SAFETY

chances of failure. The AAPM’s TG-100 is actively
promoting this approach through the publication of
“The report of Task Group 100 of the AAPM: application of risk analysis methods to radiation therapy quality management” (11). Adoption of the
TG-100 methodology strengthens the two safety
traits, Problem Identification and Resolution and
Work Processes. As this is a new approach for most
of the radiation oncology community, we briefly
outline the methodology recommended in this
report for establishing a risk-based quality management (QM) program in radiation therapy.
The ultimate aim of the exercise is to develop
a QM program that provides the patient with
confidence that the highest standards of quality
and safety will be reached and maintained. The
QM program is built on three components: Process Mapping, Failure Modes (FMs) and Effects
Analysis, and Fault Tree Analysis (FTA).
Process Mapping is familiar to many of us. It is
the process of describing, usually diagrammatically,
the major steps and substeps undertaken to complete a patient treatment. Process maps are best
generated by a multidisciplinary team, which might
be the Safety Committee, or it might be a dedicated
group consisting of professionals who are involved
in the care of the patient such as radiation oncologists, medical physicists, dosimetrists, therapists,
nurses, IT personnel, and administrators. In either
case, it is important to ensure that all key and critical steps required to complete the given process are
included. As well as being the first step in TG-100’s
methodology, process maps can have another significant benefit for the radiation therapy clinic.
A process map is a graphical representation of a
Standard Operating Procedure and hence defines
a Work Process. It is widely recognized that standardizing procedures has the ability to enhance
both quality and safety. However, process maps can
quickly become very complicated structures. It is
advisable to restrict their scope to the purpose for
which they are intended. It is also important that
all users of the process map have the same understanding of the words used to describe the various
major steps and substeps.
Armed with a process map, the next phase in
TG-100’s methodology starts with the selection of
a step in the process for further analysis. Having
selected a step, the question of what could possibly go wrong at this step is posed. The answer(s)
to this question are the FMs associated with this
step. Having identified one or more FMs, the group
performing the analysis then estimates how likely it
is that an event would occur that could lead to the

Heron_68566_PTR_09_133-138_08-23-18.indd 137

137

postulated Failure. This is the Occurrence value.
Next, an estimate is made of the severity of the
FM should it reach the patient. This is the Severity
value. The last judgment the group is called upon
to make is the probability that the pathway leading
from the originating event will not be intercepted
before reaching the patient. This is the Detectability. In the TG-100 approach, Occurrence, Severity
and Detectability are all scored between 1 and 10.
Multiplying these three estimates together yields the
Risk Priority Number (RPN), which will lie between
1 and 1,000. A high value of RPN indicates a very
hazardous step and a high value of severity indicates
potentially major consequences of the FM on the
patient whether or not the FM is likely to occur and/or
not be detected. This process is repeated for all identified FMs. The output of this analysis, a RPN for
each FM, provides the opportunity for ranking FMs
from the most to the least significant and hence for
directing resources to those issues presenting potentially the greatest hazard to the patient. Prioritizing interventions can also be based on the Severity
scores of the FMs, or, indeed, by setting thresholds
for action on both Severity and RPN.
More detailed examination of the pathways that
can lead to Failures at patient treatment can be
helpful in designing an appropriate Quality/Safety
Management program. FTA is a technique commonly used to delve deeper into pathways to failure. A Fault Tree links events and circumstances
through AND and OR gates to the FM. It can be
thought of as a hypothetical Root Cause Analysis
(RCA). In an RCA, an actual incident is traced
back to causes and contributing factors, frequently
being illustrated on a Cause and Effect diagram.
In FTA, it is not an actual incident that starts the
tree but rather a postulated failure. Because the
RCA attempts to describe actual events and their
relationships, OR gates are not necessary, because
we believe we know the chain of events. However,
visually a Fault Tree looks similar to a Cause and
Effect diagram. The value of FTAs, in the context
of prospective risk management, is that they can
help identify where best to place barriers in the
possible failure pathways and, once a few FTAs
have been designed, systemic safety improvement
measures, such as increased training or better documentation, are readily apparent.
The overall objective of this exercise is to develop
a QM program for a process, or at least part of a
process, under consideration. Failure modes and
effects analysis (FMEA) helps us to prioritize those
FMs that pose the greatest hazard to the patient and
hence require the most urgent attention. FTA can

21/08/18 2:09 PM

138

I: PRINCIPLES OF SRS AND SBRT—RADIOBIOLOGY, PHYSICS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING

highlight those systemic infrastructure issues that
have the greatest potential to compromise quality
and safety and it also provides a basis for decisions
on where to place barriers to prevent error propagation. Information obtained from the application
of these three tools can then be used to develop a
risk-based quality and safety management program.
The QM program developed out of the application of the TG-100 methodology will be specific to the clinical process under study. Thus, the
TG-100 approach customizes Quality and Safety
Management to individual radiation oncology
departments reflecting their unique ways of doing
things. It is important to recognize that the TG-100
methodology is quite different from the prescriptive approaches to quality control that we have
grown familiar with and that have served us well
over many years. Hence, it is definitely not a onesize-fits-all solution to quality and safety. It is
equally important to note that there will continue
to be a role for prescriptive approaches, although,
in the future, they are likely to be based more on
the type of analysis discussed here.
We have now discussed actions and activities that
can strengthen all nine of the NRC’s Safety Culture
traits. Our suggestions are far from exhaustive and
further ideas for useful activities can be gleaned
from the burgeoning literature in the field (12–16).
Committee meetings and the work surrounding
them can take resources away from other important
activities; so it is always worth collecting evidence
that a committee is effective. A simple means for
doing this is through the use of the AAPM’s Safety
Profile Assessment tool (17,18). This is available
to all at no cost on the AAPM website. The tool has
many useful features including the ability to track
progress on safety/quality issues over time. Thus, it
is an ideal means for assessing the value and effectiveness of the Safety Committee.
A newly available resource for those interested in
quality and safety in radiation therapy has recently
been made available by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (19). It is totally free and includes
a Certificate of Completion feature, which makes
it ideal for graduate-level and residency training
programs.
Finally, it cannot be overemphasized that establishing a sustainable Safety Culture depends critically
on the availability of resources, specifically protected
time to work on safety issues, and most importantly
the quality of the leadership of the initiative. Time
spent on selecting those charged with leading the
safety initiative is a vital initial investment.

Heron_68566_PTR_09_133-138_08-23-18.indd 138

REFERENCES
1. Solberg TD, Medin PM. Quality and safety in stereotactic
radiosurgery and stereotactic body radiotherapy: can more
be done? J Radiosurg SBRT. 2011;1:13-19. PubMed PMID:
29296293.
2. Benedict SH, Yenice KM, Followill D, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy: the report of AAPM Task Group 101. Med
Phys. 2010;37:4078-4101. doi:10.1118/1.3438081
3. NRC Safety Culture. Outreach and Education Materials.
https://www.nrc.gov/about-nrc/safety-culture/sc-outreachedu-materials.html. Last Reviewed/Updated May 24, 2018.
4. Hofstede G. Cultures and Organizations: Software of the
Mind. London, UK: McGraw-Hill; 1991.
5. Cooke D, Dubetz M, Heshmati R, et al. A Reference Guide
for Learning from Incidents in Radiation Treatment. HTA
Initiative #22, Alberta Heritage Fund for Medical Research.
http://www.ihe.ca/advanced-search/a-reference-guide-forlearning-from-incidents-in-radiation-treatment
6. Radiation Oncology Incident learning system; Sponsored by
ASTRO and AAPM. https://www.astro.org/RO-ILS.aspx
7. Center for Assessment of Radiological Sciences, A Patient
Safety Organization. https://www.cars-pso.org/radiotherapyerror-reporting.aspx
8. Safety in Radiation Oncology (SAFRON). https://www.iaea.
org/resources/rpop/resources/databases-and-learning-systems/
safron
9. Sutlief S, Caldwell B, Dunscombe P, et al. Reporting systems.
In: Thomadsen BR, Dunscombe P, Ford E, et al, eds. Quality
and Safety in Radiotherapy: Learning the New Approaches in
Task Group 100 and Beyond. Madison, WI: Medical Physics
Publishing; 2013.
10. Clark BG, Brown RJ, Ploquin J, et al. Patient safety improvements in radiation treatment through 5 years of incident
learning. Pract Radiat Oncol. 2013;3:157-163. doi:10.1016/
j.prro.2012.08.001
11. Huq MS, Fraass BA, Dunscombe PB, et al. The report of
Task Group 100 of the AAPM: application of risk analysis
methods to radiation therapy quality management. Med Phys.
2016;43:4209-4262. doi:10.1118/1.4947547
12. Preventing Accidental Exposure in External Beam Radiotherapy.
https://www.iaea.org/resources/rpop/health-professionals/
radiotherapy/external-beam-radiotherapy/accidental-exposure
13. Radiotherapy Risk Profile. http://www.who.int/patientsafety/
activities/technical/radiotherapy_risk_profile.pdf
14. Towards Safer Radiotherapy. https://www.rcr.ac.uk/publication/
towards-safer-radiotherapy
15. Preventing Accidental Exposures from New External Beam
Radiation Therapy Technologies, ICRP Publication 112.
http://www.icrp.org/publication.asp?id=ICRP%20
Publication%20112
16. Safety is No Accident: A Framework for Quality Radiation
Oncology and Care. https://www.astro.org/Product-Catalog/
Products/Publications/SafetyisNoAccident/
17. Dunscombe P, Brown D, Donaldson H, et al. Safety profile
assessment: an online tool to gauge safety-critical performance
in radiation oncology. Pract Radiat Oncol. 2015;5:127-134.
doi:10.1016/j.prro.2014.10.012
18. Ford EC, Brown D, Donaldson H, et al. Patterns of practice for safety-critical processes in radiation oncology in
the United States from the AAPM safety profile assessment
survey. Pract Radiat Oncol. 2015;5:e423-e429. doi:10.1016/
j.prro.2015.06.005
19. E-learning Modules on Radiation/IAEA. https://www.iaea.
org/search/googles/e%20learning

21/08/18 2:09 PM

P A R T

II

Clinical Applications of SRS
and SBRT

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 139

21/08/18 2:09 PM

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 140

21/08/18 2:09 PM

C H A P T E R

10

Brain Radiosurgery
Ronny Kalash, Johnathan A. Engh, and Nduka Amankulor

As described in earlier chapters, stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) represents a modern form of extremely
precise radiation delivery, engaging alternative radiobiological mechanisms of tissue ablation. In contrast, conventional radiation therapy is administered
in a highly fractionated schedule to deliver a desired
cumulative target dose, at an acceptable therapeutic
ratio. By refining the technology involved in target
delineation, treatment planning, setup reproducibility, and quality assurance, radiation oncologists are
now able to escalate the dose per fraction in a safe
and effective manner. This has allowed the delivery
of a biologically equivalent dose over a significantly
abbreviated time course, while minimizing normal
tissue toxicity.
The term “radiosurgery” was first conceived by
Lars Leksell (Stockholm, Sweden) in 1951 (1). Prior
to this time, conventionally fractionated intracranial radiation permitted a full dose of radiation to
reach sensitive normal brain tissue, increasing the
early and late toxicity profiles. Through the application of stereotactic neurosurgical techniques with
rigid skull fixation, Leksell began targeting benign
intracranial conditions and functional neurological disorders with sharp dose gradients of focused
radiation. This achievement is especially remarkable, considering how much this technique predated the advent of CT and MRI. Once feasibility
was proven, the approach evolved to the treatment
of additional benign and malignant brain tumors
and disorders.
Today, SRS continues to have a central role in
the management of a variety of intracranial con-

ditions. Multiple treatment platforms currently
exist, including frame-based cobalt-60 platforms
(Gamma Knife, Elekta Instruments, Atlanta,
Georgia) as well as several linear accelerator–based
units (CyberKnife—Accuray Inc., Sunnyvale,
California; TrueBeam/Trilogy—Varian Medical
Systems, Palo Alto, California; as well as others).
All of these rely on an accumulation of multiple
opposed beams to create a highly conformal target dose distribution. No current literature suggests a clear therapeutic advantage to any of the
above-mentioned platforms (2). This chapter presents a concise summary of applications of SRS
in the brain, including the evaluation, delivery,
expected outcomes, and considerations involved
in each condition. Readers are introduced to the
management of benign (arteriovenous malformation, acoustic neuroma, meningioma, pituitary
adenoma, vagal schwannoma) and malignant
(both primary and secondary) brain lesions, as well
as functional radiosurgery (trigeminal neuralgia,
thalamotomy, pallidotomy). This chapter is meant
to highlight the important steps of patient selection, treatment planning, safety considerations,
and expected outcomes.

ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION
Introduction
Intracranial arteriovenous malformation (AVM)
represents an anomalous communication (nidus)
between the arterial and the venous system
141

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 141

21/08/18 2:09 PM

142

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

devoid of a capillary network. With an incidence
of approximately 1/700 in the United States (3),
AVMs place patients at a 1% to 5% annual risk
of hemorrhage (4). These hemorrhages can be
fatal or neurologically devastating in a number of
instances. The incidence of a fatal hemorrhagic
event has been reported to be as high as 10% to
20% as a result of exposure of the venous system
to an abnormally high pressure (5). In addition,
AVMs can cause epilepsy and medically refractory
headache disorders.
Contemporary treatment options include observation, surgical resection, embolization, SRS, or a
combination thereof. Even when discovered in the
asymptomatic setting, patients are often encouraged to pursue therapy because of the devastating
implications of a hemorrhagic event. When feasible,
surgical resection remains the primary treatment
approach, and allows immediate removal of the
abnormal vascular focus. Postoperative morbidity
and mortality risk is reliant on factors including size,
location, and pattern of venous drainage, and can
be scored using the Spetzler–Martin grading system
I to V (6). The ideal surgical candidates (score I)
are those with a small superficial lesion in a noneloquent location. Should a patient present with a
more surgically challenging lesion (especially grades
4 or 5), or if the patient is a poor candidate for general anesthesia, the therapeutic discussion widens to
include consideration of embolization or SRS.

Patient Selection
Should a patient with AVM present with a small
(<3 cm), deep, inoperable focus of disease, SRS represents an effective and safe treatment alternative to
surgery/embolization. By delivering a high dose of
conformal radiation, SRS prompts a prolonged reaction that often results in the occlusion of the vascular
abnormality. Specifically, a cytokine-driven process
results in endothelial cell proliferation, thrombosis,
and obliteration of the AVM nidus termed “endarteritis obliterans.” This reaction can take approximately 1
to 3 years before obliteration is complete.
The obliteration response rates of AVM with SRS
have been reported between 75% and 90%, and are
dependent on multiple factors. Several institutions
have reported a relationship between nidus volume
and successful obliteration of an AVM. Steiner
et al. reported on the Swedish experience after
treating 945 AVMs. They reported an average
volume of 2.1 cm3 for successfully obliterated
lesions, and an average volume of 5.3 cm3 for

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 142

nonobliterated cases. Mendenhall et al. reported
on the Florida experience and the relationship
of nidus volume to successful obliteration outcome. Posttreatment follow-up with MRI and
arteriogram suggested an 81% obliteration rate
in lesions measuring 1 to 4 mL, 89% between
4 and 10 mL, and 69% in lesions greater than
10 mL in volume. Colombo et al. reported on the
Italian experience and reported an obliteration rate
of 96% in small (<1.5 cm) lesions, and 33% in
large (>2.5 cm) lesions. Several authors caution
direct conclusions on the basis of volume–outcome
data, citing that a larger AVM nidus may complicate interpretation of angiography, and make
complete nidus coverage more challenging.
Figure 10.1 includes a proposed algorithm
for navigating therapeutic options in the setting
of AVM proposed by the International Radio
Surgery Association (IRSA). This summarizes the
above-mentioned treatment decisions (included
in the following text).

Dose
Multiple retrospective series have reported on the
appropriate therapeutic dose for AVMs, as well as
the threshold for unacceptable treatment-related
toxicity. Flickinger et al. reported the University of
Pittsburgh experience of 197 patients with AVM
treated with Gamma Knife SRS, and reported a
significant relationship of the minimum target dose
(Dmin) and the likelihood of nidus obliteration
(7,8). A sigmoid dose–response curve was generated
demonstrating in-field obliteration rate on the basis
of Dmin, including an obliteration rate between
70% and 98% on the basis of Dmin of 15 and 25 Gy.
Multiple groups have also reported on their
experience of toxicity following SRS for AVM.
The Pittsburgh group published an overall rate of
9% of neurological sequelae post-SRS (any neurological problem including headache). Of these
patients, 58% had resolution of symptoms within
27 months. Dmin impacted resolution rate, with
89% resolution in patients with Dmin less than
20 Gy versus 36% resolution in patients with Dmin
greater than 20 Gy. This group also reported that
nidus location, as well as volume of normal brain
tissue receiving 12 Gy, significantly affected the
incidence of permanent post-SRS injury (9–11).
Finally, a published dose–response curve demonstrated that the probability of obliteration reaches
a maximum level at a marginal dose of approximately 23 Gy (12).

21/08/18 2:09 PM

10: BRAIN RADIOSURGERY

143

Intracranial AVM management algorithm
Small Volume: ≤10 cm3
Larger Volume: ≥10 cm3

Repeat
Resection
Craniotomy
and Resection

Small Volume
Lobar Location
Small Volume
Deep Location

Radiosurgery

Symptomatic
Brain AVM

Residual
AVM

Residual
AVM

Observation
Larger Volume
Lobar Location

Radiosurgery
Second
Radiosurgery

Resection
Residual
AVM

Embolization
Radiosurgery
(1 or 2 Stage)

Radiosurgery

Observation
Larger Volume
Deep Location

Patient’s Choice

Radiosurgery (1 or 2 Stage) and/or
Embolization
Resection
Radiosurgery

Residual
AVM

Second
Radiosurgery

FIGURE 10.1 IRSA intracranial AVM management algorithm.
AVM, arteriovenous malformation; IRSA, International RadioSurgery Association.

With this in mind, the authors recommend a
dose of between 16 and 24 Gy in a single-fraction
linear accelerator (linac)-based setting or 21 and
23 Gy prescribed to the 50% isodose line in framebased radiosurgery to optimize nidus obliteration,
and minimize the risk of posttreatment toxicity.

Treatment Planning
The radiographic evaluation of an AVM typically
includes a combination of imaging modalities including CT, computed tomography angiography (CTA),
MRI, magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), or
catheter angiography. CT scans assist in the detection of hemorrhage, and CTA assists in evaluating
vascular detail, whereas MRI/MRA allows the best
assessment of the surrounding brain parenchyma.
Angiography is the most accurate method of categorizing the extent of aneurysms, obstructions, or
outflow abnormalities that may exist prior to treatment, and allows grading of the AVM on the basis of
Spetzler–Martin scale. Of note, to most accurately
define intracranial structures, an image slice thickness of 0.1 to 0.15 cm is preferred.
Effective target delineation for SRS requires a
clinician to exploit the capabilities of multimodality
imaging modalities simultaneously. To accomplish

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 143

this, a fusion of multiple image sets, typically from
multiple imaging modalities, must take place within
the treatment-planning software. Frequently, a team
approach involving dosimetrists, medical physicists,
and physicians is required to accurately align multiple image registrations to categorize target/normal
tissue. This fusion can be accomplished in a manual fashion as users visually align patient rotation/
translation, or automatically via computer-matching
algorithms.
Once all the appropriate images have been
fused within the treatment-planning software,
clinicians begin to contour the appropriate treatment volume as well as critical normal tissue.
A typical AVM plan will include a gross tumor
volume (GTV) that encompasses the AVM nidus.
Critical neighboring intracranial structures are
also contoured as needed, including the brainstem, optic pathway, cochlea, and normal brain
tissue. We recommend limiting the maximum
dose to each structure over one fraction, including maximum doses of 15 Gy to brainstem, 8 to
10 Gy to optic pathway, and 4 Gy to cochlea, and
minimizing the volume of normal brain tissue
receiving 12 Gy dose.
Following the completion of contouring, and the
prescription of appropriate dose targets and dose

21/08/18 2:09 PM

144

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

constraints, an SRS plan is created. This involves
either a large number of stationary beams or fluid
treatment arcs, to achieve a conformal high dose
volume and rapid dose gradient. Beam-shaping
techniques include the use of multileaf collimators (MLCs). An ideal plan accomplishes greater
than 90% target coverage by prescription dose.
Once approved, on-board imaging is used to
verify patient setup prior to delivery of treatment.
Figure 10.2 demonstrates each phase of treatment
planning for an AVM case, as well as posttreatment follow-up imaging.

Outcomes
As mentioned earlier, the expected obliteration
response rate for AVM following SRS is between
70% and 90% over 1 to 3 years. Colombo et al.
reported an obliteration rate of 46% after 1 year
and 80% after 2 years following treatment of 180
patients with AVM (13). Mendenhall et al. reported

an overall angiographic cure rate of 80%, whereas
Flickinger et al. reported a complete obliteration
rate of 71%.
One disadvantage of radiosurgery for AVM as
opposed to microsurgery is the risk of hemorrhage
following treatment prior to AVM obliteration.
However, multiple groups have reported a significant (but not complete) reduction in AVM bleeding risk following SRS. The Italian group reported
a bleeding risk of 4.8% in the first 6 months following treatment, and 0% in 12 months following
treatment. Maruyama et al. reported on a group
of 458 patients from the University of Tokyo hospital, and demonstrated a bleeding rate of 5%
during the latency period between SRS delivery
and obliteration, and a bleeding rate of 6/250
(2%) after nidus obliteration (14). The Florida
group noted a 4% rate of intracerebral hemorrhage after radiosurgery, with five-sixths of those
patients suffering hemorrhage within 6 months
posttreatment.

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

FIGURE 10.2 The angiography (A) and MRI (B) scan of a 61-year-old female with an AVM treated with definitive GK-SRS

at a prescribed dose of 20 Gy at the 50% isodose line. Shown is a 10-shot GK-SRS plan (C) targeting the GTV. An MRI
2 years after treatment demonstrates significant treatment response (D).

AVM, arteriovenous malformation; GK-SRS, Gamma Knife stereotactic radiosurgery; GTV, gross tumor volume.

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 144

21/08/18 2:09 PM

10: BRAIN RADIOSURGERY

Follow-Up
Once SRS is complete, the authors recommend
close patient follow-up, typically on a 3-month and
6-month interval for the first year, with abbreviation in the event of clinical deterioration. Angiographic follow-up can be performed within 6 to
12 months following treatment, with the goal of
complete nidus obliteration defined by Lindquist
and Steiner. This includes normal circulation time,
absence of former nidus vessels, and disappearance
or normalization of draining veins (15). Clinical
follow-up is encouraged even after nidus obliteration to ensure clinical stability and success.

ACOUSTIC NEUROMA
Introduction
Vestibular schwannomas (VSs; commonly referred
to as “acoustic neuromas”) represent a benign
intracranial neoplasm estimated to occur at an incidence of 0.8 to 1.0 per 100,000 patients per year in
the United States (16). The majority of VSs occur
in a sporadic and unilateral pattern. Patients with
VS most frequently present with an incidentally discovered unilateral cerebellopontine angle mass, or
gradually worsening unilateral hearing loss/tinnitus
coupled with vertigo-like episodes or gait disturbance. Bilateral presentation is strongly associated
with neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2). The mass
is typically located on the superior and inferior
branches of the vestibular nerve, and is rarely found
along the cochlear nerve. The average VS growth
rate has been estimated between 1 and 3 mm/year,
with approximately 5% of VS remaining stable
or regressing during surveillance (17). Treatment
options include observation, microsurgical excision,
SRS or radiation therapy, with an expected local
control rate that exceeds 90%.

Patient Presentation, Workup,
and Selection
Patient-reported symptoms that arise from VS are
direct sequelae of mass effect on neighboring cranial
nerves. These include involvement of the acoustic
nerve (sensorineural hearing loss/tinnitus), vestibular nerve (vertigo/gait instability), trigeminal nerve
(facial paresthesias), facial nerve (facial paresis/
taste change), and cerebellar peduncles (ataxia). In
selected cases of large tumors, compression of the
fourth ventricle may even lead to hydrocephalus.
Each patient with VS demands a thorough
history and physical exam, baseline audiometric

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 145

145

testing, as well as diagnostic imaging. The standard
imaging modality for VS is a brain MRI with and
without contrast. The lesion will typically enhance
on T1-weighted images, and is frequently located
in close proximity to the internal auditory canal. It
is not uncommon for the canal to be dilated by the
tumor, although some of these tumors are purely
intracanalicular. Among other common cerebellopontine (CP) angle tumors, meningiomas generally
do not have the same pattern involvement of the
internal auditory canal, and epidermoid cysts look
entirely different on all salient imaging sequences.
In general, VS can be diagnosed based on MRI
without histopathological correlation. A Kroos
staging system was developed (Stages I–IV) based
on size and extension to the nearby brainstem (18).
Given the benign nature of VS, as well as the
high expected local control rate with treatment,
the therapeutic discussion with patients should
encompass two main goals: safe delivery of disease
control and the limitation of cranial nerve deficits.
No prospective randomized multi-institutional
study has directly compared surgical excision
with radiation therapy; however, retrospective
single-institution series indicate similar oncological
outcomes (19). Because of the higher risk profile
with surgery, most centers prefer SRS or observation as the primary management strategy for small
tumors. Large tumors, more symptomatic tumors,
and tumors presenting with hydrocephalus generally require microsurgical resection. In addition,
patients may be considered for surgical excision
on the basis of age, location, serviceable hearing,
and local expertise.
Several microsurgical approaches exist for excision of a VS, including the retrosigmoid approach,
the middle fossa approach, or the translabyrinthine
approach, each with differing rates of hearing preservation, facial nerve injury, and tumor accessibility
on the basis of primary location (20–22). In addition to typical operative risks, surgery can place
patients at risk of cerebrospinal fluid leakage and
meningitis. A surgeon will consider baseline serviceable hearing function (minimal goal of >50%
speech discrimination at 50 dB), local anatomy,
patient performance status, tumor size, and likelihood of a complete resection prior to electing one
of the above-mentioned approaches.

Outcomes
Radiosurgery has been demonstrated to be an
excellent alternative to microsurgery for VS, and is
probably best considered as the standard of care in

21/08/18 2:09 PM

146

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

the modern era. Given the steep learning curve for
microsurgery, the operative risks, and the benign
nature of the disease, SRS often has a better ratio
of reward to risk for these patients (23,24). Multiple institutions have reported on comparable
outcomes delivering both fractionated stereotactic
irradiation (fSRT) and SRS (25). On the basis of
the nature of this text, this chapter focuses on the
outcomes of SRS.
As stated earlier, SRS represents a convenient
and safe alternative to fSRT. Most institutions use
SRS to deliver a one- to three-fraction course of
precise radiation therapy to a mean dose between
12 and 18 Gy. On the basis of reported singleinstitution outcomes, local control is expected to
surpass 90%, and expected long-term cranial nerve
toxicity rates are less than 5% (26,27). One of the
initial studies involving Gamma Knife radiosurgery
(GK-SRS) to treat VS was published by Noren
et al. from the Karolinska Institutet in Sweden (26).
They reported a local control (smaller or stable
lesion) rate of 94%. Several other institutions have
found similar results including University of Pittsburgh reporting a 5-year local control (smaller or
stable lesion) rate of 97% (29), University of Virginia reporting a local control of 94% (30), and
several others reporting 10-year local control rates
ranging from 90% to 98% (31,32).
The ability of SRS to deliver a steep dose gradient facilitates avoidance of substantial radiation
exposure to critical nearby radiosensitive structures including cranial nerves, the cochlea, and the
brainstem. When properly executed, this has translated into an extraordinarily safe toxicity profile as
reported in the previously mentioned studies while
delivering a high-dose/fraction course of SRS to a
congested CP angle space. Noren et al. reported a
4% long-term facial weakness rate, and 77% hearing preservation rate. Flickinger et al. reported
preserved long-term facial nerve and trigeminal
nerve function rates above 98%. Others have also
reported comparable cranial nerve toxicity rates
between 1% and 5% (33).
Multiple single-institution reports have been
published comparing outcomes of microsurgery
and SRS in patients with VS. The largest is a French
study reported by Regis et al., which included a
total of over 200 patients with VS. This study
demonstrated significant improvements in serviceable hearing preservation (40% vs. 5%), and less
CN VII (0% vs. 47%) and CN V (4% vs. 29%) toxicity with SRS (34). Follow-up studies by Myrseth
et al. and Pollock et al. have confirmed these findings

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 146

with significant improvements in hearing preservation rates (between 63%–68% and 0%–5%) and
less CN toxicity (<5% vs. 17%–26%) for patients
undergoing SRS versus microsurgery (33,34). In
addition, the rare devastating microsurgical risks
of death, meningitis, stroke, and anesthesia complications are generally not seen with SRS, increasing
its appeal for patients with minimal symptomology.

Treatment Planning
The radiographic evaluation of VS for treatment
planning often includes a combination of imaging
modalities including CT and contrast-enhanced
MRI. MRI allows the best assessment of surrounding
brain parenchyma and soft-tissue structures including cranial nerves. Of note, to most accurately define
intracranial structures for contouring, the authors
recommend an image slice thickness of less than
0.2 cm, as well as minimal space between images.
Effective target delineation for SRS requires the
clinician to capitalize on the capabilities of multiple
imaging modalities simultaneously. To accomplish
this, a fusion of multiple image sets from multiple imaging modalities must take place within the
treatment-planning software. A team approach
involving dosimetrists, medical physicists, and physicians is required to accurately align multiple image
registrations to categorize target/normal tissue. This
fusion can be accomplished in a manual fashion as
users visually align patient rotation/translation, or
automatically via computer-matching algorithms.
Once all the appropriate images have been fused
within the treatment-planning software, clinicians
begin to contour the appropriate treatment volume
as well as critical normal tissue. A typical VS plan
will include a GTV that encompasses macroscopic
tumor visualized on CT/MRI. This structure will
typically then be prescribed a dose of 12 to 13 Gy in
one fraction, or 18 Gy over three fractions, via isodose
line calculation (typically 50% Isodose Line (ISD)
for GK-SRS and 70%–90% ISD for linac-based).
Critical intracranial structures are also contoured
including brainstem, eyes, optic nerve pathway,
cochlea, as well as normal brain tissue. We recommend limiting the maximum dose to each structure
over one fraction, including maximum doses of prescription dose to brainstem, 8 Gy to the optic nerve
pathway, and 4 Gy to cochlea (for patients with
serviceable hearing), and minimizing the volume of
uninvolved brain tissue receiving 12 Gy dose.
Following the completion of treatment volumes,
and prescription of appropriate dose targets and

21/08/18 2:09 PM

10: BRAIN RADIOSURGERY

posttreatment intervals. In addition, a transient
posttreatment swelling or increased prominence of
a VS may be observed prior to delayed regression.
The multidisciplinary team must thus use clinical
judgment to infer treatment response or disease
progression. In addition, cranial nerve and neurological function must be monitored diligently.

dose constraints, an SRS plan is created. SRS has
been effectively delivered using multiple treatment
platforms including frame-based, multi–cobalt-60
source GK-SRS, as well as linac-based platforms
including each platform discussed in the introduction of this chapter. Linac-based plans can be
formulated to involve either a large number of
stationary beams or fluid nonopposed treatment
arcs, to achieve a conformal high dose volume
and rapid dose gradient. Beam-shaping techniques
include the use of MLCs. An ideal plan includes a
prescription dose coverage of at least 95% of the
GTV, as well as rapid dose gradient at circumferential distances 2/5/10 mm away from target tissue. Once approved, onboard imaging is used to
verify patient setup prior to delivery of treatment.
Figure 10.3 demonstrates diagnostic imaging and
treatment planning of an acoustic neuroma.

MENINGIOMA
Introduction
An estimated 20% to 35% of primary intracranial
neoplasms originate from the three layers of meningeal tissue that envelop the brain (36), and are
thus termed “meningiomas.” The rate of diagnosis
increases with age, and peaks in the fifth and sixth
decades of life. Several risk factors have been proposed including female gender, genetics, hormone
replacement (37), and prior intracranial radiation
exposure (38). Although 80% to 90% of meningiomas are categorized as benign World Health
Organization (WHO) Grade I lesions, the associated
edema and mass effect they cause may result in
significant patient morbidity. Aggressive variants

Follow-Up
As stated earlier, the growth rate of VS is quite
prolonged. This mandates extended posttreatment
follow-up with patients, as well as repeat MRI
imaging at time points 6-, 12-, 24-, and 48-month

(A)

(C)

147

(B)

(D)

FIGURE 10.3 The MRI (A) scan of a 55-year-old male with a right-sided acoustic neuroma treated with definitive CK-SRS.
Shown is a 72-field CK-SRS plan (C and D) targeting the GTV. An MRI 3 years after treatment demonstrates stability following
treatment (B).

CK-SRS, CyberKnife stereotactic radiosurgery; GTV, gross tumor volume.

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 147

21/08/18 2:09 PM

148

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

have been reported with a higher propensity for
invasion, recurrence, and rapid growth pattern.
The current WHO grading schema is based on
mitosis per high-power field (mit/hpf), with WHO
Grade I (<4 mit/hpf) making up 80% of meningiomas, WHO Grade II (4–20 mit/hpf) making up
approximately 10% to 20% of meningiomas, and
WHO Grade III (>20 mit/hpf) being very rare and
accounting for the remaining patients.

Patient Selection
A large percentage of WHO Grade I meningiomas
are discovered incidentally on imaging. If discovered during an asymptomatic presentation, and
as a small volume, many advocate for conservative management with surveillance serial imaging
at 6-month intervals. If the lesion remains stagnant, serial yearly imaging is a reasonable management strategy. Once repeat scans demonstrate
a significant growth in volume, or symptoms
begin to develop, the therapeutic index of resection becomes more appropriate. Multiple surgical
series have demonstrated that a macroscopic complete resection with excision of dural attachments
and any abnormal bone yields the highest rate of
local control of approximately 90% (39). Once the
extent of surgery becomes limited by nearby critical structures, including neurovascular structures
and location, the propensity to recur increases to
as high as 40% to 50%. Once at a higher risk of
local recurrence, combining surgery with a course
of postoperative radiation is considered.

Radiosurgical Management
A number of clinical scenarios exist that would
warrant the use of radiation in the management
of meningioma. As mentioned earlier, once the
maximum extent of surgery is a subtotal resection
(STR), radiation may provide an improvement in
local control of gross residual disease. Radiation
may also replace definitive surgical therapy if a
patient is deemed a suboptimal surgical candidate,
or a lesion is found in an inaccessible/eloquent
region of the brain. Additional indications include
treatment of a recurrence following surgery. Each
of these scenarios, as well as the data that support
the indication of radiation, is discussed in the following text.
A number of single-institution series demonstrate both the feasibility and the efficacy of conventional external beam radiation to treat meningioma
in the event of STR. The majority of these studies

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 148

used a dose of approximately 54 Gy delivered
over a 30-fraction course. The University of
California–San Francisco reported on 140 patients
with meningioma following an STR and showed a
significant dose–response relationship above 52 to
53 Gy. This included an improvement in 10-year
progression-free survival (PFS) of 65% versus 93%
in benign lesions, and a 5-year PFS of 17% versus
63% in malignant meningiomas (40). The University of Florida also compared outcomes of observation with those of postoperative radiation in
132 patients with meningioma with STR, and
reported an improvement in 10-year local control
of 18% versus 82% (41).
When electing to treat via conventionally fractionated external beam radiation, the majority of radiation oncologists follow the protocol established by
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) 0539,
a phase II trial evaluating the appropriate dose of
external beam radiation for patients with meningioma. This protocol first divides patients with
meningioma into Group I (WHO Grade I with gross
total resection [GTR] or STR), Group II (WHO
Grade II with GTR or recurrent WHO Grade I),
or group III (WHO Grade II with STR, recurrent
WHO Grade II, and all WHO Grade III lesions).
Patients in Group I are observed, with an initial
report at the 2016 annual meeting of the American
Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) demonstrating a 5-year PFS of 94% for patients with GTR
and 73% in patients with STR. Patients in Group II
received 54 Gy in 30 fractions. The same report
demonstrated a 5-year PFS of 85% in patients with
WHO Grade II STR, and 73% in recurrent WHO
Grade I lesions. Patients in Group III undergo
60 Gy in 30 fractions, with outcomes of this group
yet to be reported.
With the advent of refined surgical techniques
and tumor imaging, the predominant contraindication of surgical resection is proximity to critical
structures. The ability of radiosurgery to dramatically reduce the dose of radiation delivered to normal structures has allowed radiation oncologists to
safely and effectively treat lesions with discernable
borders in unresectable locations with SRS. Multiple single-institution series have shown the use of
radiosurgery to produce local control rates above
90% with median marginal doses between 12 and
13 Gy (42). This includes definitive treatment via
linac-based or GK radiosurgery platforms. Reports
have also demonstrated efficacy in challenging
locations such as the cavernous sinus (43) and
optic nerve sheath (44).

21/08/18 2:09 PM

10: BRAIN RADIOSURGERY

Radiation Safety and Planning
Along with the above-mentioned high rates of local
control and PFS, several studies have reported on
the safety of radiation therapy in the treatment
of meningioma. The University of Pittsburgh
reported toxicity rates of new or worsened neurological symptoms at 9% in 99 patients treated
via GK-SRS, with 96% of patients considering
it a “success” on follow-up surveys (45). When
the same group reported on GK-SRS treatment
of cavernous sinus meningiomas, they reported a
91% rate of improved or stable neurological status
posttreatment. Hakim et al. reported on outcomes
following linac-based SRS to 155 meningiomas.
They reported a 4.7% rate of permanent complications because of radiosurgery at a median of
10.3 months.
Effectively delivering a course of SRS-appropriate
targeting of the lesion is critical. The standard
imaging of choice remains a contrast-enhanced
brain MRI. CT imaging may assist in identifying
hyperostosis of involved bone, as well as involvement of the skull base. Controversy exists regarding
the margin, as well as the necessity of including a
dural tail within treatment volumes. Many SRS trials to date have used margins on the order of 2 to
3 mm, and largely omitted the dural tail. Reports
indicate that, especially in the setting of WHO

(A)

(C)

149

Grade II meningioma, an overly conformal treatment volume may precipitate a higher risk of local
recurrence (46). Finally, adjacent hyperostotic bone
has been shown on surgical series to have a significant rate of involvement, and is considered worthwhile to include, as it is a frequent site of relapse
(47). With this in mind, we would recommend a
single-fraction SRS course to include a prescription
marginal dose between 12 and 14 Gy, encompassing grossly evident disease, hyperostotic bone, with
at most a 2-mm expansion.
The ideal radiosurgery plan includes at least
90% coverage of the target with the abovementioned dose, as well as limited dose to nearby
critical structures. This includes single-fraction
maximum doses below prescription dose to brainstem, 8 Gy to the optic nerve pathway, and 4 Gy
to cochlea, and minimizing the volume of uninvolved brain tissue receiving 12 Gy dose. An
example of a radiosurgery plan for meningioma is
found in Figure 10.4.

Follow-Up
We recommend close follow-up following radiosurgery treatment. This includes a 1-month posttreatment visit to ensure there is no acute toxicity,
followed by clinical evaluation at 6- to 12-month
intervals, and yearly brain MRIs thereafter.

(B)

(D)

FIGURE 10.4 The pretreatment MRI (A) scan of a 59-year-old male with a large left-sided meningioma treated with defin-

itive CK-SRS. Shown is an 81-field CK-SRS plan (B and D) targeting the GTV. An MRI 2 years after treatment demonstrates
stability following treatment (C).

CK-SRS, CyberKnife stereotactic radiosurgery; GTV, gross tumor volume.

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 149

21/08/18 2:09 PM

150

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

PITUITARY ADENOMA
Introduction
Approximately 10% to 15% of primary adult brain
tumors arise from the pituitary gland (48). Because
of a central location and interconnected endocrine
functions, tumors of the pituitary gland may present with a variety of symptoms. Mass effect on the
optic pathway can result in classic bitemporal hemianopsia (“tunnel vision”), as well as compression
of cerebrospinal fluid drainage causing obstructive
hydrocephalus. Disruption of endocrine pathways
can result in multiple syndromes related to inappropriate hormone production including Cushing’s
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), acromegaly
(GH), galactorrhea (prolactin), and hyperthyroidism (TSH). Although typically benign, slow growing, and limited in metastatic potential, the local
physical and physiological effects of pituitary adenomas may become quite problematic for patients,
and present a therapeutic challenge for physicians.
A select population of patients with incidentally discovered, nonsecretory microadenomas
(<1 cm in size) of the pituitary gland are routinely observed. In addition, certain patients with
microadenomas who present with oversecretion of
prolactin may be managed medically with dopamine agonists such as bromocriptine. As these
tumors become more physiologically active, or
locally compressive, the standard of care in most
centers is transsphenoidal microsurgery. Several
reports have demonstrated that local control with
surgery alone is excellent at approximately 90%
following a complete surgical excision (49,50),
and hormonal control may range from 50% to
80% (51). The risk of local recurrence is approximately 40% to 50%. In the event of incomplete
resection, consideration must be given to radiation
delivered via standard fractionation or radiosurgery to optimize local control.

Workup and Management
The average pituitary gland measures approximately 0.8 to 1.5 cm in size, and is confined in the
sella turcica. Within immediate proximity to the
pituitary gland are the optic chiasm (anterosuperior) and the cavernous sinus (lateral). The appropriate modality of diagnostic imaging to categorize
malignancies of this congested region is a multiplane MRI of the brain with gadolinium contrast
obtained with a slice thickness and image interval
of less than 0.2 mm.

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 150

Once a patient is considered for radiation, it is
imperative that all imaging available, both preoperative and postoperative, be accurately fused
within the radiation-planning system. This allows
for the most accurate delineation of any residual
malignant tissue and postsurgical changes. Previous treatment protocols using fractionated external beam radiation were able to achieve excellent
local control; however, fields were inclusive of the
entire hypothalamic–pituitary axis, and resulted
in undesirable posttreatment hypopituitarism
(52). SRS now allows the delivery of a higher dose
per fraction with rapid dose falloff to optimize
target dose, and minimize the dose of radiation to
nearby critical structures. By integrating the benefits of stereotactic guidance, patient immobilization, precise delivery, and improved imaging, SRS
has become a conventional approach to postoperative radiation of pituitary adenomas. Typical
target volumes encompass a GTV of enhancing
postcontrast tissue, with rapid dose falloff within
2 to 5 mm around the target. As these lesions
usually are located within close approximation to
the optic chiasm, extra attention is given to avoid
single-fraction doses of greater than 8 Gy to the
optic system. With this in mind, a fractionation
schedule of two to five fractions may be necessary
to accomplish a treatment plan with a safe optic
chiasm dose. Figure 10.5 demonstrates a pituitary
adenoma case treated with the above-mentioned
parameters.

(A)

(B)

(C)
FIGURE 10.5 The MRI (A) scan of a 48-year-old male

with a large pituitary adenoma treated with definitive
GK-SRS. Shown is an 18-shot GK-SRS plan (B and C) targeting the GTV.

GK-SRS, Gamma Knife stereotactic radiosurgery; GTV, gross
tumor volume.

21/08/18 2:09 PM

10: BRAIN RADIOSURGERY

Outcomes
Several institutions have reported clinical outcomes using postoperative fractionation schedules ranging from 14 to 18 Gy for nonfunctioning
adenomas, and 18 to 30 Gy for functioning adenomas. Local control rates from these reports surpass
90% (53,54). Sheehan et al. reported that a marginal dose less than 12 Gy using GK-SRS resulted
in suboptimal local control rate compared with
doses between 12 and 20 Gy (55).
Surgical decompression remains the most rapid
method of symptom improvement. As mentioned,
the long-term rate of local control in the event of
subtotal resection or medical inoperability remains
excellent following the addition of radiation therapy. Van den Bergh et al. reported on outcomes of
patients with subtotal resection of nonfunctional
pituitary adenomas who underwent postoperative
observation or radiation. This study reported a
disease progression rate of 4% following radiation
versus 57% disease progression following postoperative observation after subtotal resection (56).
Of those patients with a recurrence after observation, 95% were able to attain local control with
salvage radiation.
Stabilization of hormonal dysfunction following
irradiation remains a challenge, with a wide range
of outcomes reported to date. SRS has yielded hormone remission in approximately 50% of prolactinomas (57,58), 60% to 70% of acromegaly (59),
and 70% to 80% of Cushing’s disease (60,61) on
the basis of recent reports. This remission takes
place on a delayed timeline, with a median time
to improvement of 12 to 24 months. Frequently a
multidisciplinary approach is required to achieve
hormone goals, including surgical, radiation, and
medical management.

Follow-Up
Following SRS treatment of pituitary adenomas,
we recommend a short-interval follow-up at a minimum of 3-month intervals within the first year.
This includes monitoring of hormone levels, and
any indication of adverse reactions to radiation.
As the growth rate of pituitary adenomas is quite
slow, a follow-up brain MRI is typically scheduled 6
months after treatment, followed by 1-year intervals
thereafter to monitor physical progress. In the event
of posttreatment inflammation/pain/headaches or
visual changes, the first step of management is typically steroids followed by radiographic evaluation.

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 151

151

PARAGANGLIOMA, VAGAL SCHWANNOMA, AND OTHER TUMORS OF THE
PARAPHARYNGEAL SPACE
Introduction
Tumors of the parapharyngeal space are relatively
rare and are probably best divided into schwannomas and other lesions. Schwannomas may arise from
any nerve in the parapharyngeal space, including
the sympathetic chain, and exhibit similar imaging
characteristics to schwannomas in more common
locations. These features include homogeneous
contrast enhancement, easy delineation from surrounding structures, and intermittent cystic degeneration. Other tumors found in this location include
paragangliomas, neurofibromas, and neurofibrosarcomas (62,63). Paragangliomas, or glomus tumors,
are uncommon, typically benign tumors that arise
from the paraganglia of the autonomic nervous
system. Although neuroendocrine in origin, these
tumors are rarely secretory (64). Unlike schwannomas, these tumors typically exhibit a “salt and pepper” pattern of enhancement on contrast-enhanced
images because of tumoral flow voids. Frequently
discovered as a slow-growing, solitary, asymptomatic mass, these lesions usually present in the fourth
and fifth decades of life. Their growth rate is slow
(doubling time of approximately 4.2 years), with
a malignancy potential of less than 5%. If amenable, the primary treatment modality for tumors of
the parapharyngeal space is surgical excision, but
radiosurgery is an excellent treatment alternative in
selected cases.

Patient Selection/Evaluation
Once diagnosed with a parapharyngeal tumor, several factors affect a patient’s candidacy for definitive management via surgical excision or radiation
therapy. This includes the extent of local invasion,
size, location, proximity to sensitive/eloquent
structures, overall medical condition, patient preference, and local expertise.
Typical evaluation includes a thorough cranial
nerve examination, as well as a stereotactic brain
MRI with gadolinium contrast. Scan slice thickness/
interval must be less than 2 mm to accurately categorize the lesion and nearby anatomy. CT may also
aid in the delineation of bony involvement. Vascular
studies may assist in identifying angioarchitecture as
well as vascular compression/compromise.
On the basis of published meta-analysis, the
local recurrence/progression rate following either

21/08/18 2:09 PM

152

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

of these two treatment modalities is excellent and
quite similar at approximately 2% to 3% (65).
Although surgical intervention portends an excellent control rate, the risk of cranial nerve damage
and deficits has approached 30% to 40% in surgical series (66,67), so it can be argued that surgical
intervention is ideal for larger tumors rather than
for smaller or incidental masses.

structure over one fraction, including maximum
doses of prescription dose to brainstem, 8 Gy to
the optic nerve pathway, and 4 Gy to cochlea, and
minimizing the volume of uninvolved brain tissue
receiving 12 Gy dose. Once approved, on-board
imaging is used to verify patient setup prior to
delivery of treatment.

Radiation Treatment

BRAIN METASTASIS

If deemed a suboptimal surgical candidate because
of medical condition or tumor characteristics,
a definitive course of radiation therapy has been
demonstrated to provide an excellent and comparable rate of local control. As mentioned earlier,
to create an accurate and effective radiation plan,
a fusion of imaging modalities within the radiation delivery software is necessary. This allows the
team to take advantage of superior abilities of each
imaging modality while creating a treatment plan.
As these tumors are extremely rare, the majority
of treatment recommendations and outcomes data
are derived from single-institution experiences with
limited volume case series. Multiple institutions
have recently reported on the outcome of SRS used
to effectively and safely treat vagal schwannomas.
Chun et al. reported the University of Texas (UT)
Southwestern experience treating 31 patients to a
total dose of 25 Gy over five fractions, and documented a 100% local control rate, whereas 16%
of patients had grade 1 toxicity, and one patient
had grade 2 headaches (68). Pollock described the
Mayo Clinic experience treating 42 patients with
GK-SRS, using a mean marginal dose of 14.9 Gy,
reporting a 98% rate of stable/decreased disease,
and a 2% progression rate (69). They noted hearing
preservation in 81% of patients at 4 years. The University of Pittsburgh reported a local control rate of
100% following SRS treatment of glomus jugulare
tumors (70). Multiple European series have also
demonstrated 95% to 100% radiographic stability/
improvement following SRS (71,72).
With these data in mind, we recommend an SRS
dose of approximately 12 to 16 Gy over one fraction delivered with high conformality. This includes
adequate target coverage (95% coverage with prescription dose) as well as rapid dose falloff within
2 mm (90% isodose) and 5 mm (50% isodose)
outside the target volume. As described earlier,
critical intracranial structures are also contoured
including brainstem, eyes, optic nerve pathway,
cochlea, as well as normal brain tissue. Our authors
recommend limiting the maximum dose to each

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 152

Introduction
Overall, approximately 25% of cancer patients eventually develop brain metastasis, resulting in a significant negative impact on their long-term prognosis
(73). Metastatic tumors to the brain outnumber primary brain malignancies at a rate of approximately
10 to 1 (74). The risk of developing secondary disease to the brain is directly related to the patient’s
cancer histology, with tumors of the lung, breast,
and melanoma demonstrating the highest propensity
for central nervous system (CNS) spread (75,76).
As the sensitivity of diagnostic imaging improves,
and systemic agents improve control of microscopic
disease proximal to the blood–brain barrier, the incidence of brain metastasis continues to rise. On the
basis of presenting symptoms, burden of intracranial
disease, extracranial tumor control, performance
status, and treatment history, treatment options
can include surgical resection, whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT), SRS, or supportive care. This
chapter discusses the critical points of evaluation,
therapeutic options, and outcomes in the management of a patient with intracranial metastatic disease.

Evaluation/Prognosis
Once a patient with a known cancer diagnosis
presents with new neurological symptoms such as
headache, strength/sensory changes, ataxia, altered
mental status, seizure, nausea, or cranial nerve
deficits, the clinical suspicion of brain metastasis
must remain high until proven otherwise. In addition, many otherwise asymptomatic patients benefit from screening MRI scans of the brain during
cancer staging. In either case, the diagnostic modality of choice is a contrast-enhanced brain MRI,
preferably using a stereotactic protocol and slice
thickness/image interval width less than 0.2 cm.
Once metastatic disease is confirmed, optimal
management includes a rapid relief of symptoms.
This may include a temporary course of corticosteroids, typically an intravenous (IV)-loading dose
of approximately 8 to 10 mg, followed by an oral

21/08/18 2:09 PM

10: BRAIN RADIOSURGERY

153

maintenance dose of 4 to 6 mg every 6 hours alongside a prophylactic proton pump inhibitor. Antiepileptic medications are worthwhile only if the
patient presents with seizure symptoms; otherwise,
prophylactic antiseizure medication has demonstrated no benefit (77).
Multiple tools have been developed to accurately
prognosticate patients with brain metastasis. Sperduto et al. created a disease-specific graded prognostic assessment (GPA) on the basis of the primary
cancer and factors including age, performance status, and intracranial disease, and extracranial control. Following a multi-institutional analysis of over
4,200 patients with brain metastasis, a comprehensive point system was able to predict median overall
survival between 3 and 18 months (78). Prior to
this, Gasper et al. created a recursive partitioning
analysis (RPA) on the basis of 1,200 patients with
brain metastasis treated on three different RTOG
trials between 1979 and 1993. On the basis of factors including performance status, age, and extracranial status, patients were grouped into classes I
to III with median survival of 7.1 months in class
I, 4.2 months in class II, and 2.3 months in class
III (79,80). Each of these tools assists physicians
in discussing potential outcomes with patients, and
has provided physicians with a helpful metric when
debating treatment options.

significant neurological deficit, surgery provides
an effective method of immediate debulking of
the mass, preventing further decline and potentially facilitating neurological recovery. Most agree
that patients most suitable for surgery include
those with a single accessible metastatic lesion,
otherwise well-controlled systemic disease, and
relatively intact functional status. This cohort has
grown with modern cytotoxic and targeted agents
providing enhanced systemic control of disease.
Multiple well-cited randomized controlled trials have demonstrated a benefit of the addition of
surgical resection to WBRT alone in patients with
a single brain metastasis and Karnofsky Performance Status (KPS) greater than or equal to 70.
A seminal paper by Patchell et al. demonstrated
multiple benefits with the addition of surgery
to WBRT (36 Gy/12 fractions). This included
a significant improvement in overall survival
(40 weeks in the combined modality group vs.
15 weeks in the WBRT-alone group), local failure (20% vs. 52%), time to neurological death
(62 weeks vs. 26 weeks), and prolongation of
KPS greater than or equal to 70 (81). A Dutch
study by Noordijk et al. confirmed a median survival
benefit by adding surgery to WBRT (10 months vs.
6 months), particularly in those with stable extracranial disease (12 months vs. 7 months; 82).

TREATMENT MODALITIES/OUTCOMES

Whole-Brain Radiation Therapy

As discussed earlier, the optimal management of
brain metastasis depends on several factors including the primary disease, patient presentation,
performance status, intracranial and extracranial
disease volume, and age. A multidisciplinary team
including neurosurgeons, medical oncologists,
radiation oncologists, neuroradiologists, and supportive care specialists may be needed to establish
an appropriate treatment strategy. There should be
a mutual understanding of the goals and expected
benefits from treatment between the patient and
his or her physician, with continuous reevaluation. In the appropriate setting, surgical resection/
debulking, WBRT, SRS, and supportive care are
acceptable and worthwhile treatment options.

Surgery
As brain metastasis represents an incurable progression of disease, with typically a limited longterm survival, the role of surgical resection of
secondary brain lesions has been an issue of investigation. If a metastatic tumor has resulted in a

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 153

Prior to the improvement of surgical technique and
expanded feasibility, WBRT was used as a standard treatment approach to control macroscopic
and suspected microscopic disease throughout the
brain. With the advent of effective and safe surgical excision, the role of WBRT was called into
question. Patchell et al. performed a prospective
study evaluating surgery alone versus surgery plus
WBRT in patients with single brain metastasis and
KPS greater than or equal to 70. They reported an
improvement in both local control (90% vs. 54%)
and intracranial control (72% vs. 30%), as well as
less neurological death (14% vs. 44%), with the
addition of WBRT to surgery alone (81). There was
no difference in overall survival. European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer
(EORTC) 22952 affirmed these findings when comparing local therapy (either surgery or SRS) alone
or in combination with WBRT in 353 patients with
one to three metastases, stable extracranial disease,
and intact performance status. The authors demonstrated a significant improvement in 2-year local
control (73% vs. 41%) and 2-year intracranial

21/08/18 2:09 PM

154

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

control (77% vs. 58%), with no change in overall
survival (83).
Most would agree today that the use of WBRT is
reserved for postoperative patients with progressive
disease, or inoperable patients with diffuse and
numerable disease burden. In general, we recommend WBRT for patients with greater than 10 intracranial lesions, a large volume of involved disease,
or leptomeningeal carcinomatosis.

Stereotactic Radiosurgery
WBRT provides physicians the ability to target
intracranial metastasis with a noninvasive
approach, while controlling extracranial disease
with systemic therapy. However, conventionally
fractionated WBRT permits a full dose of radiation
to reach a large volume of sensitive uninvolved
brain tissue, increasing the early/late toxicity profile. By combining techniques similar to those in
stereotactic neurosurgery, and taking advantage of
the relative immobility of the brain, SRS was implemented to provide a high dose per fraction of radiation to a discernable focus of disease, and spare
nearby normal tissue with rapid dose gradients.
Several studies have demonstrated the efficacy
of SRS as a definitive therapy, and in combination
with WBRT or surgical resection. When delivered
following surgery, multiple single-institution series
have reported local control rates between 70%
and 90%, whereas the rate of intracranial failure
remained approximately 25% to 50% (84–86).
RTOG 95-08 compared WBRT (37.5 Gy/15 fractions) with WBRT plus SRS for patients with one
to three brain metastases. In patients with a single
unresectable focus of disease, the addition of SRS
provided an improvement in median survival from
4.9 to 6.5 months (p = .039), as well as improved
performance status and less steroid dependence
(87–89). When used alone, SRS provided excellent
local control rates between 70% and 90%; however,
intracranial failure remained at approximately 50%.
The Mayo Clinic published a single-institutional
series directly comparing SRS (n = 23 patients) with
surgical excision (n = 74 patients), with no difference in overall survival, but a local recurrence rate of
58% with surgery versus 0% with SRS (90).
On the basis of the existing literature, SRS remains
an effective and accepted treatment approach to
patients with disease burden/location that is not
amenable to complete surgical excision, or patients
who either wish to avoid surgery or are medically
inoperable. Reports indicate that SRS may be safely

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 154

used for patients presenting with up to 10 brain
metastases (91), and that overall disease volume may
be more relevant than absolute lesion number. Our
authors will generally recommend SRS for lesions
up to 4 cm in size in nonsurgical candidates, on the
basis of location and the overall case presentation.

SRS Dose Schedule/Treatment Planning
Most SRS centers follow the dose/fractionation
schedule generated by RTOG 9005. This phase I
study demonstrated safe, single-fraction radiosurgery doses of 24 Gy to lesions less than or equal
to 2 cm, 18 Gy for lesions of 2 to 3 cm, and 15 Gy
to lesions of 3 to 4 cm (92). A typical linac-based
SRS plan will include 100% coverage of GTV to
an 80% isodose line, with the 90% isodose line
covering at least 50% of the GTV. Prescription
dose will then be to the 80% isodose line, generating a central dose of 1.1 to 2 times the prescription dose. Once coverage is adequate, the goal is to
promote conformity of dose. Our center uses rings
2, 5, and 10 mm from the target to set goals of
less than 50% isodose line by a 10-mm distance.
Figure 10.6 demonstrates a representative SRS plan
targeting metastatic breast carcinoma in the brain.

(A)

(C)

(B)

(D)

FIGURE 10.6 The MRI (A) scan of a 53-year-old female
with intracranial metastatic breast carcinoma treated with
definitive CyberKnife stereotactic radiosurgery. A total of
six lesions were treated in this plan; shown is a 178-field
CK-SRS plan (C and D) targeting the GTV. An MRI 1 year
after treatment demonstrates significant interval treatment
response (B).
CK-SRS, CyberKnife stereotactic radiosurgery; GTV, gross tumor
volume.

21/08/18 2:09 PM

10: BRAIN RADIOSURGERY

Follow-Up
As mentioned earlier, patients with SRS remain at a
significant risk of intracranial failure when enrolled
in a protocol that avoids WBRT. In addition, the
protective effect of WBRT with regard to remote
intracranial failure is relatively short-lived. With this
in mind, our authors recommend a short-interval
close follow-up with repeat contrast-enhanced brain
MRIs on a schedule of every 3 months for the first
year, and gradually expanded timecourse thereafter.
In the event of recurrence, or new disease, the evaluation process must renew, with consideration to the
benefit of each treatment modality and the current
state of extracranial disease.

HIGH-GRADE GLIOMA (ANAPLASTIC
GLIOMA/GLIOBLASTOMA
MULTIFORME)
Introduction
High-grade gliomas include WHO Grade III (anaplastic astrocytoma, anaplastic oligodendroglioma,
and anaplastic oligoastrocytoma) and WHO Grade
IV (glioblastoma multiforme [GBM]) lesions. Highgrade gliomas account for approximately 40% to
50% of primary adult brain lesions (93). The majority (75%–80%) of high-grade gliomas are of WHO
Grade IV GBM histology. The criteria to distinguish
these entities include histopathological detection of
nuclear atypia, mitoses, endothelial cell proliferation, and necrosis. Several recursive partitioning
analyses have been performed that allow physicians
to prognosticate patients on the basis of age, performance status, extent of resection, and mental
status (94,95). On initial presentation, it is critical
to distinguish histology, as the median survival for
GBM ranges from approximately 9 to 20 months,
whereas the median survival for astrocytoma can
reach as high as 60 months. In addition, cellular markers including O(6)-methylguanine-DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter methylation,
telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT), 1p19q
codeletion, and isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)
1 or 2 mutation have all been reported as both
prognostic and predictive for patients with malignant glioma, and are an increasingly important
element of patient evaluation and management.

Patient Selection/Management
To date, the first step of therapy for a high-grade
glioma is a maximum safe resection. The extent of
resection (gross vs. subtotal) has been associated

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 155

155

with improved median survival outcomes in several studies (96). Several autopsy series have
demonstrated that approximately 80% of tumor
recurrences are within 2 cm of the initial unifocal
tumor bed. With this in mind, multiple studies have
demonstrated that combining maximal safe resection with standard external beam radiation therapy
(EBRT) provides a significant survival benefit to
patients with malignant glioma (97,98). If a tumor
cannot be safely resected, then stereotactic biopsy
is necessary to establish a diagnosis prior to definitive treatment.
The data regarding the benefit of radiation in
combination with chemotherapy can be parsed
out on the basis of histology. For patients with
WHO Grade III Disease (Astrocytoma), the two
major trials demonstrating a benefit to the combination of radiation and chemotherapy include
RTOG 94-02 (99) and EORTC 26951 (100). Both
studies compared postoperative radiation alone
with postoperative radiation plus a procarbazine/
CCNU/vincristine (PCV) regimen. Both studies
established 1p19q/IDH1 as strong prognostic
factors, and that the addition of chemotherapy
significantly improved progression-free survival.
Both of these studies also demonstrated an overall
survival benefit of chemotherapy alone in patients
with 1p19q codeletion, but failed to demonstrate
a survival benefit in patients without this mutation. Further trials have demonstrated no significant oncological outcome difference between PCV
and temozolomide (TMZ) regimens; however,
TMZ has an improved hematologic/neuropathy/
transaminitis toxicity profile. These data have been
supplemented by recent published results of the
CATNON trial (NCT00626990), which randomized patients with anaplastic glioma without the
1p19q codeletion to postoperative radiation alone
versus postoperative radiation plus concurrent/
adjuvant TMZ. This trial reported a significant
5-year overall survival (44% vs. 55%) and median
progression-free survival (19 months vs. 42 months)
improvement in patients who received adjuvant
TMZ, advocating for adjuvant chemotherapy in
those with 1p19q codeletion.
For patients who present with WHO Grade IV
Disease (GBM), the seminal trial demonstrating
a survival benefit to combination of radiation and
chemotherapy was EORTC-NCIC trial 2698122981 published by Stupp et al. (101). This trial
randomized patients greater than 70 years of age
with strong performance status to postoperative
radiation therapy (60 Gy in 30 fractions) with or

21/08/18 2:09 PM

156

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

without concurrent and adjuvant TMZ. The
authors demonstrated a significant 5-year overall
survival benefit that was greatest in patients with
MGMT promoter methylation.
Each of the trials mentioned in this chapter
was performed with conventionally fractionated
EBRT. With the advancement of radiation delivery techniques, many have questioned the potential role of definitive or additive radiation via SRS
as a boost for selected patient groups. To date,
there have been no prospective trials that have
demonstrated a significant benefit of SRS boost
in combination with standard surgical resection
and conventional fractionated EBRT for primary
malignant glioma. RTOG 93-05 randomized
203 patients with GBM to postoperative SRS
followed by standard protocol EBRT plus systemic
therapy versus standard protocol chemoradiation
therapy alone. This trial reported no significant
difference in median survival (approximately
13 months) between the two groups (102). Since
that time, the ASTRO has published a review
statement that SRS boost “does not confer a
benefit in terms of overall survival, local brain
control, or quality of life as compared with external beam radiotherapy and BCNU alone” (103).
This review also went on to cite an insufficiency
of evidence regarding the benefits/harms of using
SRS at the time of initial presentation, progression, or recurrence for patients with malignant
glioma. Therefore, as a general rule, the use of
adjuvant SRS for high-grade glioma should be
reserved for selected cases in which the patient
has already received an adequate course of conventional EBRT.
Multiple single-institution and multicenter retrospective reviews have reported the use of SRS
for patients with new/recurrent high-grade glioma
(104–106). Each has shown potential improvements in outcome compared with historical controls; however, these reports must be interpreted
cautiously because of a significant risk of selection bias. Multiple single-institution reports have
demonstrated the potential safety and efficacy of
concurrent SRS and bevacizumab in recurrent
malignant gliomas. Together they have reported
low incidence of grade 3 toxicity (107,108), and
improved outcomes compared with historical
controls (109).
The University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute
reported on the treatment of 11 patients with recurrent GBM with GK-SRS to a median margin dose
of 16 Gy alongside bevacizumab, and compared

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 156

outcomes with 44 case-matched controls who
underwent GK-SRS alone (110). This report
demonstrated that the combination of GK-SRS
and bevacizumab yielded a significant improvement
in 1-year progression-free survival (15 months
vs. 7 months) and overall survival (18 months
vs. 12 months) compared with GK-SRS alone.
Figure 10.7 demonstrates the MRI findings of
patients from this trial.
Others have cautioned against the use of highly
conformal radiosurgery in high-grade glioma, as
the disease has an infiltrative growth pattern with
borders that are difficult to distinguish, increasing the risk of a potential treatment miss. The
previously cited experiences have treated lesions
less than 3 cm in diameter with a single fraction
(13–18 Gy), whereas lesions sized 3 to 5 cm in
diameter received doses of 25 to 30 Gy in five
fractions. With this in mind, our authors do not
recommend the use of SRS in the up-front treatment of high-grade glioma, and reserve SRS for
patients in the recurrent disease setting with
low-volume disease.

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

FIGURE 10.7 The MRI (A) scan of a patient with a recur-

rent glioblastoma multiforme 4 months after upfront resection, conventional radiation, and temozolomide. (B) An MRI
1 year after salvage GK-SRS and bevacizumab. (C) The MRI
of a patient with a recurrent left temporal lobe glioblastoma multiforme after resection, conventional radiation, temozolomide, and Novocure therapy. (D) An MRI 18 months
after salvage GK-SRS and bevacizumab.

GK-SRS, Gamma Knife stereotactic radiosurgery.

21/08/18 2:09 PM

10: BRAIN RADIOSURGERY

FUNCTIONAL RADIOSURGERY—
TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA,
THALAMOTOMY, PALLIDOTOMY
Introduction
Functional SRS shifts the target of radiation from
a discernable tumor or other anatomic lesion to
a nonmalignant abnormal physiological pathway
that has resulted in significant detrimental symptoms for a patient. These symptoms may include
facial pain, intractable seizures, and essential
parkinsonian tremors. Typically in each presentation, the patient has been refractory to medical
management, presents as a suboptimal operative
candidate, or has failed multiple additional treatment modalities.

Trigeminal Neuralgia (TGN)
The most widely used application of functional SRS
is control of medically refractory trigeminal neuralgia pain. Trigeminal neuralgia is a symptomatic
disorder of cranial nerve V that results in sudden
and severe stabbing/shocking pain felt in a unilateral distribution of the affected nerve root (111).
The International Headache Society defines classical trigeminal neuralgia (aka “idiopathic/tic douloureux”) as including paroxysmal pain attacks that
are intense, precipitated by trigger areas, with no
additional neurological deficits or disorders. The
etiology is suspected to be an aberrant vascular
compression of the affected nerve before it enters
the brainstem. Initial standard of care includes a
regimen of antiepileptic medication, with systemic
review demonstrating symptom control in 90% of
patients (112). Medication alternatives include open
surgery with microvascular decompression, rhizotomy with glycerol injection or balloon decompression, or radiofrequency injury to the nerve (113).
Several groups have published high rates of pain
control with microvascular decompression surgery,
which remains the gold standard of care for medically refractory cases. Barker et al. published a surgical series of 1,185 patients and documented 82% of
patients achieving immediate pain relief, which was
sustained as complete pain relief in 75% of patients
at 1 year, and 64% of patients at 10 years (114).

SRS for Trigeminal Neuralgia
Retrogasserian radiosurgical rhizotomy is a noninvasive and safe procedure suitable for patients
regardless of treatment history (115,116). Multiple

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 157

157

series have demonstrated the efficacy of SRS in
the treatment of idiopathic, medically refractory,
trigeminal neuralgia pain. Kondziolka et al. reported
outcomes on 220 patients treated with a median
dose of 80 Gy, and documented complete pain
relief in 65% of patients at 6 months, 70% of
patients at 1 year, and 75% of patients at 33 months
(117). This group also cited improved pain relief in
patients with younger age, fewer prior procedures,
and increased risk of complications (numbness or
paresthesias) with increased length of nerve irradiated (118). Multiple additional single-institution
reports have published long-term “excellent pain
control” rates of approximately 60% to 90%
(119,120). Although overall response rates are not
as durable as for MVD, SRS for TGN allows the
patient to avoid the risks unique to craniotomy,
including anesthesia complications, hemorrhage,
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak, and infection.

SRS Technique
The majority of published data using SRS for
TGN have been via the GK-SRS platform,
according to previously described setup protocols. Treatment is typically prescribed to either
one or two isocenters (separated by 3–5 mm),
with a maximum dose of approximately 70 to
80 Gy, and a 50% isodose line as the nominal
treatment volume. This is typically delivered using
4-mm-diameter collimators. One isocenter is
always placed close to the root entry zone of the
retrogasserian trigeminal nerve, with the 50%
isodose volume outside the brainstem, and the 20%
isodose volume abutting the brainstem. Singleinstitution studies have shown that dose rate, treatment time, and collimator size are not significantly
associated with control rate or degree of pain relief
(121,122). Similar control rates and toxicity profiles
have been reported with linear accelerator–based
SRS platforms (123,124). An example of GKSRS–based radiosurgery is shown in Figure 10.8.

Thalamotomy/Pallidotomy
Parkinsonian tremors, rigidity, and akinesia remain
a therapeutic challenge for neurologists and neurosurgeons. These symptoms are felt to originate
from irregularities between activation and negative
feedback mechanisms between the basal ganglia,
caudate nucleus, and cerebellum that control voluntary and involuntary movements. Initial management strategies have included the use of dopamine
agonists that actively cross the blood–brain barrier,

21/08/18 2:09 PM

158

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

FIGURE 10.8 The MRI planning scan of a 70-year-old
male with trigeminal neuralgia. A single-shot plan was delivered via GK-SRS, using 4-mm collimators. The dose prescribed was 42.5 Gy at the 50% isodose line.
GK-SRS, Gamma Knife stereotactic radiosurgery.

including levodopa. Reports have demonstrated
the efficacy of surgical pallidotomy/thalamotomy and deep brain stimulation (DBS) to alleviate the aforementioned symptoms in patients who
become medically refractory (125–127). Durable
efficacy from these procedures has reached 90%
in some reports while using electrophysiological
target localization, but is associated with the risks
of an intracranial invasive procedure.

When performing a thalamotomy for tremor, the
target is the ventral intermediate thalamic nucleus.
The Swedish group recommends a target that
measures 3 to 4 mm in the anteroposterior dimension, and is located 2 to 3 mm anterior to the
midcommisural point, 22 mm lateral to midline,
and 6 mm below the commissural plane. When
performing a pallidotomy, the target includes the
globus pallidus interna (GPI), which is immediately
lateral to the internal capsule, superior to the optic
tract, and posterior to the mammillary bodies, 2 to
3 mm anterior to the midcommissural point, and
4 to 6 mm inferior to the intercommissural line
(131). An example of this is shown in Figure 10.9.
Treatment planning via GK usually involves
placing a single isocenter, and using a 4-mmdiameter collimator, while prescribing a maximum
dose between 120 and 140 Gy. The target is localized via pretreatment MRI studies obtained after
placement of a stereotactic frame. Regardless of
the therapeutic goal of radiosurgery, our authors
recommend close-interval follow-up between
radiation oncologists, neurologists, and neurosurgical services to monitor for response, reaction,
and recovery following treatment. As discussed,
the full symptomatic benefit of radiation may take
weeks to develop.

SRS and Parkinson’s Disease
For medically-refractory patients deemed suboptimal
surgical candidates for DBS, either because of comorbidities or advanced age, noninvasive tissue ablation via SRS may be the best option for treatment.
Although the therapeutic effects of SRS are delayed
in comparison to surgery (approximately 4–8 weeks),
some have reported symptom control efficacy rates
of 90%, which is comparable to historical surgical
controls (128). The Jefferson group performed pallidotomy or thalamotomy via SRS on 17 patients with
medically refractory movement disorders and noted
a clinical response and a ring-enhancing radiosurgical “scar” in the majority of patients approximately
4 weeks after treatment (129). Additional reports
have documented significant improvements in patientreported tremors and motor function scores after
SRS-mediated ablation (129,130).
Delivery of thalamotomy/pallidotomy via GK-SRS
requires a multidisciplinary approach between neurologist, neurosurgeons, and radiation oncologists.

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 158

(A)

(B)

(C)
FIGURE 10.9 The MRI planning scan (A) of an 85-year-

old female with an essential tremor that underwent
functional stereotactic Gamma Knife radiosurgery. Her
treatment involved delivery of a single-shot plan, prescribed to 65 Gy at the 50% isodose line; two treatment sectors were blocked. An anterior commissure/
posterior commissure (AC/PC) line was created for
a frame of reference (B), and a 1-year posttreatment
(B)
MRI (C) demonstrated a histological response.

21/08/18 2:09 PM

10: BRAIN RADIOSURGERY

159

SUMMARY OF DOSE CONSTRAINTS
(TABLE 10.1)
TABLE 10.1 Dose Constraints for Brain Using SBRT
Brain Dose Guidelines
Brain metastasis
Lesion diameter ≤2 cm

20–24 Gy

Diameter >2 cm but ≤3 cm

18 Gy

Diameter >3 cm but ≤4 cm

15–16 Gy

Meningioma

12–16 Gy (single fraction) or 20–25 Gy (four to five fractions)

Pituitary adenoma

22–24 Gy for secreting, ~15 Gy for nonsecreting (single fraction) or 20–24 Gy (five
fractions)

Acoustic neuroma

12–13 Gy (single fraction) or 18 Gy (three fractions)

Arteriovenous malformations
<2 cm

20 Gy (single fraction)

2–3 cm

18 Gy (single fraction)

>3 cm

15 Gy (single fraction)

>3 cm

20 Gy (five fractions)

Vagal schwannoma/paragangliomas

12–13 Gy (single fraction) or 20–25 Gy (four to five fractions)

Trigeminal neuralgia

80–90 Gy (single fraction to isocenter with 5-mm cone)

Thalamotomy/pallidotomy

130–140 Gy (single fraction to isocenter using 5-mm cone)

Recurrent glioma

15–24 Gy (single fraction based on size and location)
a

Critical structures

Suggested dose limits

Brainstem

V12 Gy <1 mL

Optic apparatus

Maximum 8 or <12–14 Gy (three fractions)

Brain

V12 Gy <5–10 mL

Cochlea

Maximum 4.2 Gy (single fraction) or 6–8 Gy (three fractions)

Plan evaluation
Conformality index

Prescription isodose volume/target volume (1 is perfect, ~1.2 is good)

Gradient index

Volume of 50% prescription isodose/volume of entire treatment isodose (~sharpness
of dose falloff: want less than 3; can turn on 25% isodose line when placing shots)

Heterogeneity index

Maximum dose/prescription dose (~hot spots)

aFor several lesions in proximity, volume covered by 12-Gy isoline in normal brain tissue should be minimized.

SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 159

21/08/18 2:09 PM

160

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

REFERENCES
1. Timmerman R, Papiez L, McGarry R, et al. Extracranial
stereotactic radioablation: results of phase I study in medically inoperable stage I non-small cell lung cancer. Chest.
2003;124:1946-1955. PubMed PMID: 14605072.
2. Nguyen T, Hsu W, Lim M, et al. Delivery of stereotactic radiosurgery: a cross-platform comparison. Neurol
Res.
2011 ;33 (8):787 -791.
doi: 10.1179/0161641
11X13123658647409
3. Brown Jr RD, Wiebers DO, Torner JC, et al. Frequency of
intracranial hemorrhage as a presenting symptom and subtype
analysis: a population-based study of intracranial vascular
malformations in Olmsted Country, Minnesota. J Neurosurg.
1996;85:29-32. doi:10.3171/jns.1996.85.1.0029
4. Crawford PM, West CR, Chadwick DW, et al. Arteriovenous malformations of the brain: natural history in unoperated patients. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1986;49:1-10.
PubMed PMID: 3958721.
5. ApSimon HT, Reef H, Phadke RV, et al. A population-based
study of brain arteriovenous malformation: long-term treatment outcomes. Stroke. 2002;33:2794-2800. PubMed PMID:
12468772.
6. Spetzler RF, Martin NA. A proposed grading system for arteriovenous malformations. J Neurosurg. 1986;65(4):476-483.
doi:10.3171/jns.1986.65.4.0476
7. Karlsson B, Lindquist C, Steiner L. Prediction of obliteration
after gamma knife surgery for cerebral arteriovenous malformations. Neurosurgery. 1997;40:425-431. PubMed PMID:
9055280.
8. Friedman WA, Bova FJ, Mendenhall WM. Linear accelerator
radiosurgery for arteriovenous malformations: the relationship of size to outcome. J Neurosurg. 1995;82:180-189.
doi:10.3171/jns.1995.82.2.0180
9. Flickinger JC, Pollock BE, Kondziolka D, et al. A doseresponse analysis of arteriovenous malformation obliteration after radiosurgery. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1996;
36(4):873-879. PubMed PMID: 8960516.
10. Flickinger JC, Kondziolka D, Maitz AH, et al. Analysis
of neurological sequelae from radiosurgery of arteriovenous
malformations: how location affects outcome. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 1998;40:273-278. PubMed PMID: 9457809.
11. Flickinger JC, Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD, et al. Development of a model to predict permanent symptomatic postradiosurgery injury for arteriovenous malformation patients.
Arteriovenous Malformation Radiosurgery Study Group. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2000;46(5):1143-1148. PubMed
PMID: 10725624.
12. Flickinger JC, Kondziolka D, Maitz AH, et al. An analysis
of the dose-response for arteriovenous malformation radiosurgery and other factors affecting obliteration. Radiother
Oncol. 2002;63:347-354. PubMed PMID: 12142099.
13. Colombo F, Pozza F, Chierego G, et al. Linear accelerator
radiosurgery of cerebral arteriovenous malformations: an
update. Neurosurgery. 1996;34:14-21. PubMed PMID:
8121550.
14. Maruyama K, Kawahara N, Shin M, et al. The risk of hemorrhage after radiosurgery for cerebral arteriovenous malformations. N Engl J Med. 2005;352(2):146-153. doi:10.1056/
NEJMoa040907
15. Lindquist C, Steiner L. Stereotactic radiosurgical treatment
of malformations of the brain. In: Lundsford LD, (ed.). Modern Stereotactic Neurosurgery. Boston, MA: Martinus Nijhoff;
1988:491-505.
16. Schuknecht HF. Pathology of the Ear. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press; 1974:428.

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 160

17. Yamakami I, Uchino Y, Kobayashi E, et al. Conservative
management, gamma-knife radiosurgery, and microsurgery
for acoustic neurinomas: a systematic review of outcome
and risk of three therapeutic options. Neurol Res. 2003;25:
682-690. doi:10.1179/016164103101202075
18. Koos WT, Day JD, Matula C, et al. Neurotopographic considerations in the microsurgical treatment of small acoustic
neurinomas. J Neurosurg. 1998;88(3):506-512. doi:10.3171/
jns.1998.88.3.0506
19. Karpinos M, Teh BS, Zeck O, et al. Treatment of acoustic
neuroma: stereotactic radiosurgery vs. microsurgery. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2002;54(5):1410-1421. PubMed
PMID: 12459364.
20. Brackmann DE. Middle cranial fossa approach. In: House
WF, Luetje CM, (eds.). Acoustic Tumors. Vol 2. Baltimore,
MD: University Park Press; 1979:15-41.
21. Bremond G, Garcin M, Magnan J. Preservation of hearing in
the removal of acoustic neuroma (‘Minima’ posterior approach
by retrosigmoidal route). J Laryngol Otol. 1980;94:1199-1204.
PubMed PMID: 7430779.
22. Cohen NL, Ransohoff J. Preservation of hearing in acoustic
neurinoma surgery. In: Samii M, Jannetta PJ, (eds.). The Cranial Nerves: Anatomy, Pathology, Pathophysiology, Diagnosis,
Treatment. Berlin, Germany: Springer Verlag; 1981:561-568.
23. Sarmiento JM, Patel S, Mukherjee D, et al. Improving outcomes in patients with vestibular schwannomas: microsurgery versus radiosurgery. J Neurosurg Sci. 2013;57(1):23-44.
PubMed PMID: 23584218.
24. Lunsford LD, Niranjan A, Flickinger JC, et al. Radiosurgery
of vestibular schwannomas: summary of experience in 829
cases. J Neurosurg. 2013;119(suppl):195. PubMed PMID:
25077305.
25. Williams JA. Fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy for acoustic neuromas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2002;54(2):
500-504. PubMed PMID: 12243828.
26. Norén G, Greitz D, Hirsch A, et al. Gamma knife surgery in
acoustic tumours. Acta Neurochir Suppl (Wien). 1993;58:
104-107. PubMed PMID: 8109269.
27. Combs SE, Welzel T, Schulz-Ertner D, et al. Differences in
clinical results after LINAC-based single-dose radiosurgery
versus fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy for patients
with vestibular schwannomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2010;76:193-200. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.01.064
28. Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD, McLaughlin MR, et al.
Long-term outcomes after radiosurgery for acoustic neuromas. N Engl J Med. 1998;339:1426-1433. doi:10.1056/
NEJM199811123392003
29. Prasad D, Steiner M, Steiner L. Gamma surgery for vestibular
schwannoma. J Neurosurg. 2000;92:745-759. doi:10.3171/
jns.2000.92.5.0745
30. Friedman WA, Bradshaw P, Myers A, et al. Linear accelerator radiosurgery for vestibular schwannomas. J Neurosurg.
2006;105(5):657-661. doi:10.3171/jns.2006.105.5.657
31. Fukuoka S, Takanashi M, Hojyo A, et al. Gamma Knife
radiosurgery for vestibular schwannomas. Prog Neurol Surg.
2009;22:45-62. doi:10.1159/000163382
32. Régis J, Pellet W, Delsanti C, et al. Functional outcome after
gamma knife surgery or microsurgery for vestibular schwannomas. J Neurosurg. 2002;97(5):1091-1100. doi:10.3171/
jns.2002.97.5.1091
33. Myrseth E, Møller P, Pedersen PH, et al. Vestibular schwannoma: surgery or gamma knife radiosurgery? A prospective,
nonrandomized study. Neurosurgery. 2009;64(4):654-661.
doi:10.1227/01.NEU.0000340684.60443.55
34. Pollock BE, Driscoll CL, Foote RL, et al. Patient outcomes
after vestibular schwannoma management: a prospective

21/08/18 2:09 PM

10: BRAIN RADIOSURGERY
comparison of microsurgical resection and stereotactic
radiosurgery. Neurosurgery. 2006;59:77-85. doi:10.1227/01.
NEU.0000219217.14930.14
35. Chopra R, Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD, et al. Long-term
follow-up of acoustic schwannoma radiosurgery with
marginal tumor doses of 12 to 13 Gy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2007;68(3):845-851. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.01.001
36. Ostrom QT, Gittleman H, Xu J, et al. CBTRUS Statistical
Report: primary brain and central nervous system tumors
diagnosed in the United States in 2009-2013. Neuro Oncol.
2016;18(suppl 5):v1-v75. doi:10.1093/neuonc/now207
37. Blitshteyn S, Crook J, Jaeckle KA. Is there an association between
meningioma and hormone replacement therapy? J Clin Oncol.
2008;26(2):279-282. doi:10.1200/JCO.2007.14.2133
38. Rogers CL. Radiation therapy for intracranial meningiomas.
In: Mehta MP, (ed.). Principles and Practice of Neurooncology: A Multi-disciplinary Approach. New York, NY:
Demos Medical; 2011:820-841.
39. Simpson D. The recurrence of intracranial meningiomas
after surgical treatment. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry.
1957;20:22-39. PubMed PMID: 13406590.
40. Goldsmith BJ, Wara WM, Wilson CB, et al. Postoperative irradiation for subtotally resected meningiomas: A retrospective
analysis of 140 patients treated from 1967 to 1990. J Neurosurg. 1994;80(2):195-201. doi:10.3171/jns.1994.80.2.0195
41. Taylor Jr BW, Marcus Jr RB, Friedman WA, et al. The meningioma controversy: postoperative radiation therapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1988;15(2):299-304. PubMed
PMID: 3403313.
42. Hakim R, Alexander E, Loeffler JS, et al. Results of linear
accelerator-based radiosurgery for intracranial meningiomas.
Neurosurgery. 1998;42:446-454. PubMed PMID: 9526976.
43. Lee JY, Niranjan A, McInerney J, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery providing long-term tumor control of cavernous sinus
meningiomas. J Neurosurg. 2002;97(1):65-72. doi:10.3171/
jns.2002.97.1.0065
44. Brower JV, Amdur RJ, Kirwan J, et al. Radiation therapy
for optic nerve sheath meningioma. Pract Radiat Oncol.
2013;3(3):223-228. doi:10.1016/j.prro.2012.06.010
45. Kondziolka D, Levy EI, Niranjan A, et al. Long-term outcomes after meningioma radiosurgery: physician and patient
perspectives. J Neurosurg. 1999;91(1):44-50. doi:10.3171/
jns.1999.91.1.0044
46. Boskos C, Feuvret L, Noel G, et al. Combined proton and
photon conformal radiotherapy for intracranial atypical
and malignant meningioma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2009;75:399-406. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.10.053
47. Bikmaz K, Mrak R, Al-Mefty O. Management of boneinvasive, hyperostotic sphenoid wing meningiomas. J Neurosurg. 2007;107:905-912. doi:10.3171/JNS-07/11/0905
48. Ezzat S, Asa SL, Couldwell WT, et al. The prevalence of
pituitary adenomas: a systematic review. Cancer. 2004;
101:613-619. doi:10.1002/cncr.20412
49. Dekkers OM, Pereira AM, Roelfsema F, et al. Observation alone after transsphenoidal surgery for nonfunctioning
pituitary macroadenoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006;91:
1796-1801. doi:10.1210/jc.2005-2552
50. Erturk E, Tuncel E, Kiyici S, et al. Outcome of surgery for
acromegaly performed by different surgeons: importance of
surgical experience. Pituitary. 2005;8:93-97. doi:10.1007/
s11102-005-3280-9
51. Barker FG 2nd, Klibanski A, Swearingen B. Transsphenoidal
surgery for pituitary tumors in the United States, 1996-2000:
Mortality, morbidity, and the effects of hospital and surgeon volume. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003;88:4709-4719.
doi:10.1210/jc.2003-030461

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 161

161

52. Flickinger JC, Nelson PB, Martinez AJ, et al. Radiotherapy of
nonfunctional adenomas of the pituitary gland: results with
long-term follow-up. Cancer. 1989;63:2409-2414. PubMed
PMID: 2541887.
53. Salinger DJ, Brady LW, Miyamoto CT. Radiation therapy
in the treatment of pituitary adenomas. Am J Clin Oncol.
1992;15:467-473. PubMed PMID: 1449108.
54. Kondziolka D, Atteberry DS, Lunsford LD. Gamma knife
radiosurgery for meningiomas, schwannomas, and pituitary
tumors. In: Germano IM, (ed.). LINAC and Gamma Knife
Radiosurgery. Park Ridge: American Assoc. of Neurological
Surgeons; 1999:207-219.
55. Sheehan JP, Starke RM, Mathieu D, et al. Gamma knife
radiosurgery for the management of nonfunctioning pituitary
adenomas: a multicenter study. J Neurosurg. 2013;119:
446-456. doi:10.3171/2013.3.JNS12766
56. van den Bergh AC , van den Berg G , Schoorl MA , et al.
Immediate postoperative radiotherapy in residual nonfunctioning pituitary adenoma: beneficial effect on local
control without additional negative impact on pituitary
function and life expectancy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys . 2007 ; 67 ( 3 ): 863 - 869 . doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2006.
09.049
57. Pouratian N, Sheehan J, Jagannathan J, et al. Gamma knife
radiosurgery for medically and surgically refractory prolactinomas. Neurosurgery. 2006;59:255-266. doi:10.1227/01.
NEU.0000223445.22938.BD
58. Jezková J, Hána V, Krsek M, et al. Use of the Leksell
gamma knife in the treatment of prolactinoma patients. Clin
Endocrinol (Oxf). 2009;70:732-741. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2265.
2008.03384.x
59. Pollock BE, Jacob JT, Brown PD, et al. Radiosurgery of growth
hormone producing pituitary adenomas: factors associated
with biochemical remission. J Neurosurg. 2007;106:833-838.
doi:10.3171/jns.2007.106.5.833
60. Sheehan JP, Xu Z, Salvetti DJ, et al. Results of gamma
knife surgery for Cushing’s disease. J Neurosurg. 2013;
119:1486-1492. doi:10.3171/2013.7.JNS13217
61. Höybye C, Grenbäck E, Rähn T, et al. Adrenocorticotropic
hormone producing pituitary tumors: 12- to 22-year follow-up
after treatment with stereotactic radiosurgery. Neurosurgery.
2001;49:284-292. PubMed PMID: 11504104.
62. Sniezek JC, Netterville JL, Sabri AN. Vagal paragangliomas.
Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2001;34:925-939. PubMed
PMID: 11557447.
63. Green Jr JD, Olsen KD, DeSanto LW, et al. Neoplasms of the
vagus nerve. Laryngoscope. 1988;98:648-654. doi:10.1288/
00005537-198806000-00014
64. Manolidis S, Shohet JA, Jackson CG, et al. Malignant
glomus tumors. Laryngoscope. 1999;109:30-34. doi:10.1097/
00005537-199901000-00007
65. Gottfried ON, Liu JK, Couldwell WT. Comparison of radiosurgery and conventional surgery for the treatment of glomus
jugulare tumors. Neurosurg Focus. 2004;17(2):E4. PubMed
PMID: 15329019.
66. Pellitteri PK, Rinaldo A, Myssiorek D, et al. Paragangliomas of the head and neck. Oral Oncol. 2004;40:563-575.
doi:10.1016/j.oraloncology.2003.09.004
67. Biller HF, Lawson W, Som P, et al. Glomus vagale tumors.
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 1989;98:21-26. doi:10.1177/
000348948909800105
68. Chun SG, Nedzi LA, Choe KS, et al. A retrospective analysis
of tumor volumetric responses to Five-Fraction stereotactic
radiotherapy for paragangliomas of the head and neck (Glomus
Tumors). Stereotact Funct Neurosurg. 2014;92(3):153-159.
doi:10.1159/000360864

21/08/18 2:09 PM

162

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

69. Pollock BE. Stereotactic radiosurgery in patients with glomus
jugulare tumors. Neurosurg Focus. 2004;17(2):E10. PubMed
PMID: 15329025.
70. Wegner RE, Rodriguez KD, Heron DE, et al. Linac based
stereotactic body radiation therapy for treatment of glomus
jugulare tumors. Radiother Oncol. 2010;97(3):395-398.
doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2010.09.004
71. Gerosa M, Visca A, Rizzo P, et al. Glomus jugulare tumors:
the option of gamma knife radiosurgery. Neurosurgery. 2006;
59(3):561-569. doi:10.1227/01.NEU.0000228682.92552.CA
72. Saringer W, Khayal H, Ertl A, et al. Efficiency of gamma
knife radiosurgery in the treatment of glomus jugulare
tumors. Minim Invasive Neurosurg. 2001;44(3):141-146.
doi:10.1055/s-2001-18162
73. Fox BD, Cheung VJ, Patel AJ, et al. Epidemiology of metastatic brain tumors. Neurosurg Clin N Am. 2011;22:1-6.
doi:10.1016/j.nec.2010.08.007
74. Wen PY, Black PM, Loeffler JS. Treatment of metastatic
cancer: metastatic brain cancer. In: DeVita VT, Hellman S,
Rosenberg SA, (eds.). Cancer: Principles and Practice of
Oncology. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2001:2655-2670.
75. Posner JB. Brain metastases, 1995: A brief review. J Neurooncol. 1996;27:287-293. PubMed PMID: 8847563.
76. Johnson JD, Young B. Demographics of brain metastasis. Neurosurg Clin N Am. 1996;7:337-344. PubMed PMID: 8823767.
77. Sawaya R, Bindal RK, Lang FF, et al. Metastatic brain tumors.
In: Kaye AH, Lawa E Jr, (eds.). Brain Tumors: An Encyclopedic Approach. 2nd ed. London, UK: Churchill Livingstone;
2001:999-1026.
78. Sirven JI, Wingerchuck DM, Drazkowski JF, et al. Seizure
prophylaxis in patients with brain tumors: a meta-analysis.
Mayo Clin Proc. 2004;79(12):1489-1494. doi:10.4065/79.
12.1489
79. Sperduto PW, Chao ST, Sneed PK, et al. Diagnosis-specific
prognostic factors, indexes, and treatment outcomes for
patients with newly diagnosed brain metastases: a multiinstitutional analysis of 4,259 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2010;77(3):655-661. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.08.025
80. Gaspar L, Scott C, Rotman M, et al. Recursive partitioning
analysis (RPA) of prognostic factors in three radiation therapy oncology group (RTOG) brain metastases trials. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1997;37(4):745-751. PubMed
PMID: 9128946.
81. Patchell RA, Tibbs PA, Walsh JW, et al. A randomized
trial of surgery in the treatment of single metastases to the
brain. N Engl J Med. 1990;322(8):494-500. doi:10.1056/
NEJM199002223220802
82. Noordijk EM, Vecht CJ, Haaxma-Reiche H, et al. The choice
of treatment of single brain metastasis should be based on
extracranial tumor activity and age. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 1994;29(4):711-717. PubMed PMID: 8040016.
83. Patchell RA, Tibbs PA, Regine WF, et al. Postoperative radiotherapy in the treatment of single metastases to the brain: a
randomized trial. JAMA. 1998;280(17):1485-1489. PubMed
PMID: 9809728.
84. Kocher M, Soffietti R, Abacioglu U, et al. Adjuvant whole-brain
radiotherapy versus observation after radiosurgery or surgical
resection of one to three cerebral metastases: results of the
EORTC 22952-26001 study. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(2):134-141.
doi:10.1200/JCO.2010.30.1655
85. Robbins JR, Ryu S, Kalkanis S, et al. Radiosurgery to the
surgical cavity as adjuvant therapy for resected brain metastasis. Neurosurgery. 2012;71(5):937-943. doi:10.1227/NEU.
0b013e31826909f2

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 162

86. Mathieu D, Kondziolka D, Flickinger JC, et al. Tumor bed
radiosurgery after resection of cerebral metastases. Neurosurgery. 2008;62(4):817-823. doi:10.1227/01.neu.
0000316899.55501.8b
87. Soltys SG, Adler JR, Lipani JD, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery of the postoperative resection cavity for brain metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008;70(1):187-193.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.06.068
88. Andrews DW, Scott CB, Sperduto PW, et al. Whole brain
radiation therapy with or without stereotactic radiosurgery
boost for patients with one to three brain metastases: phase III
results of the RTOG 9508 randomised trial. Lancet.
2004;363:1665-1672. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(04)16250-8
89. Sneed PK, Lamborn KR, Forstner JM, et al. Radiosurgery
for brain metastases: is whole brain radiotherapy necessary?
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1999;43:549-558. PubMed
PMID: 10078636.
90. Aoyama H, Shirato H, Tago M, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery plus whole-brain radiation therapy vs stereotactic
radiosurgery alone for treatment of brain metastases: A
randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2006;295:2483-2491.
doi:10.1001/jama.295.21.2483
91. O’Neill BP, Iturria NJ, Link MJ, et al. A comparison of surgical resection and stereotactic radiosurgery in the treatment
of solitary brain metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2003;55(5):1169-1176. PubMed PMID: 12654423.
92. Shaw E, Scott C, Souhami L, et al. Single dose radiosurgical
treatment of recurrent previously irradiated primary brain
tumors and brain metastases: final report of RTOG protocol
90-05. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2000;47(2):291-298.
PubMed PMID: 10802351.
93. Ostrom QT, Gittleman H, Fulop J, et al. CBTRUS statistical report: Primary brain and central nervous system tumors
diagnosed in the United States in 2008-2012. Neuro Oncol.
2015;17:iv1-iv62. doi:10.1093/neuonc/nov189
94. Curran Jr WJ, Scott CB, Horton J, et al. Recursive partitioning analysis of prognostic factors in three radiation therapy
oncology group malignant glioma trials. J Natl Cancer Inst.
1993;85(9):704-710. PubMed PMID: 8478956.
95. Mirimanoff RO, Gorlia T, Mason W, et al. Radiotherapy and
temozolomide for newly diagnosed glioblastoma: recursive
partitioning analysis of the EORTC 26981/22981-NCIC CE3
phase III randomized trial. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24(16):
2563-2569. doi:10.1200/JCO.2005.04.5963
96. Lacroix M, Abi-said D, Fourney DR, et al. A multivariate
analysis of 416 patients with glioblastoma multiforme:
prognosis, extent of resection, and survival. J Neurosurg.
2001;95(2):190-198. doi:10.3171/jns.2001.95.2.0190
97. Laperriere N, Zuraw L, Cairncross G. Radiotherapy for
newly diagnosed malignant glioma in adults: a systematic
review. Radiother Oncol. 2002;64(3):259-273. PubMed
PMID: 12242114.
98. Rusthoven CG, Carlson JA, Waxweiler TV, et al. The
impact of adjuvant radiation therapy for high-grade gliomas
by histology in the United States population. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2014;90(4):894-902. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2014.07.046
99. Cairncross G, Wang M, Shaw E, et al. Phase III trial of
chemoradiotherapy for anaplastic oligodendroglioma: longterm results of RTOG 9402. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(3):
337-343. doi:10.1200/JCO.2012.43.2674
100. van den Bent MJ, Brandes AA, Taphoorn MJ, et al.
Adjuvant procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine chemotherapy in newly diagnosed anaplastic oligodendroglioma:
long-term follow-Up of EORTC brain tumor group study

21/08/18 2:09 PM

10: BRAIN RADIOSURGERY
26951. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(3):344-350. doi:10.1200/
JCO.2012.43.2229
101. Stupp R, Hegi ME, Mason WP, et al. Effects of radiotherapy
with concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide versus radiotherapy alone on survival in glioblastoma in a randomised
phase III study: 5-year analysis of the EORTC-NCIC
trial. Lancet Oncol. 2009;10(5):459-466. doi:10.1016/
S1470-2045(09)70025-7
102. Souhami L, Seiferheld W, Brachman D, et al. Randomized
comparison of stereotactic radiosurgery followed by conventional radiotherapy with carmustine to conventional
radiotherapy with carmustine for patients with glioblastoma
multiforme: report of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group
93-05 protocol. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2004;60(3):
853-860. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2004.04.011
103. Tsao MN, Mehta MP, Whelan TJ, et al. The American
Society for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology (ASTRO)
evidence-based review of the role of radiosurgery for
malignant glioma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005;
63(1):47-55. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2005.05.024
104. Bokstein F, Blumenthal DT, Corn BW, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) in high-grade glioma: judicious
selection of small target volumes improves results. J
Neurooncol. 2016;126(3):551-557. doi:10.1007/s11060015-1997-5
105. Kondziolka D, Flickinger JC, Bissonette DJ, et al. Survival
benefit of stereotactic radiosurgery for patients with malignant
glial neoplasms. Neurosurgery. 1997;41:776-785. PubMed
PMID: 9316038.
106. Binello E, Green S, Germano I, et al. Radiosurgery for
high-grade glioma. Surg Neurol Int. 2012;3(suppl 2):
S118-S126. doi:10.4103/2152-7806.95423
107. Cabrera AR, Cuneo KC, Desjardins A, et al. Concurrent stereotactic radiosurgery and bevacizumab in recurrent malignant gliomas: a prospective trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2013;86(5):873-879. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.04.029
108. Cabrera AR, Cuneo KC, Vredenburgh JJ, et al. Stereotactic
radiosurgery and bevacizumab for recurrent glioblastoma
multiforme. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2012;10:695-699.
PubMed PMID: 22679114.
109. Clark GM, McDonald AM, Nabors LB, et al. Hypofractionated stereotactic radiosurgery with concurrent bevacizumab
for recurrent malignant gliomas: the University of Alabama
at Birmingham experience. Neurooncol Pract. 2014;1(4):
172-177. doi:10.1093/nop/npu028
110. Park KJ, Kano H, Iyer A, et al. Salvage gamma knife stereotactic radiosurgery followed by bevacizumab for recurrent
glioblastoma multiforme: a case-control study. J Neurooncol.
2012;107(2):323-333. doi:10.1007/s11060-011-0744-9
111. Bagheri SC, Farhidvash F, Perciaccante V, et al. Diagnosis
and treatment of patients with trigeminal neuralgia. J Am
Dent Assoc. 2004;135:1713. PubMed PMID: 15646605.
112. Chole R, Patil R, Degwekar SS, et al. Drug treatment of
trigeminal neuralgia: a systematic review of the literature.
J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2007;65(1):40-45. doi:10.1016/
j.joms.2005.12.063
113. Lunsford LD, Apfelbaum RI. Choice of surgical therapeutic
modalities for treatment of trigeminal neuralgia: Microvascular decompression, percutaneous retrogasserian thermal,
or glycerol rhizotomy. Clin Neurosurg. 1985;32:319-333.
PubMed PMID: 3905143.
114. Barker FG, Jannetta PJ, Bissonette DJ, et al. The longterm outcome of microvascular decompression for trigeminal neuralgia. N Engl J Med. 1996;334(17):1077-1083.
doi:10.1056/NEJM199604253341701

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 163

163

115. Halperin EC, Perez CA, Brady LW, (eds.). Principles and
Practice of Radiation Oncology. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013.
116. Young RF, Vermeulen SS, Grimm P, et al. Gamma knife
radiosurgery for treatment of trigeminal neuralgia: Idiopathic and tumor related. Neurology. 1996;48:608-614.
PubMed PMID: 9065534.
117. Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD, Flickinger JC. Stereotactic
radiosurgery for the treatment of trigeminal neuralgia. Clin
J Pain. 2002;18(1):42-47. PubMed PMID: 11803302.
118. Flickinger JC, Pollock BE, Kondziolka D, et al. Does increased
nerve length within the treatment volume improve trigeminal neuralgia radiosurgery? a prospective double-blind,
randomized study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2001;51(2):
449-454. PubMed PMID: 11567820.
119. Dhople A, Kwok Y, Chin L, et al. Efficacy and quality of
life outcomes in patients with atypical trigeminal neuralgia treated with gamma-knife radiosurgery. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2007;69(2):397-403. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2007.03.001
120. Fountas KN, Lee GP, Smith JR. Outcome of patients undergoing gamma knife stereotactic radiosurgery for medically
refractory idiopathic trigeminal neuralgia: Medical College
of Georgia’s experience. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg. 2006;
84(2-3):88-96. doi:10.1159/000094366
121. Balamucki CJ, Stieber VW, Ellis TL, et al. Does dose rate
affect efficacy? The outcomes of 256 gamma knife surgery
procedures for trigeminal neuralgia and other types of facial
pain as they relate to the half-life of cobalt. J Neurosurg.
2006;105(5):730-735. doi:10.3171/jns.2006.105.5.730
122. Kanner AA, Neyman G, Suh JH, et al. Gamma knife radiosurgery for trigeminal neuralgia: comparing the use of a 4-mm
versus concentric 4- and 8-mm collimators. Stereotact Funct
Neurosurg. 2004;82(1):49-57. doi:10.1159/000076661
123. Richards GM, Bradley KA, Tomé WA, et al. Linear accelerator radiosurgery for trigeminal neuralgia. Neurosurgery.
2005;57(6):1193-1200. PubMed PMID: 16331167.
124. Lim M, Villavicencio AT, Burneikiene S, et al. CyberKnife
radiosurgery for idiopathic trigeminal neuralgia. Neurosurg
Focus. 2005;18(5):E9. PubMed PMID: 15913285.
125. Dogali M, Fazzini D, Kolodny E, et al. Stereotactic ventral
pallidotomy for Parkinson’s disease. Neurology. 1995;45:
753-761. PubMed PMID: 7723966.
126. Lozano AM, Lang AE, Galvez-Jimenez N, et al. Effect of
GPi pallidotomy on motor function in Parkinson’s disease.
Lancet. 1995;346:1383-1387. PubMed PMID: 7475819.
127. Johansson F, Malm J, Nordh E, et al. Usefulness of pallidotomy in advanced Parkinson’s disease. Neur Neuros
Psych. 1997;62:125-132. PubMed PMID: 9048711.
128. Young RF, Li F, Vermeulen S, et al. Gamma knife thalamotomy for treatment of essential tremor: long-term results.
J Neurosurg. 2010;112:1311-1317. doi:10.3171/2009.10.
JNS09332
129. Friedman DP, Goldman HW, Flanders AE, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgical pallidotomy and thalamotomy with the
gamma knife: MR imaging findings with clinical correlationpreliminary experience. Radiology. 1999;212(1):143-150.
doi:10.1148/radiology.212.1.r99jl34143
130. Young RF, Francisco L, Vermeulen S, et al. Gamma knife
pallidotomy for treatment of Parkinson’s disease: long-term
results, clinical study. Transl Cancer Res. 2014;3(4):342-350.
doi:10.3978/j.issn.2218-676X.2014.08.04
131. Young RF. The gamma knife in movement disorder surgery.
In: Lozano AM, (ed.). Movement Disorder Surgery. Basel,
Switzerland: Karger; 2000:272-278.

21/08/18 2:09 PM

Heron_68566_PTR_10_139-164_08-23-18.indd 164

21/08/18 2:09 PM

C H A P T E R

11

Head and Neck SBRT
John A. Vargo, Shlomo A. Koyfman, Robert L. Ferris, Dwight E. Heron, and Farzan Siddiqui

The use of stereotactic body radiation therapy
(SBRT) in the head and neck was born out of
the difficult necessity of having to manage progressive locoregional disease, from either recurrent cancer or a second primary lesion, in an
area that was irradiated earlier. Oncologists have
had the painful experience of treating recurrent,
previously-irradiated head and neck cancer with
more conventional palliative doses, only to be
faced with progressive disease several months
later in patients who often have nonmetastatic
disease and cases in whom local therapy is quite
vital. This clinical scenario poses the proverbial
“rock and a hard place” in which reirradiation in
the head and neck, an anatomic region characterized by numerous critical structures in close
proximity including several nonredundant serial
organs at risk (OARs), carries significant risks
of morbidity and mortality, whereas tumor progression is notoriously insidious and universally
morbid. With the rise and success of intracranial and extracranial SBRT in the late 1990s and
early 2000s, SBRT became an attractive potential
solution to this dilemma by allowing high-dose
radiation with a reasonable likelihood of disease
response and more durable control while minimizing the dose to OARs by capitalizing on the
small margins and sharp dose falloff associated
with SBRT.
Much of the initial research in head and neck
SBRT was performed by the University of Pittsburgh
group. In a series of studies, investigators

systematically proved safety in the phase 1 setting
and efficacy in the phase 2 setting, demonstrating
the benefit of dose escalation to overcome a dose–
response threshold and the ability to safely combine
SBRT with systemic therapy (1–2). As a result, head
and neck SBRT is becoming increasingly used in
the reirradiation setting, and is more recently being
explored in the up-front radiation-naïve setting for
select patients who are ineligible for traditional
prolonged courses of conventionally fractionated
radiation therapy (RT), with or without systemic
therapy (3).
SBRT is not the only reirradiation technique for
recurrent or second primary head and neck cancers, as the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group
(RTOG) conducted several prospective trials
investigating conventionally fractionated or hyperfractionated radiation with concurrent chemotherapy (4–5). As such, optimizing patient selection
for various modalities of reirradiation in general,
and for SBRT in particular, is a critical need, and
one in which there is a paucity of comparative
research. Similarly, defining patients most appropriate for SBRT in the radiation-naïve setting
remains in its infancy. Increasing publications on
single-institution SBRT experiences, as well as some
novel comparative research recently presented,
have helped clarify which patients are most and
least appropriate for head and neck SBRT and serve
as a guide for “inclusion” and “exclusion” criteria
when considering this treatment for a particular
patient (6).

165

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 165

23/08/18 5:46 PM

166

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

SELECTION CRITERIA FOR SBRT:
MORE APPROPRIATE PATIENTS

disease, whose natural history of disease may portend extended survival (8).

The original work for head and neck SBRT was performed primarily in patients who had received significant prior radiation dose to the head and neck
(>30–40 Gy) and then developed either a recurrence or a second primary lesion that was unresectable in the absence of metastatic disease and
required definitive management. These patients
frequently present with neck disease encasing a
major vessel including the carotid artery, and/or
unresectable skull base disease, and are perhaps
the most appropriate candidates for whom SBRT
should be considered because of well representation in the evidence base. Similarly, more recent
data have emerged describing the use of SBRT reirradiation in the postoperative setting—typically for
gross residual disease, a positive margin, or extensive extranodal extension (7). Importantly, patients
with either squamous or nonsquamous histology
were included in many of these studies, as were
tumors of any size or volume.
Patients in whom the use of SBRT is more controversial include patients who have resectable
recurrent or second primary disease and are medically fit for surgery but refuse an operation for
fear of surgical morbidity or other personal preferences. Data from the recent RTOG pattern of
failure study suggest that surgical salvage was a
strong predictor of improved outcomes in these
patients, and SBRT is an inadequate replacement
for surgery (8). That said, SBRT can be offered in
this setting, albeit with clear informed consent and
an acknowledgment of likely inferior outcomes.
Another less studied area includes radiation-naïve
patients with an initial diagnosis of head and neck
cancer who are poor candidates for definitive surgical management or even conventionally fractionated radiation for 6 to 7 weeks because of advanced
age, comorbidities, and/or poor social support.
SBRT is an attractive option for these patients, as
the shortened five-fraction treatment schedule is
quite appealing and the acute toxicity quite manageable (3). Similarly, patients who present with
metastatic head and neck cancer and are planned
for primary systemic therapy, but have large,
symptomatic primary tumors requiring up-front
radiation, may be appropriate for consideration of
SBRT as opposed to traditional lower dose palliative regimens (9). This may be particularly true
in patients with more limited metastatic disease
burden, or human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive

SELECTION CRITERIA FOR SBRT:
LESS APPROPRIATE PATIENTS

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 166

Understanding which patients are poor candidates
for SBRT is a crucial need and one that continues
to change as more evidence becomes available.
However, several recurrent themes have emerged
in the literature and can guide the judicious use
of SBRT (see Table 11.1). Patients with recurrent
disease, and especially those with second primaries, who are eligible and fit for resection should
be recommended to proceed with surgery—SBRT
is not an equivalently effective strategy. Similarly,
patients with poor prognoses, who rapidly recur
within 3 to 4 months of prior conventional radiation, and/or who have a life expectancy of less than
6 months, are unlikely to benefit from SBRT and
should be considered for purely palliative regimens
(e.g., Quad Shot; 10).
The most dramatic evidence published that
demonstrated excessive harm with SBRT was a
European study that demonstrated a high rate of
carotid blowout syndrome (CBS) in patients with
tumor encompassing more than 180° of the carotid
artery (11). Although some consider this study to
be a contraindication to head and neck SBRT, it
resulted in modification of the dosing scheme from
daily SBRT treatments to every-other-day SBRT,
with the investigators demonstrating a significant
decrease in adverse events (12). Many radiation
oncologists continue to use SBRT in the setting
of carotid encasement; however, extreme caution
should be used in patients who have cancer involving all of the soft tissue between the carotid and the
pharyngeal mucosa and in whom prior surgery may
have created fistulas (13).
Similarly, data have emerged that suggest more
SBRT-related toxicity when treating the laryngeal and hypopharyngeal regions in comparison
with the neck or skull base (14). In treating these
patients, one should consider tracheostomy or the
placement of a feeding tube in patients with recurrences involving these areas. Patients with frank
skin invasion with tumor are almost guaranteed to
experience worsened soft-tissue necrosis and nonhealing wounds after SBRT and should be avoided.
Although there are no established size criteria for
head and neck SBRT, patients with extensive neck
disease (i.e., either bilateral or multilevel ipsilateral disease) are not well suited for SBRT. Finally,

23/08/18 5:46 PM

11: HEAD AND NECK SBRT

167

TABLE 11.1 Factors Influencing Patient Selection for Head and Neck SBRT
More Appropriate for SBRT

Less Appropriate for SBRT

Previously radiated patients
● Unresectable recurrent/second primary disease
● Tumors of skull base
● Tumors of neck with minor carotid involvement/
encasement
● Tumors recurrent in prior flap reconstruction
● Patients with >6-month life expectancy
● Postoperative to high-risk area (e.g., + margin or gross
extranodal extension)

Previously radiated patients
● Resectable recurrent/second primary disease
● Gross skin invasion
● Carotid encasement with tumor communicating with
mucosal surface
● Diffuse neck disease (e.g., bilateral or largevolume multilevel ipsilateral)
● Tumors adjacent to spinal cord and/or brainstem (may
require dose reduction)
● Tumors of larynx/hypopharynx region in absence of
prior laryngectomy

Radiation-naïve patients
● Patients with nonmetastatic head and neck cancer who
are ineligible for definitive surgery, chemo-RT, or
long-course conventional RT
● Patients with oligometastatic disease at presentation
with symptomatic locoregional disease

Radiation-naïve patients
● Patients with nonmetastatic head and neck cancer who
are eligible for definitive surgery, chemo-RT, or
long-course conventional RT
● Patients with widespread metastatic disease

SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

although extremely rare with modern treatment
planning, patients in whom disease is in close proximity to the spinal cord and/or brainstem necessitating violation of SBRT dosing guidelines should
be treated with other non-SBRT–based schedules,
or dose-reduced SBRT (13).

IMAGING AND TARGET DEFINITION
The extreme hypofractionation, and dose per fraction greater than 6 Gy, inherent to SBRT requires
steep dose gradients that hinge on accurate target
and critical OAR definition. To this end, CT simulation for SBRT planning requires fine-cut (e.g.,
1.25 mm slice thickness) CT and the use of intravenous contrast enhancement to increase accuracy of
target and critical OAR delineation. Complementary imaging modalities to assist in target definition
have also been used in many reported experiences.
For instance, 18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography (18FDG-PET) is routinely
used either at the time of SBRT simulation or via
deformable image registration to CT simulation to
aid in volume definition at the University of Pittsburgh, as well as in other large academic institutional experiences in the United States (15–17).
Although others have used gadolinium-enhanced
fine-cut magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) fused
to the CT simulation to similarly increase the accuracy of target definition (18–20), clinically, we find
MRI most useful when treating recurrent volumes
close to the base of skull or paranasal sinuses, in

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 167

which proximity to high-risk neural structures
(e.g., temporal lobes, brainstem, optic nerve, and
optic chiasm) necessitates this modality to aid in
critical OAR and target definition (Figure 11.1).
To account for organ motion, such as when treating
the larynx, four-dimensional CT scans may be used.
However, few reports have described such methodology acknowledging that although the motion of
the larynx can be significant, the time during which
this motion takes place is small relative to total
treatment time (21,22). Others have used intrafraction monitoring techniques such as ExacTrac®
(BrainLab, Munich, Bavaria) or CyberKnife®
(Accuray, Sunnyvale, California) six-dimensional
skull or spine tracking to account for such potential motion during treatment delivery (13).
When performing target definition, we recommend the following steps:
1. There should be collaboration between a

radiation oncologist, neuroradiologist, and
head and neck surgeon for multidisciplinary
target definition while taking into account
the patient’s medical history, anatomy
(which is commonly distorted in the setting
of recurrent disease), and potential patterns
of spread.
2. Information should be incorporated from

both contrast-enhanced CT simulation and
complementary imaging modalities such as
PET/CT or gadolinium-enhanced fine-cut
MRI (Figure 11.2A–C).

23/08/18 5:46 PM

168

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

(A)

(B)

FIGURE 11.1 Example of the importance of additional high-resolution imaging such as MRI or PET/CT fusion or simulation in target definition for SBRT. (A) CT with true extent of GTV especially with extension toward brainstem and right
temporal lobe difficult to assess; (B) 1.25-mm slice thickness, high-resolution, contrast-enhanced, T1-weighted MRI with
GTV highlighted in red. The red GTV volume is then displayed over the CT-fused image to highlight the importance of this
imaging and fusion in SBRT treatment planning.
GTV, gross tumor volume; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

3. We do not routinely incorporate a clinical tar-

get volume (CTV) margin for treatment of the
primary lesion, nor do we routinely electively
irradiate nodal levels when using SBRT for
recurrent head and neck cancer. This practice
is consistent with recommendations for conventional reirradiation and is imperative to
minimize risks of complication with high-doseper-fraction reirradiation with SBRT (23).
4. Although many of the early reports using

SBRT in head and neck cancer extrapolated from clinical experience with intracranial stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) and
focused on the gross tumor volume (GTV)
with no additional margin for the planning target volume (PTV), many radiation
oncologists now use a GTV to PTV expansion despite use of these advanced imaging
modalities consistent with patterns of failure analyses with PET/CT-based SBRT
experiences (13,24). However, although PTV
is not modified by strict definition, a reduced
or edited PTV may be permitted in cases in
which the PTV margin significantly overlaps with critical OARs to respect normal
tissue tolerances in the reirradiation setting
(Figure 11.2D–F).

DOSE FRACTIONATION SCHEMES
Various dose fractionation schemes have been
used and described in the literature. Most treatment regimens are largely empirical with clinician

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 168

experience and preference dictating the regimen
used. SBRT for head and neck cancers is largely
used in the reirradiation setting. This is unlike
other sites, such as SRS for intracranial lesions
and SBRT for early stage lung cancers, in which
the treated lesions are in previously unirradiated
tissue. Dose–response relationships and toxicity
data are well studied and more mature for these
situations.
The unique challenge posed by the head and
neck population is the fact that data for normal
tissue toxicity with high-dose-per-fractionation
RT in earlier irradiated tissues are scarce. Most
of the guidelines and recommendations present
unvalidated data for a few structures (13). In
these recommendations, previous dose of radiation to tissues and structures and the time since
previous radiation are not considered. Radiation
dose tolerance information for a large number
of OARs such as the brain, bone, carotid artery,
cranial nerves, skin, and soft tissue is unknown. In
addition, dose–response relationships for recurrent tumors in the earlier operated or irradiated
tissue with underlying hypoxia and fibrosis are
also largely unknown. Thus, dose fractionation
schemes for SBRT in recurrent head and neck
cancers are still evolving.
Review of the literature reveals a wide array
of schemes (see Table 11.2). Some centers had
earlier used one large dose of 10 to 18 Gy in one
fraction similar to the paradigm used for SRS
for intracranial lesions. However, most centers
started fractionating treatments to minimize
side effects and to increase the delivered dose

23/08/18 5:46 PM

11: HEAD AND NECK SBRT

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

(E)

(F)

169

FIGURE 11.2 Volume definition using PET/CT-based simulation: (A) GTV delineation on the basis of CT in green; (B) FDG
PET/CT GTV in red; (C) combination of PET and CT information used to define GTV contour; (D) 2-mm PTV expansion in
orange (notice editing of PTV at interface with mandible in yellow); (E) 40 Gy in five-fraction color wash; and (F) 20 Gy in
five-fraction color wash (notice skin and ipsilateral parotid sparing).

FDG, fluorodeoxyglucose; GTV, gross tumor volume.

TABLE 11.2 Summary of Head and Neck SBRT Literature
Publication
and Year

Technique

Survival

Late
Toxicity

OS1,
70.6%
OS2,
58.3%

N = 6 in
re-RT,
hemorrhage

OS1,
58.9%
OS2,
28.4%

No grade
4/5
toxicity

CR, 27%
PR, 29.8%
Stable,
10%

Median
OS, 11.9
months
OS1, 46%

N=8
(carotid
blowout);
7/8 (fatal)

16 months

2 years,
CR, 54%
30%
PR, 27%
Stable, 20%

Median
OS, 12
months

N=7
(11%);
1/7 fatal

36 months

CR, 31%
PR, 46%
Stable,
16%
PD, 3%

OS1,
primary—
70%
OS1,
recurrent—
38.1%

N = 7,
necrosis and
fistulae

N

Sites

Dose

Medical FU Response

Kodani
et al. (28)

34

Orbit, LNs,
Npx, Opx,
others

19.5–42 CyberKnife
Gy/3–8 fr

16 months

CR, 32.4%
PR, 38.6%

Rwigema
et al. (15)

96

larynx,
Hpx, Npx,
Opx, BOS,
Parotid,
Sinus, Orbit

15–50 Gy CyberKnife, 14 months
Dose
Varian
escalaTrilogy
tion

CR,
20%–50%
depending
on dose

Cengiz
et al. (11)

46

Npx, oral
cav, Hpx,
larynx

18–35
CyberKnife
Gy/1–5 fr

7 months

Unger
et al. (48)

65

CyberKnife
Opx, Npx, 21–35
Hpx, PNS, Gy/2–5 fr
LNs

Siddiqui
et al. (27)

44

Opx,
eyelid, lip,
orbit, Hpx,
mandible,
LNs

Local
Control

SBRT Alone

13–18
BrainLab
Gy/1 fr;
36–48
Gy/5–8 fr

LRC2,
30.7%

1 year,
83.3%
(primary),
60.6%
(recurrent),
75%
(metastatic
groups)

(continued)

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 169

23/08/18 5:46 PM

170

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

TABLE 11.2 Summary of Head and Neck SBRT Literature (continued)
Publication
and Year

N

Sites

Dose

Roh
et al. (49)

36

Npx, PNS,
LNs, skull
base,
nasal cav,
orbit

Voynov
et al. (50)

22

Technique

Medical FU

Response

18–40
CyberKnife
Gy/3–5 fr

17.3
months

CR, 42.9%
PR, 37.1%
Stable,
8.6%
PD, 11.4%

LNs, Npx,
Opx, PNS

10–36
CyberKnife
Gy/1–8 fr

19 months

Local
Control

Survival

Late
Toxicity

LRC1,
61%
LRC2,
52.2%

1-year OS
52.1%
and
2-year OS
30.9%

N = 3,
bone
and softtissue
necrosis

2 years,
26%

Median
OS,
12 months

No grade
4/5

1-year
PFS, 60%

Median
OS, 10
months;
OS1, 40%

SBRT + Cetuximab
Vargo
et al. (2)

48

Larynx,
Npx, oral
cav, Opx,
Hpx,
nasal cav,
parotid

Tumors
<25 cm3,
40 Gy/5
fr; ≥25
cm3, 44
Gy/5 fr

CyberKnife, 18 months
Varian
Trilogy/
TrueBeam

CR, 21%
PR, 30%
Stable,
14%
PD, 36%

Lartigau
et al. (18)

56

Opx in
80%

36 Gy/
6 fr

CyberKnife

11.4
months

CR, 49.0%
PR, 20.4%
Stable,
22.5%
PD, 8.2%

Heron
et al. (26)

Larynx,
70
(35, SBRT Npx, oral
cav, Opx
alone;
35, SBRT +
cetuximab)

20–44
Gy/5 fr

CyberKnife, 21.3
months
Varian
Trilogy

SBRT only
CR, 34.3%
PR, 28.6%
Stable,
17.1%
PD, 20%
SBRT +
cetuximab
CR, 45.7%
PR, 31.4%
Stable,
14.3%
PD, 8.6%

SBRT only
1 year,
53.8%
2 years,
33.6%
SBRT +
cetuximab
1 year,
78.6%
2 years,
49.2%

No grade
Median
4/5
OS
SBRT, 14.8 toxicity
months
SBRT +
cetuximab, 24.5
months

Comet
et al. (44)

40

36
Gy/6 fr

CyberKnife

CR, 44.1%
PR, 35.3%
Stable,
20.6%

LRC, 60%

Median
OS, 13.6
months
OS1, 58%

Oral cav,
Hpx, skull
base,
Npx, PNS,
larynx

25.6
months

Median
OS, 11.8
months;
OS1,
47.5%

10.3%
grade
3 toxicity

BOS, base of skull; cav, cavity; CR, complete response; fr, fractions; FU, follow-up; Hpx, hypopharynx; LN, lymph node; LRC, locoregional control;
N, number at risk; Npx, nasopharynx; Opx, oropharynx; OS, overall survival; PD, progression of disease; PFS, progression-free survival; PNS,
paranasal sinus; PR, partial response; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

over a period of time achieving up to eight fractions for dose delivery. The Centers for Medicaid
and Medicare Services (CMS) allows for a maximum of five fractions to be classified as a SBRT
treatment. With this standardization, most centers in the United States now use a maximum
of four to five fractions to deliver doses ranging
from 20 to 44 Gy.
One systematic approach to this problem was
reported by Heron et al. in 2009 (1). The investigators at the University of Pittsburgh conducted
a phase I trial in 25 patients with recurrent head

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 170

and neck cancers. Escalating doses ranging from
20 Gy in five fractions to 44 Gy in five fractions
were studied. Even at the highest dose level,
no grade 3 to 4 or other dose-limiting toxicities were noted. A subsequent publication by
the same group treated patients with doses up
to 50 Gy in five fractions (15). An improvement
in locoregional control was noted in patients
receiving between 40 and 50 Gy as opposed to
those who had received 15 to 36 Gy. In addition,
tumors measuring greater than 25 mL in volume
had inferior locoregional control as opposed

23/08/18 5:46 PM

(p = .096)
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Chua 2003 (11)
Voynov 2006 (22)
Paravati 2010 (14)
Rwigema 2011 (18–29)
Vargo 2012 (34)
Latigau 2013 (56)
Kress 2014 (51)
Disman 2014 (24)

0.0
0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Prescribed dose, Gy (5 fraction equivalent)

1.0
0.8

Chua 2003 (11)
Voynov 2006 (22)
Paravati 2010 (14)
Rwigema 2011 (18–29)

Vargo 2012 (34)
Latigau 2013 (56)
Kress 2014 (51)
Disman 2014 (24)

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

(p = .004)

0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Prescribed dose, Gy (5 fraction equivalent)

Local control probability at 3 year

1.0

Local control probability at 2 year

Local control probability at 1 year

11: HEAD AND NECK SBRT

171

1.0
0.8
0.6

Paravati 2010 (14)
Rwigema 2011 (18–29)
Vargo 2012 (34)
Disman 2014 (24)

0.4
0.2
(p = .002)
0.0

0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Prescribed dose, Gy (5 fraction equivalent)

FIGURE 11.3 Local control probability against prescribed dose. Pooled data from the literature reporting local control

and dose at 1, 2, and 3 years, as shown. Each data point represents one dataset, and doses are computed (via the linear–
quadratic mode) as “five-fractional equivalent total doses” (patient numbers of each study are in parentheses in the keys of
each figure panel). Vertical error bars are 68% binomial confidence intervals. Solid line is the logistic model; dashed lines
are 95% confidence intervals for the dose–response.
Source: Vargo JA, Moiseenko V, Grimm J, et al. Head and neck tumor control probability: radiation dose-volume effects in stereotactic
body radiation therapy for locally recurrent previously-irradiated head and neck cancer: report of the AAPM working group. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2018. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2018.01.044

to those that were 25 mL or less. Locoregional
control improved in both groups with increasing
delivered dose.
In an attempt to further improve the local control and survival outcomes in this group of patients,
systemic therapy in combination with SBRT has
also been studied. The University of Pittsburgh
group initially reported on a retrospective matched
cohort study of 70 patients, 35 (50%) of whom
had received cetuximab infusion during SBRT
treatment (26). The dose of radiation was 40 to
44 Gy delivered over five fractions on alternating days. Cetuximab was started at a dose of
400 mg/m2 1 week prior to the start of SBRT and
continued at the dose of 250 mg/m2 during SBRT.
The combined complete response (CR) or partial
response (PR) rate for the group of patients receiving cetuximab was 77.1%, whereas it was 62.9%
in the SBRT-alone group. The median overall
survival was also noted to be higher with the
addition of cetuximab to SBRT (24.5 months
vs. 14.8 months for SBRT-only patients, respectively). This was subsequently followed by a
prospective phase 2 trial with the same regimen
for SBRT and cetuximab (2). The rate of 1-year
local progression-free survival was 60%, with
a median overall survival of 10 months among
the 50 patients enrolled in the study. A similar
multi-institutional prospective phase 2 study was
also conducted in Europe (18). Cetuximab was
administered in the same manner as mentioned
earlier; however, the dose of radiation was 36 Gy
in six fractions over 11 or 12 days. The CR plus
PR rate was 69.4%, with a median overall survival of 11.8 months and a 1-year survival rate
of 47.5%.

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 171

SBRT FOR NEWLY DIAGNOSED HEAD
AND NECK CANCERS
Although SBRT has been used primarily in the
treatment of recurrent or second primary head
and neck cancers, there are encouraging data on
its use for the treatment of newly diagnosed cancers when other standard therapy is unsuitable.
A report from Henry Ford Hospital described
11 patients treated with SBRT for various histologies (27). Doses ranged from 18 Gy in one fraction to 48 Gy in 16 fractions. A combined CR plus
PR rate of 82% was noted with 1-year local control and overall survival rates of 83% and 70%,
respectively. Similar high combined response
rates of 84% were seen in another report on 13
radiation-naïve patients who received 35 Gy in
five fractions (28). Among those who had been
earlier irradiated to the same area, the response
rates were lower at 62%. In a more recent publication, 12 elderly patients with a median age of
88 years were treated to a dose of 44 Gy in five
fractions (3). Three of these received cetuximab in
addition to SBRT. The 1-year local control was 69%.

DOSE TO CRITICAL STRUCTURES
AND TOXICITY OF TREATMENTS
The overall toxicity profile of head and neck
SBRT has been favorable when compared with
conventionally fractionated reirradiation with or
without concurrent systemic therapy. The rates of
acute grade 3 to 4 toxicity and treatment-related
mortality for conventional RT, even with the use
of modern intensity-modulated radiation therapy
(IMRT) techniques, are approximately 20% and

23/08/18 5:46 PM

172

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

5% to 7%, respectively (29). In comparison, the
rates for the same end points are approximately
10% and less than 1%, respectively, for SBRT.
The addition of cetuximab did not appear to
increase toxicity in the aforementioned studies.
Some of the unique toxicities associated with
SBRT are as follows.

Carotid Blowout Syndrome
CBS is a potentially fatal complication in patients
with head and neck cancers. It refers to the rupture
and hemorrhage from the carotid artery or its major
branches as a result of tumor invasion or because
of aggressive treatment-related complications. CBS
is an often confusing entity. It is carotid rupture in
the absence of uncontrolled disease, suggesting a
complication of treatment. Unfortunately, the literature is confounded by a mixture of uncontrolled
disease resulting in ruptures. The reported mortality rates range from 20% to 100%, with a similarly
high rate of major neurological complications (30).
A 2.6% risk of carotid artery blowout after conventional reirradiation is reported, approximately 76%
of which are fatal (31).
Unfortunately, the risk of CBS is much higher
in patients treated with high-dose-per-fraction RT.
In a series reported by Cengiz et al., 46 patients
underwent reirradiation to a dose of 30 Gy (range,
18–35 Gy) in a median of five fractions (range, one
to five fractions; 11). Eight (17.3%) of these had a
carotid blowout with death occurring in seven. On
the basis of this analysis, the authors reported that
CBS occurred in patients whose tumor encased the
carotid artery by 180° or more, or cases in which
the carotid artery received 100% of the prescribed
dose. The majority of CBS occurred within the first
6 months after treatment. In a study from Japan
reporting on 381 patients reirradiated to the same
median dose of 30 Gy in five fractions after previous median RT dose of 60 Gy, the CBS rate was
8.4% (32). This proved fatal in 22 patients. On
univariate analysis, older age, skin invasion, and
necrosis or signs of infection were predictive for
CBS. However, only skin invasion was significant
on multivariate analysis. In a subsequent matchedpair analysis by the same group, the following three
factors were identified as being predictive of CBS:
carotid involvement of greater than 180° by tumor,
presence of ulceration in the tumor, and lymph nodal
irradiation. The presence of no, one, or two risk factors resulted in a CBS-free survival of 100%, 95%,
and 84%, respectively, at 12 months. However,
the CBS-free survival at 6 months was only 25%

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 172

in the presence of all three factors (33). A more
recent report further emphasized the important
negative prognostic implication of tumor-related
mucosal ulceration in causing CBS at a median of
4.2 months after reirradiation (34).
In addition to the tumor-related factors, the treatment delivery regimen also appears to significantly
impact the incidence of CBS. Yazici et al. reported
on their institutional experience among 75 patients
in which the first group of 43 patients received highdose-per-fraction RT on a daily basis (12). CBS was
observed in 16% of these patients with a CBS-free
median survival of 9 months. A change in treatment
delivery to an alternate-day regimen in the subsequent
32 patients reduced the rate of CBS to 12.5%, with a
significant increase in CBS-free survival to 23 months.
In summary, the following factors seem to
increase the risk of fatal carotid artery blowout:
(a) tumor involving the artery greater than 180°;
(b) mucosal ulceration because of tumor; (c) skin
involvement; (d) nodal irradiation; and (e) treatment delivery on consecutive days. Careful patient
selection with multidisciplinary care of this complication, should it occur, is essential to avoid
treatment-related mortality. It should be noted that
CBS is not used as a contraindication to SBRT by
all institutions, as large, single-institutional, dose–
volume analyses have not demonstrated excess
toxicity in patients treated with this configuration
with no correlation between CBS and carotid
dose (35). Additionally normal tissue complication
models have been generated to guide the application of SBRT against carotid artery doses (51)
(Figure 11.4).

Spinal Cord Myelopathy
Spinal cord myelopathy is rarely encountered in
published reports on head and neck SBRT. This is
in large part because of two major factors. First is
the careful planning and maximum dose restriction
to less than 45 to 50 Gy to the spinal cord during
the initial course of SBRT. Second, there are robust
experimental and clinical data providing information on spinal cord dose tolerance to reirradiation.
SBRT to the spinal and paraspinal region results
in sharp dose gradients with partial volume exposure of the spinal cross-section to any high dose
of radiation. Experimental data from spinal cord
radiation in pigs demonstrated a 50% incidence of
motor nerve deficits for a maximum point dose of
19.7 Gy after a previous dose of 30 Gy in 10 fractions delivered 1 year prior (36). No neurological
compromise was reported at doses less than 18.8 Gy,

23/08/18 5:46 PM

11: HEAD AND NECK SBRT

173

acceptable dose to the thecal sac is 15.5 Gy in five
fractions after a previous dose of 50 Gy in 2 Gy per
fraction to the same segment of the spinal cord.

Brain Necrosis

FIGURE 11.4 Probability of carotid toxicity. Pooled data
predictive of 1-, 2-, and 3-year probability of local control
on the basis of dose. Note that the increasing impact of
higher dose on local control is heightened with longer
follow-up, that is, 3 years > 2 years >1 year.

whereas doses greater than 21.3 Gy resulted in
100% toxicity.
In humans, doses of 5 to 6 Gy × 5 fractions or
8 Gy × 3 fractions appear to be safe after previous
30 Gy in 10 fractions when the spinal cord surface
point dose is restricted to the maximum prescribed
dose (24–30 Gy; 37). A meta-analysis also showed
very low rates of spinal myelopathy with reirradiation
among many centers that had published earlier on
their spine SBRT experience (38). Nieder et al. developed risk stratification on the basis of cumulative biologically equivalent dose (BED), duration between
the two courses of radiation, and the BED of one of
the two courses of RT being 102 Gy or greater in
2 Gy per fraction. On the basis of the sum of these
risk scores, patients are divided into low-, intermediate-, and high-risk groups with the risk of myelopathy
at 3%, 25%, and 90%, respectively (39).
Although the validity and use of the linear–
quadratic (LQ) model and BED calculations at high
dose per fraction is a matter of intense debate and
speculation, Sahgal et al. used this methodology to
determine spinal cord dose tolerance to reirradiation.
The investigators performed a multi-institutional
dose–volume histogram (DVH) comparison between
14 patients who did not develop radiation myelopathy after reirradiation with SBRT and five patients
who did (40). They have developed recommendations for the maximum point dose to the thecal sac
allowed for a planned course of SBRT after previous
external beam RT to the spinal cord. On the basis of
their data, a minimum of 5 months must be allowed
between the two courses. For example, the maximum

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 173

Similar to the reasons stated earlier for spinal
cord toxicity, brain necrosis is also rarely reported
in patients undergoing SBRT. The Quantitative
Analyses of Normal Tissue Effects in the Clinic
(QUANTEC) guidelines provide an excellent
review for the dose–volume constraints in the
brain for up-front and reirradiation cases (41).
No cases of brain necrosis were observed when
the total cumulative BED was less than 100 Gy in
2 Gy per fraction (42).

Other Toxicities
A variety of other toxicities have also been reported
in published literature. Local rates of grades 1 and
2 toxicity are reported in approximately 100% of
treated patients (27).
Grades 3 and 4 toxicities are reported to varying
degrees in acute and late settings. One of the major
drawbacks is the retrospective nature of these
reports, which limits the validity of reported toxicities. However, the serious and significant toxicities
include mucositis, dysphagia, ulceration of skin
or mucosa, fistula formation, bone and soft-tissue
necrosis, xerostomia, cranial nerve palsy, and hemorrhage (see Table 11.3). Unfortunately, it is very
difficult to draw any meaningful dose–volume–
structure data for the incidence of these toxicities because of the lack of such information in the
published reports.
Carotid artery blowout or hemorrhage from
other major blood vessels is a major cause of mortality. However, with increasing experience with
the use of SBRT in recurrent head and neck cancers, mortality rates are very low or rarely seen in
more contemporary series.
In one recent article, grade 3 or greater acute
and late toxicities were retrospectively evaluated in
291 patients (14). Various disease- and treatmentrelated factors were considered for analysis including site of recurrence, postoperative versus nonpostoperative cases, prior dose of RT, chemotherapy, and
treatment volume. Acute grade 3 or higher toxicity
was noted in 11.3% of patients. Grade 3 side effects
were dysphagia, mucositis, skin toxicity, trismus,
xerostomia, and fatigue. Acute grade 4 pharyngeal
edema and lingual artery bleed were seen in one
patient each. One treatment-related mortality was

23/08/18 5:46 PM

174

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

TABLE 11.3 Summary of Toxicity Outcomes Following SBRT for Head and Neck
Publication
and Year

Acute
N

Grade 3

Grade 4

Kodani
et al. (28)

34

None

None

Rwigema
et al. (15)

96

Dysphagia (1)
Dysgeusia (1)
Xerostomia (2)

None

Cengiz
et al. (11)

46

Dermatitis and
mucositis (2)

Unger
et al. (48)

65

Siddiqui
et al. (27)

Late
Grade 3

Grade 4

TreatmentRelated Mortality

Mucositis and
dysphagia (2)
Mucosal
ulceration (1)
Skin necrosis
(1)

2, carotid
hemorrhage

Dysphagia (2)
Fibrosis (1)

None

None

None

Dysphagia (2)

Soft-tissue
necrosis (1)
Mandibular
necrosis (1)

9 deaths
8, carotid
blowout
1, tracheal
hemorrhage

Grades 1–3
mucositis,
dermatitis,
nausea (19)

None

None

Arterial
bleeding (2)
Dysphagia (1)
Soft-tissue
necrosis (1)
Dysphagia,
cranial
neuropathy,
trismus (1)

1, cause
unknown

44

None

None

Facial pain (1)
Cataract (1)
Dysphagia (1)

Dysphagia and
ulceration (1)
Esophagocutaneous fistula (1)
Orocutaneous
fistula (1)
Buccal fistula
and mandibular necrosis (1)

None

Roh
et al. (49)

36

(13)

(0)

Voynov
et al. (50)

22

Mucositis (10)

None

None

None

None

Dysphagia (1)
Leakage into nasopharynx (1)
Stricture and trachea–
esophageal fistula (1)

None

None

Mandible
necrosis (1)
Soft-tissue
necrosis (2)

SBRT + Cetuximab
Vargo
et al. (2)

48

Rash (1)
Mucositis (1)
Dysphagia (1)
Moist
desquamation (1)

None

Lartigau
et al. (18)

56

Rash (1)
Dermatitis (1)
Mucositis (4)
Dysphagia (3)
Dysgeusia (1)

Fibrosis (1)
Xerostomia (2)
Oral fistula (1)

Heron
et al. (26)

70 (35,
SBRT
alone; 35,
SBRT +
cetuximab)

SBRT alone
Xerostomia (1)
SBRT +
cetuximab
Dysphagia (1)
Xerostomia (1)

None

SBRT alone
Xerostomia (1)
SBRT +
cetuximab
Xerostomia (3)

None

None

Comet
et al. (44)

40

Mucositis (1)
Dysphagia (1)

None

Fibrosis (1)
Induration (1)

None

None

1, malnutrition
and hemorrhage

N, number at risk; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 174

23/08/18 5:46 PM

11: HEAD AND NECK SBRT

175

seen shortly after completion of treatment because
of cardiac arrest. Grade 3 or higher late toxicity was
higher at 18.9% with treatment-related mortality in
seven patients (three patients with carotid blowout).
Treatment of lymph node recurrence was associated
with a lower risk of acute toxicity. SBRT dose of 44 Gy
or higher in five fractions delivered on alternate days
resulted in significantly more grade 3 or higher acute
and late toxicities. When examining the sites of treatment, patients receiving treatment to the laryngeal/
hypopharyngeal region had significantly higher acute
(20%) and late (50%) toxicities than those receiving
treatment to other head and neck sites.

treatment. He was noted to have a recurrence in his
nasopharyngeal/parapharyngeal region. A review
of the prior RT plan revealed that the area of the
recurrence has received between 70 and 72.5 Gy.
This lesion was PET avid and confirmed on
T1-weighted contrast-enhanced MRI. This recurrent lesion was treated using SBRT to a dose of
30 Gy in five fractions prescribed to the 95%
isodose line. A repeat MRI completed 4 months
posttreatment showed significant reduction in the
size of the mass with symptomatic relief of his
symptoms (Figure 11.5). The patient developed
metastatic disease in the lungs after 6 months and
passed away with locally controlled disease.

CASE STUDY

Treatment Planning and Plan Evaluation

A 70-year-old male patient had previously been
treated for carcinoma of the nasopharynx at an
outside institution. He had been treated to a dose
of 70 Gy in 35 fractions with concurrent cisplatin
chemotherapy followed by adjuvant chemotherapy
with cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil. He presented
with symptoms of severe headaches and pain on
the right side of his face 2 years after his previous

Although many of the initial studies have favored
treatment delivery platforms that aggressively used
multiple noncoplanar treatment plans such as the
CyberKnife platform (Accuray), the majority of the
authors now favor linear accelerator (linac)-based
multibeam delivery with 10 to 15 coplanar beams or
two to three arcs with volumetric-modulated
arc therapy. This helps to reduce treatment

FIGURE 11.5 Case example of SBRT for locally recurrent nasopharyngeal cancer. Highlighted is the SBRT plan delivering
30 Gy in five fractions with pre- and post-SBRT MRI showing complete clinical response.

SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 175

23/08/18 5:46 PM

176

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

time in a patient population, often with difficulty
tolerating long treatment times because of airway
compromise, swallowing dysfunction, or pain (13).
However, non-coplanar beams are often useful when
treating lesion in close proximity to the skull base.
When evaluating plan quality, it is important to
watch for streaking phenomenon (see Figure 11.8C),
which can increase skin toxicity as the optimizer is
pushed to create sharp dose gradients.

OUTCOME DATA
Outcome data from what is primarily retrospective
supportive literature are outlined in Table 11.2.
More recently, a number of single-institutional
prospective datasets have been published to better
define the expected control and toxicity associated
with SBRT for reirradiation of recurrent squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck. The prospective phase I dose escalation study previously mentioned by Heron et al. first established the safety
of dose escalation of SBRT from 25 to 44 Gy over
five fractions delivered on alternating days over
1 to 2 weeks with no reported dose-limiting
toxicity; however, this dataset also highlighted
the suboptimal outcomes with low-dose SBRT
without radiosensitizing systemic therapy with
a response rate of 17% and median overall survival of 6 months (1). Building on the landmark
data from the primary definitive treatment of
newly diagnosed squamous cell carcinoma of the
head and neck, in which integration of concurrent cetuximab improved outcomes compared
with RT alone, cetuximab has been shown to have
an important therapeutic benefit when added to
SBRT for recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of
the head and neck (43). Investigators from Lille,
France, initially reported a small prospective feasibility study of SBRT (36 Gy in six fractions) with
concurrent cetuximab, which showed promising
results with the addition of cetuximab to SBRT
with a response rate of 79%, a median overall
survival of 14 months, and only a 10% rate of
grade 3 toxicity (44). These results have been further validated by two prospective phase II studies.
The first, a French multi-institutional study, which
again used 36 Gy in six fractions plus cetuximab,
confirmed the results from their previously published feasibility study showing a response rate of
58%, 1-year overall survival of 48%, and a grade
3 or higher toxicity rate of 30% (19). The second
was a phase II prospective study from the University of Pittsburgh, which used 40 to 44 Gy in five

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 176

fractions with cetuximab, with a similar 1-year
overall survival of 40% and grade 3 or higher
toxicity of 12% (2). These experiences set SBRT
and cetuximab as a viable reirradiation strategy for recurrence of squamous cell carcinoma
of the head and neck. Recently, a large multiinstitutional comparative effectiveness project has
been reported comparing reirradiation with SBRT
with and without cetuximab with conventional
fractionation with and without chemotherapy with
modern IMRT techniques (6). Although limited by
the retrospective study design, the results suggest
relative equipoise between the two modern reirradiation techniques in terms of tumor control, especially for patients reirradiated within 2 years with
preexisting organ dysfunction (e.g., tracheostomy
or feeding tube), further supporting the potential
role of SBRT in the treatment armamentarium for
recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head
and neck, especially recognizing the decrease in
treatment time and burdens of care associated
with SBRT (45). Ongoing trials are further exploring the role of SBRT in recurrent head and neck
cancer integrating recently approved novel systemic
agents such as anti-PD-1 immunotherapy and
pembrolizumab (KEYSTROKE Trial), or the addition of adjuvant systemic therapy with docetaxel
and cetuximab (NCT 02057107).

QUALITY OF LIFE OUTCOMES
AND FOLLOW-UP
Uncontrolled disease in the head and neck carries
a significant risk to a number of vital functions
including mastication, swallowing, speech, airway
protection, and risks of fatal bleeding. Although
reirradiation with SBRT may not always provide
long-term cure for the majority of patients, reirradiation can palliate a number of these distressing symptoms. However, the risks of toxicity with
aggressive salvage strategies such as SBRT must
be balanced against the risks to an often fragile
patient’s quality of life. In the largest prospective
evaluation of patient-reported quality of life, investigators from the University of Pittsburgh used
the previously validated University of Washington
Quality of Life Revised Questionnaire from 2004 to
2011 to quantify the impact of reirradiation
with SBRT with and without cetuximab on
patient-reported quality of life (46). Following
an initial 1-month decline, SBRT with and without cetuximab significantly improved patientreported overall quality of life as well as specific

23/08/18 5:46 PM

11: HEAD AND NECK SBRT

analysis of reirradiation for recurrent head and
neck cancer comparing SBRT with IMRT, SBRT
appeared to result in potentially lower acute
toxicity and comparable late toxicity than IMRT
(6). When implementing SBRT, however, some
unique safety considerations apply:

domains of swallowing, speech, saliva, activity,
and recreation relative to baseline independent of
age, use of cetuximab, tumor volume, and reirradiation interval (46). Similarly, 62% of patients
reported stable or improved quality of life following reirradiation with SBRT with cetuximab
in a prospective trial of SBRT with cetuximab
(2). Combined, although comparative effectiveness of SBRT with other salvage strategies
such as systemic therapy or conventional fractionated reirradiation is currently lacking, these
data speak to the palliative benefits of SBRT
wherein short treatment time and low rates of
acute toxicity make SBRT an attractive reirradiation strategy for recurrent head and neck
cancers. Follow-up after SBRT remains consistent with clinical practice following conventional RT for head and neck cancer with baseline
PET/CT or MRI 3 to 4 months after the completion of therapy and close clinical follow-up
with a comprehensive head and neck exam every
3 months (see Figure 11.5). There is heterogeneous practice in regards to additional imaging follow-up after the 3- to 4-month PET/CT,
as these patients remain at high risk for recurrence (13).

1. CBS: Fatal bleeding events are often the

most feared complication of reirradiation of
head and neck cancers. As described earlier,
a number of clinical factors such as tumor
involving the artery greater than 180°, mucosal ulceration because of tumor, skin
involvement, nodal irradiation, and treatment delivery on consecutive days have been
suggested to predict for higher risk of CBS
(33–36). It is important to note that uncontrolled tumor in the head and neck also
places patients with recurrent head and
neck cancer at high risks of fatal bleeding
event; thus, often despite extensive carotid
involvement, a decision between the patient and the treating team may be made
to accept the risks of retreatment. When
treating such patients, it is important to
watch for development of necrosis or
infection of the treatment site and attempt
to spare the carotid as much as possible
without compromising tumor coverage
(Figure 11.6).

SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
Inherent to the extreme hypofractionation of SBRT
and concerns of reirradiation toxicity, many concerns of risks of late toxicity following SBRT in
recurrent head and neck cancer have been raised.
In the only available comparative effectiveness

(A)

177

2. Organ

dysfunction: Organ dysfunction,
including dysphagia and inability to maintain airway patency, is a negative prognostic factor that should be considered when

(B)

FIGURE 11.6 Carotid blowout syndrome. (A) Patient with large nodal recurrence reirradiated with SBRT 44 Gy in five

fractions with cetuximab; (B) development of necrotic reaction in treated hemineck with development of carotid artery
pseudoaneurysm, which is an ominous sign of impending arterial blowout as occurred in this patient.

SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.
Source: Adapted from Ling DC, Vargo JA, Heron DE. Stereotactic body radiation therapy for recurrent head and neck cancer.
2016;22(4):302-306. doi:10.1097/PPO.0000000000000208

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 177

23/08/18 5:46 PM

178

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

selecting patients for aggressive salvage
strategies such as reirradiation with SBRT
(47). Patients being re-treated to the larynx
and hypopharynx are at a higher risk of developing organ dysfunction after reirradiation and should be counseled on these risks
prior to considering SBRT (14). When patients develop signs of laryngeal edema, including stridor or imaging changes showing laryngeal edema, they must be managed
aggressively with tracheostomy and critical
care support to avoid fatal complications
(Figure 11.7).
3. Skin ulceration: Skin ulceration is a disfiguring

and often difficult-to-manage complication

(A)

(B)

of reirradiation. Clinically, patients with
ulceration present prior to SBRT may not
be optimal candidates, as it has been shown
to be a predictor to increased risks of CBS
(33). In patients with large tumor volumes in
close proximity to the skin, high doses to the
skin can increase the risk of subsequent skin
ulceration (Figure 11.8A and B). During
treatment planning, it is important to keep
a close eye on skin dose, and avoid streaking
of high dose that can occur during inverse
optimization when critical structures are in
close proximity to the target and the optimizer is trying to achieve a steep dose gradient
(Figure 11.8C).

(C)

FIGURE 11.7 Organ dysfunction. (A) Patient reirradiated for hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma with 44 Gy in
five fractions with cetuximab; (B) 6-month posttreatment PET/CT showing near-complete metabolic response and airway
patency; (C) Grade 5 laryngeal edema that developed 8 months after SBRT manifested as extensive soft-tissue filling the
airway.

SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

(A)

(B)

(C)

FIGURE 11.8 Skin ulceration. (A) Clinical example of skin ulceration 8 weeks following 44 Gy in five fractions of SBRT
with cetuximab in a patient with recurrent laryngeal cancer; (B) treatment plan for patient from panel A showing the high
skin dose because of the size and location of the recurrent tumor (displayed is the 40-Gy color wash); (C) a different
patient with recurrence in the skull base abutting the brainstem. Highlighted by the arrow is streaking of 30 to 40 Gy, a
planning phenomenon that can occur when the optimizer is being pushed to achieve rapid dose falloff for targets close
to critical organs and is overutilizing preferential beams. Streaking should be avoided to minimize risks of ulceration, and
can be easily checked when reviewing plan by displaying lower isodose clouds such as 50%.

SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 178

23/08/18 5:46 PM

11: HEAD AND NECK SBRT

179

SUMMARY OF DOSE CONSTRAINTS
(TABLE 11.4)
TABLE 11.4 Dose Constraints for Head and Neck Cancer Using SBRT
Unresected Target

8 Gy × 5 < 25 mL
8.8 Gy × 5 > 25 mL

Resected Target (High-risk, Postoperative, and/or + Margins)

7 Gy × 5

Critical Structures

Suggested Dose Limits

Spinal cord (canal)

24–50 Gy in five fractions maximum

Thecal sac

<15.5 Gy in five fractions

Esophagus

<20–24 Gy in five fractions

Mucosa

<55 Gy EQD2

Larynx

D5 mL < 30 Gy

Optic chiasm/nerve

<12 Gy in five fractions

Parotid/salivary

Variable

Mandible

Variable

Carotids

D0.1 mL < 47.6 Gy
<30 Gy in five fractionsa

Brain

<100 Gy BED2

Skin

<50% prescription dose

aDo not compromise target average to spare structure.

BED, biologically equivalent dose; EQD2, Equivalent Dose at 2Gy per Fraction; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

REFERENCES
1. Heron DE, Ferris RL, Karamouzis M, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy for recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the
head and neck: results of a phase I dose-escalation trial. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2009;75:1493-1500. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2008.12.075
2. Vargo JA, Ferris RL, Ohr J, et al. A prospective phase 2 trial
of reirradiation with stereotactic body radiation therapy
plus cetuximab in patients with previously irradiated recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015;91:480-488. doi:10.1016/j.
ijrobp.2014.11.023
3. Vargo JA, Ferris RL, Clump DA, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy as primary treatment for elderly patients with medically
inoperable head and neck cancer. Front Oncol. 2014;4:214.
doi:10.3389/fonc.2014.00214
4. Spencer SA, Harris J, Wheeler RH, et al. Final report of
RTOG 9610, a multi-institutional trial of reirradiation and
chemotherapy for unresectable recurrent squamous cell
carcinoma of the head and neck. Head Neck. 2008;30:
281-288. doi:10.1002/hed.20697
5. Langer CJ, Harris J, Horwitz EM, et al. Phase II study of
low-dose paclitaxel and cisplatin in combination with splitcourse concomitant twice-daily reirradiation in recurrent
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: results of
radiation therapy oncology group protocol 9911. J Clin Oncol.
2007;25:4800-4805. doi:10.1200/JCO.2006.07.9194

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 179

6. Vargo JA, Ward MC, Caudell JJ, et al. A multi-institutional comparison of SBRT and IMRT for definitive reirradiation of recurrent
or second primary head and neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2018;100(3):595-605. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2017.04.017
7. Vargo JA, Kubicek GJ, Ferris RL, et al. Adjuvant stereotactic
body radiotherapy ± cetuximab following salvage surgery in
previously irradiated head and neck cancer. Laryngoscope.
2014;124:1579-1584. doi:10.1002/lary.24441
8. Fakhry C, Zhang Q, Nguyen-Tan PF, et al. Human papillomavirus and overall survival after progression of oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32:3365-3373.
doi:10.1200/JCO.2014.55.1937
9. Khan L, Tjong M, Raziee H, et al. Role of stereotactic body
radiotherapy for symptom control in head and neck cancer patients. Support Care Cancer. 2015;23:1099-1103.
doi:10.1007/s00520-014-2421-y
10. Corry J, Peters LJ, Costa ID, et al. The ‘QUAD SHOT’: a phase
II study of palliative radiotherapy for incurable head and neck
cancer. Radiother Oncol. 2005;77:137-142. doi:10.1016/j.
radonc.2005.10.008
11. Cengiz M, Özyiğit G, Yazici G, et al. Salvage reirradiation
with stereotactic body radiotherapy for locally recurrent headand-neck tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;81:104109. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.04.027
12. Yazici G, Sanli TY, Cengiz M, et al. A simple strategy to
decrease fatal carotid blowout syndrome after stereotactic body reirradiation for recurrent head and neck cancers.
Radiat Oncol. 2013;8:242. doi:10.1186/1748-717X-8-242

23/08/18 5:46 PM

180

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

13. Karam I, Yao M, Heron DE, et al. Survey of current practices
from the International Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy Consortium (ISBRTC) for head and neck cancers. Future Oncol.
2017;13:603-613. doi:10.2217/fon-2016-0403
14. Ling DC, Vargo JA, Ferris RL, et al. Risk of severe toxicity
according to site of recurrence in patients treated with stereotactic body radiation therapy for recurrent head and neck
cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2016;95:973-980.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2016.02.049
15. Rwigema JC, Heron DE, Ferris RL, et al. The impact of
tumor volume and radiotherapy dose on outcome in previously irradiated recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of
the head and neck treated with stereotactic body radiation
therapy. Am J Clin Oncol. 2011;34:372-379. doi:10.1097/
COC.0b013e3181e84dc0
16. Vargo JA, Wegner RE, Heron DE, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for locally recurrent, previously irradiated
nonsquamous cell cancers of the head and neck. Head Neck.
2012;34:1153-1161. doi:10.1002/hed.21889
17. Kress MA, Sen N, Unger KR, et al. Safety and efficacy of
hypofractionated stereotactic body reirradiation in head and
neck cancer: long-term follow-up of a large series. Head
Neck. 2015;37:1403-1409. doi:10.1002/hed.23763
18. Lartigau EF, Tresch E, Thariat J, et al. Multi institutional phase
II study of concomitant stereotactic reirradiation and cetuximab for recurrent head and neck cancer. Radiother Oncol.
2013;109:281-285. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2013.08.012
19. Chua DT, Sham JS, Kwong PW, et al. Linear accelerator-based
stereotactic radiosurgery for limited, locally persistent, and
recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma: efficacy and complications. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2003;56:177-183.
PubMed PMID: 12694836.
20. Dizman A, Coskun-Breuneval M, Altinisik-Inan G, et al.
Reirradiation with robotic stereotactic body radiotherapy
for recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Asian Pac J Cancer
Prev. 2014;15:3561-3566. PubMed PMID: 24870757.
21. Hamlet S, Ezzell G, Aref A. Larynx motion associated with
swallowing during radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 1994;28:467-470. PubMed PMID: 8276663.
22. Bradley JA, Paulson ES, Ahunbay E, et al. Dynamic MRI analysis of tumor and organ motion during rest and deglutition
and margin assessment for radiotherapy of head-and-neck
cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;81:e803-e812.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.12.015
23. Popovtzer A, Gluck I, Chepeha DB, et al. The pattern of
failure after reirradiation of recurrent squamous cell head
and neck cancer: implications for defining the targets. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2009;74:1342-1347. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2008.10.042
24. Wang K, Heron DE, Clump DA, et al. Target delineation in
stereotactic body radiation therapy for recurrent head and
neck cancer: a retrospective analysis of the impact of margins and automated PET-CT segmentation. Radiother Oncol.
2013;106:90-95. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2012.11.008
25. Vargo JA, Moiseenko V, Grimm J, et al. Head and neck
tumor control probability: radiation dose-volume effects
in stereotactic body radiation therapy for locally recurrent
previously-irradiated head and neck cancer: report of the
AAPM working group. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2018.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2018.01.044
26. Heron DE, Rwigema JC, Gibson MK, et al. Concurrent cetuximab with stereotactic body radiotherapy for
recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and
neck: a single institution matched case-control study.

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 180

Am J Clin Oncol. 2011;34:165-172. doi:10.1097/COC.
0b013e3181dbb73e
27. Siddiqui F, Patel M, Khan M, et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy for primary, recurrent, and metastatic tumors
in the head-and-neck region. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2009;74:1047-1053. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.09.022
28. Kodani N, Yamazaki H, Tsubokura T, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for head and neck tumor: disease control and morbidity outcomes. J Radiat Res. 2011;52:24-31.
PubMed PMID: 21127390.
29. Patel PR, Salama JK. Reirradiation for recurrent head
and neck cancer. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2012;12:
1177-1189. doi:10.1586/era.12.97
30. Citardi MJ, Chaloupka JC, Son YH, et al. Management
of carotid artery rupture by monitored endovascular
therapeutic occlusion (1988-1994). Laryngoscope. 1995;
105:1086-1092. doi:10.1288/00005537-199510000-00015
31. McDonald MW, Moore MG, Johnstone PA. Risk of carotid
blowout after reirradiation of the head and neck: a systematic
review. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;82:1083-1089.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.08.029
32. Yamazaki H, Ogita M, Kodani N, et al. Frequency, outcome
and prognostic factors of carotid blowout syndrome after
hypofractionated re-irradiation of head and neck cancer using
CyberKnife: a multi-institutional study. Radiother Oncol.
2013;107:305-309. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2013.05.005
33. Yamazaki H, Ogita M, Himei K, et al. Carotid blowout
syndrome in pharyngeal cancer patients treated by hypofractionated stereotactic re-irradiation using CyberKnife:
a multi-institutional matched-cohort analysis. Radiother
Oncol. 2015;115:67-71. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2015.02.021
34. Yamazaki H, Ogita M, Himei K, et al. Reirradiation using
robotic image-guided stereotactic radiotherapy of recurrent head and neck cancer. J Radiat Res. 2016;57:288-293.
doi:10.1093/jrr/rrw004
35. Gebhardt BJ, Vargo JA, Ling D, et al. Carotid dosimetry
and the risk of carotid blowout syndrome after reirradiation
with head and neck stereotactic body radiation therapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2018;101(1):195-200. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2017.11.045
36. Medin PM, Foster RD, van der Kogel AJ , et al. Spinal cord
tolerance to reirradiation with single-fraction radiosurgery:
a swine model. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;83:
1031-1037. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.08.030
37. Mahadevan A, Floyd S, Wong E, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy reirradiation for recurrent epidural spinal metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;81:1500-1505.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.08.012
38. Kirkpatrick JP, van der Kogel AJ, Schultheiss TE. Radiation dose-volume effects in the spinal cord. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;76:S42-S49. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2009.04.095
39. Nieder C, Grosu AL, Andratschke NH, et al. Update
of human spinal cord reirradiation tolerance based on
additional data from 38 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2006;66:1446 -1449. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2006.07
.1383
40. Sahgal A, Ma L, Weinberg V, et al. Reirradiation human
spinal cord tolerance for stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;82:107-116. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2010.08.021
41. Lawrence YR, Li XA, el Naqa I, et al. Radiation dosevolume effects in the brain. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2010;76:S20-S27. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.02.091

23/08/18 5:46 PM

11: HEAD AND NECK SBRT
42. Mayer R, Sminia P. Reirradiation tolerance of the human
brain. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008;70:1350-1360.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.08.015
43. Bonner JA, Harari PM, Giralt J, et al. Radiotherapy plus
cetuximab for squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and
neck. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:567-578. doi:10.1056/
NEJMoa053422
44. Comet B, Kramar A, Faivre-Pierret M, et al. Salvage stereotactic reirradiation with or without cetuximab for locally recurrent
head-and-neck cancer: a feasibility study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2012;84:203-209. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.11.054
45. Ward MC, Riaz N, Caudell JJ, et al. Multi-institution analysis of IMRT-based re-irradiation for head and neck cancer:
prognostic factors and recursive partitioning analysis for
overall survival [published online ahead of print 2017]. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2017.
46. Vargo JA, Heron DE, Ferris RL, et al. Prospective evaluation of patient-reported quality-of-life outcomes following
SBRT ± cetuximab for locally-recurrent, previouslyirradiated head and neck cancer. Radiother Oncol. 2012;
104:91-95. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2012.04.020

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 181

181

47. Tanvetyanon T, Padhya T, McCaffrey J, et al. Prognostic
factors for survival after salvage reirradiation of head and
neck cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:1983-1991. doi:10.1200/
JCO.2008.20.0691
48. Unger KR, Lominska CE, Deeken JF, et al. Fractionated
stereotactic radiosurgery for reirradiation of head-and-neck
cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;77:1411-1419.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.06.070
49. Roh KW, Jang JS, Kim MS, et al. Fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy as reirradiation for locally recurrent head
and neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2009;74:
1348-1355. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.10.013
50. Voynov G, Heron DE, Burton S, et al. Frameless stereotactic radiosurgery for recurrent head and neck carcinoma.
Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2006;5:529-535. doi:10.1177/
153303460600500510
51. Vargo JA, Grimm J, Mavroidis P, et al. Radiation DoseVolume Tolerance for Hypo fractionated Head-and-Neck
Retreatments: A Report from the HyTEC Normal Tissue
Complications Probability Working Group for Carotid
Blowout Syndrome. Poster presentation at ASTRO 2018.

23/08/18 5:46 PM

Heron_68566_PTR_11_165-182_08-23-18.indd 182

23/08/18 5:46 PM

C H A P T E R

12

Lung SBRT
Arjun Pennathur, James D. Luketich, Dwight E. Heron, Alexandre Escande, David Pasquier, and
Eric F. Lartigau

“Stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS), a term originally coined by Dr. Lars Leksell at Karolinska
Hospital in Stockholm, Sweden, is an approach
to radiation therapy using multiple convergent
beams, precise localization with a stereotactic
coordinate system, rigid immobilization, and
single-fraction treatment (1). In 1994, Karolinska
Hospital was also the site of a paradigm shift in
external beam radiation therapy (EBRT), when
Lax, Blomgren, and colleagues published the first
report of extracranial SRS (2,3). Extracranial
SRS is also referred to as stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) or stereotactic ablative radiation therapy (SABR), and these terms are used
interchangeably in this chapter. The application
of SRS/SBRT/SABR to tumors in the thorax may
offer an alternative to surgery in the management
of patients with lung neoplasm (4–8).
Lung cancer is the most common cancer with
nearly 2 million cases a year globally, and is the
leading cause of death by cancer (9,10). Surgical
resection is considered the standard treatment of
early stage non–small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
However, patients with early stage NSCLC who
are medically inoperable or unwilling to undergo
surgery are not uncommon. These patients were
historically treated with conventional EBRT with
high rates of local progression (11). SBRT is an
alternative in these patients (4). Because of the
encouraging results of SBRT in medically inoperable patients with NSCLC, SBRT has also been
applied in some operable patients with early
stage NSCLC, patients with locally advanced
NSCLC, patients with recurrent NSCLC, and

patients with pulmonary oligometastatic disease
(7,8,12–15).
Over time, SBRT has benefitted from the development of technology including dedicated accelerators and integrated motion management solutions
(CyberKnife®, Vero®, Novalis®, TrueBeam®, Versa
HD®, etc.). New technology brings new questions,
and SBRT exemplifies this. SBRT presents specific
concerns compared with conventional EBRT, such
as a very high biological effective dose (BED) and
toxicity. Other details of treatment, such as delineation of target volume, dose, fractionation, treatment planning, and motion management, are still in
debate, and a recent report published by the International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements (ICRU; ICRU Report 91) should help
both physicists and physicians to compare studies
and results (16). When evaluating the results of
SBRT treatment presented in this chapter, the reader
should keep in mind that dosimetric characteristics,
such as radiation dose, fractionation schedule, dose
calculation algorithms, and isodose, present large
discrepancies. The ICRU 91 report should help
simplify the comparisons of results from different
studies moving forward. Finally, patients treated
with SBRT present uncommon toxicities (sometimes fatal), and new image interpretation recommendations during follow-up are needed (17).
SRS/SBRT/SABR treatment of tumors in the
thorax may offer an alternative in the management
of patients with lung neoplasm (18–21). SBRT is
attractive for many reasons. It is noninvasive and
painless, has a short overall treatment duration,
and facilitates an immediate return to activities.
183

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 183

23/08/18 5:48 PM

184

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

In this chapter, we review the potential indications
for SBRT, patient selection, and results of SBRT
treatment of lung neoplasms including primary
NSCLC, recurrent lung cancer, persistent cancer in
a previously irradiated field, and pulmonary metastases. In addition, we discuss the technical details
of SBRT including motion management, dose fractionation and schema, results of treatment, quality
of life (QOL), and follow-up imaging protocols.

INDICATIONS AND RESULTS
Lung SBRT may be indicated for several different
presentations of lung cancer including NSCLC in
medically inoperable patients, persistent tumors
requiring reirradiation, recurrent tumors, and lung
metastases.

Early Stage NSCLC

Medically-Inoperable Early Stage NSCLC
Surgical resection is the standard for operable
patients with early stage NSCLC. SBRT is recommended only in patients with medically inoperable
early stage NSCLC. Although surgery is considered a gold standard for early stage NSCLC (25%
of patients), at about 20% of this population is
unfit or unwilling to undergo surgery (22). This
is especially observed in elderly patients, as well
as patients with comorbidities such as chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In medically inoperable patients, EBRT was considered
the standard of care before the era of SBRT and
other ablative modalities such as radiofrequency
ablation. However, with poor outcomes noted with
EBRT alone (11), SBRT has become a standard
treatment in this patient population. Palma et al.
demonstrated that SBRT led to a 12% decrease
in the number of elderly patients with early stage
NSCLC who go untreated with an accompanying
improvement in overall survival (23).
Early results of SRS/SBRT/SABR were published
from retrospective cohorts, yielding important findings that impacted clinical practice (7,8,18,19,
24,25). We presented our initial experience with
SRS/SBRT for the treatment of lung neoplasm at
the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC)
Hillman Cancer Center in 2005 (18). We treated
32 patients (27 with NSCLC and five with pulmonary metastases) with SRS using the CyberKnife
system (18). Patients were treated with 20 Gy in a
single fraction in this early series. Following SRS, an
initial complete response was seen in seven patients

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 184

(22%), partial response in 10 patients (31%), stable
disease in nine patients (28%), and progression in
five patients (16%). The probability of 1-year overall
survival for the entire group was 78% (95% confidence interval [CI], 65%–94%), and the probability
of 1-year overall survival for the patients with stage I
NSCLC was 91% (95% CI, 75%–100%). This
and other early studies demonstrated the safety and
feasibility of SRS for the treatment of lung neoplasm.
Subsequently, we reported the results in 21 medically inoperable patients with stage I NSCLC treated
with SRS at UPMC (19). With mean follow-up of
24 months, estimated 1-year survival probability
was 81% (68% CI, 73%–90%). However, with a
low dose of 20 Gy, local progression occurred in
nine patients (42%). We concluded from this preliminary experience that SRS (median dose 20 Gy)
is safe in this high-risk group of patients; however,
it was associated with significant local progression. We and other investigators initiated prospective studies using SRS in multiple fractions and
increased the BED to evaluate the efficacy of SBRT
in high-risk patients with early stage NSCLC.
Timmerman et al. conducted a dose escalation
study from 24 to 60 Gy in three fractions in 37
patients with stage I NSCLC treated with SBRT (5).
At a median follow-up of 15 months, six patients
had local failure; all had received less than 18 Gy
per fraction. The disease-free and overall survival
at median follow-up of 15 months were 50% and
64%, respectively. Onishi et al., in an analysis of
outcomes in 245 patients with stage I NSCLC from
13 Japanese institutions, showed that increasing
the BED was associated with improved local control (7). These authors reported a lower local recurrence rate when a BED more than 100 Gy was used.
Although an increased dose delivered during SRS
may improve local control, increased dose is also
associated with increased toxicity, when treating
central lesions (6). Therefore, dose modifications
and modified treatment schema are required for
central lesions, and this is described further, later
in this chapter.
Investigators from UPMC led a prospective
multicenter study to evaluate CyberKnife SRS
for the treatment of stage I NSCLC in medically
inoperable patients. Patients were evaluated by
thoracic surgeons and radiation oncologists and
accrued to the study from 14 centers. Patients
with peripheral lesions were treated with a high
BED, which was delivered in three fractions (total
60 Gy). We reported the preliminary results from
the peripherally located tumor arm of our study

23/08/18 5:48 PM

12: LUNG SBRT

at the American Society for Therapeutic Radiation and Oncology (ASTRO) annual meeting in
2012 (26). We enrolled a total of 78 patients with
peripheral NSCLC; 62 with stage IA NSCLC and
16 with stage IB NSCLC underwent SRS. There
was no peritreatment mortality. During follow-up,
there were 41 deaths, 15 because of cancer. The
median follow-up for patients was 26 months. The
probability of 2-year cancer-specific survival for
the entire group was 79% (95% CI, 69%–90%).
During follow-up, 26 patients had recurrence.
In three patients (3.8%) recurrence was local
only, and 23 patients (29%) had regional and/
or distant progression. We concluded that the
intermediate-term results of this prospective
multicenter study of SRS for high-risk, medically
inoperable patients with stage I peripheral NSCLC
were promising. In particular, local control and
disease-specific survival were encouraging.
One of the first prospective studies of SBRT
for early stage NSCLC was the Radiation Therapy
Oncology Group (RTOG) 0236 trial, a phase II
study in which 55 patients were treated with SBRT
for a total dose of 60 Gy in three fractions (27).
This study demonstrated a 3-year actuarial overall survival of 56% associated with an early local
control of 98% at 3 years. Similar results were
obtained in other studies (28).

Operable Early Stage NSCLC
In patients with operable early stage NSCLC, surgical resection is the standard treatment and the
debate is still open concerning the role of SBRT
in this patient population. Although there are no
completed randomized controlled trials comparing
surgery with SBRT in operable patients with early
stage NSCLC, SBRT results in some studies have
seemed promising (7,29).
Three phase III studies comparing surgery with
SBRT for early stage NSCLC were opened for enrollment (RTOG1201/American College of Surgeons
Oncology Group [ACOSOG] Z4099, ROSEL, and
STARS trials); however, all three studies failed to
accrue well and were closed. Chang et al. published
an analysis of the data from the limited number of
accrued patients to the STARS and ROSEL trials
(29). This analysis of 58 patients did not show a
statistically significant difference in local control
between the two treatments. However, the study
has several limitations including low accrual and
has been criticized (30).
Onishi et al. (7) reviewed a Japanese multiinstitutional SBRT study that included 93 operable

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 185

185

patients who refused surgery and were treated with
SBRT. These authors stratified the results on the
basis of the dose of radiation and the BED delivered. They reported that 5-year overall survival
was 88.4% for patients treated with BED more
than 100 Gy and 69.4% for patients treated with
BED less than 100 Gy. Multi-institutional phase II
studies of SRS in the treatment of patients with
potentially resectable stage I NSCLC have also
been done in Japan (JCOG0403). There have been
several retrospective studies using matched-pair
analyses comparing surgery with SBRT; however, it
is difficult to derive definitive conclusions because
of the limitations of the retrospective nature of
these studies, including selection bias (31). Palma
et al. explored a new treatment strategy combining neoadjuvant SBRT and surgery for medically
operable patients with early stage NSCLC, but only
very early results are published with no postoperative mortality at 90 days (32).
Although surgical resection with lobectomy is
the standard treatment for early stage NSCLC,
some patients with early stage NSCLC who are
not candidates for a lobectomy because of medical
comorbidities are treated with a sublobar resection. Further studies are needed and are currently
underway comparing sublobar resection with
SBRT for stage I NSCLC. In 2016, there were at
least four prospective studies comparing surgery
with SABR: SABRTooTH (UK National Health
System), POSTLIV (China), STABLE-MATES
(University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center),
and VALOR (U.S. Veterans Affairs). The results
of these trials are eagerly awaited before recommendations can be made for the role of SBRT in
operable patients with NSCLC.

Prognostic Factors
Some studies have examined prognostic factors after
treatment of patients with early stage NSCLC with
SABR that have included tumor characteristics,
dose, and imaging biomarkers, such as maximum
standardized uptake value (SUVmax). Matsuo et al.
in a study of 101 patients who underwent SBRT for
NSCLC described the impact of tumor diameter for
both local control (p = .020) and overall survival
(p = .013) 3 years after SBRT (33). Shaverdian et al.
described location as a prognostic factor; patients
with lower lobe, stage I NSCLC tumors had poor
relapse-free (p = .04) and overall (p = .01) survival
(34). Takeda et al. (35) found that a higher SUVmax was a worse predictive factor for both overall
survival and disease-free survival at 3 years among

23/08/18 5:48 PM

186

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

152 patients treated with SBRT. Similar results
were later confirmed by Horne et al. (36). Some
authors have reported preliminary results on the
prognostic value of radiomics and textural-features
analysis, but further studies are warranted (37,38).

Advanced NSCLC
For advanced inoperable NSCLC, the standard of
care is chemoradiation; however, up to 50% of
patients develop local (in-field) failure, so SBRT
has been explored for advanced NSCLC using a few
different approaches. For large tumors, Eriguchi
et al. (39), in a retrospective study with 25 patients
treated exclusively by SBRT, reported 2-year local
control rates for T3N0 and T4N0 NSCLCs of 91%
and 68%, respectively, with a low toxicity rate.
This study should be regarded as a feasibility study
and needs to be compared with results from Cho
et al. who reported outcomes for patients with
cT1-3N0 NSCLC treated with radiation therapy
alone and a classical fractionation schedule (40).
Some studies have reported preliminary results of
SBRT treatment of patients with tumors involving
the chest wall. Berriochoa et al. retrospectively
reviewed 13 patients with chest wall involvement
treated with SBRT with no grade 3 toxicity and
a 1-year local control rate of 89% (41). In addition, some authors have explored the possibility of
SBRT as a boost to both the primary tumor and
the involved nodal area after conventional chemoradiotherapy. Hepel et al. (42) explored SBRT
as a boost after concurrent chemoradiation for
locally advanced NSCLC and reported 1-year local
control of 78%. Given the limited data available, additional evaluation is warranted before
consensus statements regarding the role of SBRT
in advanced NSCLC will be forthcoming from
ASTRO, the European Society for Radiotherapy
and Oncology (ESTRO), the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN), and the European
Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO).

Others Indications for SBRT in the Lung

Oligometastases
Hellman and Weichselbaum described the concept of oligometastases as a distinct intermediate between locally advanced cancer and widely
disseminated metastases (13). Classic studies
investigating lung cancer, including some nearly
two decades ago, have documented long-term survival of selected patients who presented during

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 186

follow-up with limited recurrent metastases
and were treated with complete surgical resection or radiation (43). In addition, resection or
radiation is applicable in patients with limited
pulmonary metastases from other sites. In a study
of outcomes in 5,206 patients using the International Registry for Lung Metastases (IRLM), the
estimated 5-year survival after complete resection was 36%, and the median survival was
35 months (44). SBRT has also been used to treat
patients with pulmonary metastases and recurrent
lung cancer (8,14,15). Le et al. (45) reported the
results of single-fraction radiosurgical treatment
in 12 patients with metastatic or recurrent lung
neoplasm. The 1-year overall survival was 56%
in patients with pulmonary metastases. We previously published the results of 100 consecutive
patients who were treated with SABR at UPMC
(8). Nineteen of these patients had pulmonary
metastases, with colorectal cancer being the most
frequent primary site. The median overall survival was not reached (95% CI, 21 months—not
reached) for patients with metastatic disease.
The estimated 2-year overall survival by cancer
type for metastatic disease was 84% (95% CI,
47%–96%).
Another retrospective study comparing surgery
with SBRT, published by Widder et al., did not
report significant differences in either local control
(85% for surgery vs. 83% for SBRT at 4 years)
or overall survival (49% for surgery vs. 41% for
SBRT at 5 years; 46). Franceschini et al. analyzed
the outcome of 200 patients with colorectal cancer,
sarcoma, or renal cell carcinoma with lung metastases treated by SBRT. The time interval between
the treatment of the primary and the development
of metastases, the performance status, histologic
type, number of metastases, and size were all prognostic factors (47).
SBRT is recommended as an option by the NCCN
and ESMO depending on patient and clinical history characteristics. Further studies are required
to fully evaluate the role of SBRT for pulmonary
metastatic disease.

Treatment of Recurrent or Persistent Lung Cancer
Recurrent Disease
After complete resection or treatment of primary
NSCLC with definitive chemoradiation, a significant proportion of patients develop recurrent
disease, which is associated with cancer-related
mortality (48,49). Innovative treatment options

23/08/18 5:48 PM

12: LUNG SBRT

are essential in this patient population. We published the results of 100 patients with recurrent or
persistent lung cancer who were then treated
with SRS/SBRT/SABR at UPMC (14). The
median interval from the treatment of the primary tumor (with surgery or chemoradiation) to
the treatment of recurrent or progressive disease
was 18 months. SRS was administered to treat the
first recurrence in the majority of patients (70%).
For patients who had received prior radiation, the
median dose was 48 Gy. The primary end point
we evaluated was overall survival. There was no
mortality within 30 days after treatment, and
morbidity was minimal. The estimated 2-year
overall survival was 49% (95% CI, 40%–60%),
and 5-year overall survival was 31% (95% CI,
23%–43%). We also examined the joint effects
of covariates with a proportional hazards regression model. The regression model identified
three significant factors that adversely affected
survival: larger tumor size (p < .0001), whether
SRS was applied to a second or subsequent recurrence (p = .0014), and being male (p = .0128).
Hou et al. (50) reported the outcomes of SRS in
50 patients with recurrent disease who had undergone a prior lung resection, and reported a local
control of 100% within 1 year, but this was associated with significant toxicity (12% of patients
experienced toxicity ⱖgrade 2).

Persistent Disease After Prior Radiation
or Chemotherapy
When lung cancer persists after radiation treatment, reirradiation of the field poses challenges and
requires special caution because high toxicity rates
and variable local control rates have been reported
(40–70%; 51). However, median progression-free
survival after SBRT reirradiation is nearly 1 year;
therefore, patients may benefit from this strategy. Because data are limited by the small studies
performed thus far, further studies are needed to
determine patient selection criteria and treatment
characteristics.
Recurrent or persistent disease after chemotherapy also presents a challenge to radiation
oncologists. Acquired resistance because of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations
can limit the utility of tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs). Some patients present with oligoprogression,
and some clinicians have explored the utility of
combining SBRT with TKIs. The results of the
UPMC series, discussed previously, included SBRT

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 187

187

in patients who developed recurrent disease after
prior chemotherapy or chemoradiation (14).

SRS/SBRT AND CONSIDERATION
OF TUMOR CHARACTERISTICS
Tumor Location and Toxicity of Treatment
Tumor location, whether peripherally or centrally
located in the lung, is an important factor in risk
assessment for lung SABR, because SABR for
peripheral lung lesions shows a lower toxicity profile.
Toxicity of SABR to peripheral lesions includes the
risk of chest wall toxicity and rib fractures. Apical
lesions have specific toxicity profiles because of their
location. Some authors have described an increased
risk of brachial plexopathy with apical lesions (52).
SABR for centrally located lesions in the lung
results in a higher toxicity (6). Some of the first investigations of SBRT for central lung lesions reported
very high (even fatal) toxicity in some cases because
of fistula, bronchial stricture, and massive hemoptysis, so initially high-dose SBRT was contraindicated
for central tumors. In a phase II study of 70 medically inoperable patients with stage I NSCLC treated
with SRS using 60 to 66 Gy in three fractions, local
control of 95% and an estimated 2-year overall
survival of 54% were reported (6). However, there
was an increased toxicity noted in central tumors,
with a 2-year freedom from severe toxicity of 54%
in central lesions compared with 83% in peripheral
lesions. During a median follow-up of 17.5 months,
six of the 70 patients (8.6%) died of treatmentrelated causes. The authors concluded that this
SABR regimen should not be used for patients with
tumors near central airways. These investigators
originally described a “no-fly zone” within 2 cm of
a major or lobar bronchus as a contraindication to
high-dose SBRT. The Advanced Radiation Technology Committee of the International Association for
the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC) further detailed
that the zone within 2 cm in any direction of any
mediastinal critical structure should be considered
a forbidden zone, or “no-fly zone,” for SABR (53).
Chang et al. cautioned that the delivery of high
ablative doses of radiation for central lung lesions
with exposure of critical structures, such as the
bronchial tree, esophagus, major blood vessels,
heart, and brachial plexus and phrenic nerve, can
lead to severe toxicity. These authors suggested a
modified dose schema, optimized planning, and
normal tissue dose–volume constraints when treating centrally located lung lesions (53).

23/08/18 5:48 PM

188

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

Fortunately, advances in motion management and modifications in the dose schema have
allowed treatment of centrally located lung lesions
with lower toxicity rates. At UPMC, we typically
use a dose of 48 Gy in four fractions for central lesions. We delineate the target with care to
protect adjoining critical central structures. In
addition, we typically avoid SBRT for endobronchial lesions visualized on bronchoscopy. Davis
et al. (54) published a retrospective analysis of
111 patients with 114 centrally located lung tumors
(48 T1-2N0M0- NSCLC and 66 lung metastases).
SBRT dose varied from 16 to 60 Gy (median
48 Gy) and was delivered in one to five fractions. They found a low toxicity rate with no
grade 3 or higher (acute or late) toxicity and
2-year overall survival of 79% for patients with
T1 tumors, 32% for patients with T2 tumors, and
49% for patients with metastases. Other authors
have also published their results of treatment of
centrally located tumors (55). We are still waiting for the results from the phase I/II studies of
the RTOG 0813 trial (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT00750269) to determine the best dose
for both tumor control and limiting toxicity in
patients with centrally located lung tumors.

Histologically Unproven Nodule
When faced with a histologically unproven nodule, our approach at UPMC is to obtain a biopsy
of the lung lesion, if possible, prior to SBRT treatment. In some patients, the risks of biopsy may be
very high, or the results of the biopsy are not conclusive. Various algorithms have been described
to estimate the probability of malignancy in a
solitary lesion (56). These include not only lesion
radiological characteristics but also patient characteristics such as age, history of smoking, and
history of cancer (57). Except in rare circumstances where tissue confirmation is not possible,
our standard approach at UPMC is to obtain a
biopsy of the lung lesion in all patients prior to
treatment.

Nodal Staging
Nodal metastasis is an important prognostic factor in NSCLC. The combination of CT
scan and PET-CT scan has improved our evaluation of the nodal status. In medically inoperable patients with early stage NSCLC who
are being considered for SBRT, patients with
mediastinal lymph nodes less than or equal to

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 188

1 cm and without increased fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG) uptake in the mediastinal lymph nodes
can be considered as node negative. However,
it should be noted that PET-CT is not as accurate
for nodal staging as invasive mediastinal staging. A prospective multi-institutional ACOSOG
study evaluated the role of PET scanning in
lung cancer (58). PET was significantly better
than CT for the detection of N1 and N2/N3
disease (42% vs. 13%, and 58% vs. 32%,
respectively). The negative predictive value
of PET for mediastinal node disease was 87%.
Distant metastatic disease was indicated in 19 of
287 patients (6.6%), but was subsequently
shown to be benign. The authors concluded that
PET should not be relied on as a sole staging
modality for mediastinal staging, and positive
findings should be confirmed by mediastinoscopy. Although mediastinoscopy is considered
the standard, more recently, endobronchial
ultrasound (EBUS)–guided biopsy has also been
used for nodal staging.

Large Tumors
Few results are specifically available on the
use of SBRT for very large lung tumors. Verma
et al. (59) explored the outcomes of SBRT in
92 patients with NSCLC ranging in size from
5 to 7.5 cm and showed local control of 73% at
2 years. They reported 2-year disease-free and
overall survival of 53% and 46%, respectively,
which may be lower than seen with SBRT for
smaller tumors. Ricco et al. (60) confirmed the
negative impact of increasing lesion size in a
large retrospective cohort of 577 patients treated
for lung metastases with SBRT. A survey from the
German Society of Radiation Oncology (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Radioonkologie [DEGRO])
placed a consensus limit on lung tumor size for
SBRT at 4 to 5 cm with a protracted regimen for
bigger tumors (61).

Lung Cancer With Multiple
Primary Tumors
The incidence of multiple synchronous primary
lung cancers can be as high as 8%. SBRT can be
considered as feasible in some of these patients
depending on their comorbidities, and the volume
irradiated in patients with more than one target
(62). Local control and toxicity ratings are excellent depending on the organ-at-risk (OAR) volume
irradiated.

23/08/18 5:48 PM

12: LUNG SBRT

PATIENT CHARACTERISTICS
AND CONSIDERATION FOR SBRT
Patient characteristics must be taken into account
when considering SBRT for NSCLC, particularly
the patient’s age and any comorbidities. Advanced
age has been associated with worse toxicity in some
but not all studies. Hayash et al. compared the
outcomes of SBRT among the elderly and found
that octogenarians experience similar efficacy
of SBRT, as indicated by local control, but with
a higher rate grade 2 toxicity (63). Patients with
significant COPD, with reduced forced expiratory
volume (FEV) or reduced diffusing capacity of the
lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO), and who are
medically inoperable are candidates for SBRT.
Guckenberger et al. (64) found a limited loss of
less than 10% of FEV1 or DLCO within 24 months
of SBRT without clinical impact. However, Ueki
et al. found that a history of active interstitial lung
disease (ILD) is a significant prognostic factor for
grade 5 toxicity after SBRT (65). Nevertheless, in
patients with ILD who are unfit for other treatment
strategies, SBRT may still be an option.

Concomitant Treatment or Adjuvant
Treatment
None of the oncology societies recommend standard concomitant or adjuvant chemotherapy with
SBRT (66). Verma et al. studied chemotherapy with
concomitant SBRT for large tumors (ⱖ5 cm) and
observed an effect on the overall survival (p = .027),
but overall survival was poor (23 months vs.
30 months depending on chemotherapy) (59).
Iyengar et al. published a small, phase II trial
with 24 patients who were treated by SBRT and
erlotinib (67). Each of the patients had fewer than
six metastases and had progressed through platinum-based chemotherapy. Treatments with SBRT
and erlotinib were well tolerated and resulted in high
progression-free survival (median 14.7 months)
and overall survival (median 20.4 months).

TREATMENT PLANNING
Delineation of the Target Lesion
With CT scanners, the optimal threshold for target
delineation of lung tumors is a “lung window”—
window level of 600 Hounsfield units (HU) and a
window width of plus or minus 1,600 HU. The optimal window for target delineation for mediastinal
lesions is a window level of 20 HU and a window

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 189

189

width of plus or minus 400 HU. Historically, only
gross tumor volume (GTV) was delineated using
CT without clinical target volume (CTV). Because
tumors and atelectasis can be difficult to separate,
Hanna et al. recommend using PET-CT with caution to improve accuracy and the reproducibility of
delineation (68). Moreover, several authors, such as
Fleckenstein et al. (69), explored the impact of MRI
for lung delineation using T2-weighted images without reporting clinical outcomes.
Internal target volume (ITV) using fourdimensional CT is needed to delineate the target
volume on the maximum inspiration, expiration,
and the mean. This is then fused, verifying that
lung tumors are still delineated on each phase (0%,
25%, 50%, 75%, and 100%). However, this delineation depends on the motion management strategy. Planning target volume (PTV) depends on the
type of motion management and accelerator, and
margins range from 1 to 5 mm, but no study has
compared the impact of the PTV margin. A survey
published by Redmond et al. found a consensus
PTV margin of 5 mm (70). At the University of
Pittsburgh, we use at least a 5-mm margin, with
consideration for the critical adjacent structures,
when planning the target volume. Figure 12.1
shows the delineation using CT, PET-CT, and MRI.

Dose and Fractionation for Target Volume
and Organ at Risk
Because of heterogeneity in dose, fractionation
schedule, target definition, motion management,
and reporting, it is clear that results for physical characteristics should be taken with caution.
The primary feature of SBRT is ablative doses of
radiation through hypofractionation. With the
limits of the linear quadratic model and because
a single one-point BED will not be representative
of the biological effect, the correlation between
the BED and the local control using an ␣/␤ ratio
has been studied (71). BED10 greater than 100 Gy
causes standard damage but also prevents repopulation and induces specific vascular damage. In
a large, multi-institutional retrospective study of
257 patients, Onishi et al. found a significant
difference for 5-year local control depending on
the BED10, with 70.8% versus 30.2% (p < .001)
for a threshold of 100 Gy (25). Moreover, one
meta-analysis published by Zhang et al. suggested
that regimens exceeding a BED of 146 Gy are
associated with inferior survival (72). Another limitation highlighted in this meta-analysis was that

23/08/18 5:48 PM

190

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

FIGURE 12.1 Use of multimodality evaluation for GTV delineation. Upper left: CT scanner; upper right: PET-CT scanner;
lower left: MRI; and lower right: final treatment planning.
GTV, gross tumor volume.

authors did not consider various dose calculation
algorithms. With regard to SRS treatment of pulmonary metastases, Ricco et al. found a 3-year local
control of 77.1% versus 45% (p = .001) using a
BED10 greater than 100-Gy threshold (60).
With more than 25 different protocols and isodose prescriptions, the best dose fractionation
schedule is still unclear and needs further study.
Thus, it is more common to prescribe between 80%
and 100% isodose line that encompasses 95% of
the target volume. No consensus or guidelines
are well described. There have been a few studies evaluating the optimal number of fractions for
lung SBRT. However, recommendations have been
published by an ICRU committee: ICRU Report 91,
Prescribing, Recording, and Reporting of Stereotactic Treatments With Small Photon Beam. A
recent study suggests that multifraction SBRT
could be superior to single fraction but this was
not confirmed by the RTOG 0915 trial published in
2015 (73). In the RTOG 0915 trial, two different
schedules (34 Gy in one fraction vs. 48 Gy in four
consecutive daily fractions) were compared with
no significant difference in tumor control (97% and
92.7%, respectively) (73). Alite et al. retrospectively reviewed 107 patients treated with SBRT and
described better local control with nonconsecutive
versus consecutive fractionation (p = .001), which
confirms a currently used fractionation schedule of
three times a week (74).

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 190

Many authors recommend a more protracted
dose fractionation schedule in patients with a central tumor or a tumor adhered to the chest wall or
diaphragm without high-level clinical evidence. This
is based on studies reporting mild-to-moderate
side effects as compared with the side effects previously reported using nonprotracted schedules.
Recently, the ESTRO Advisory Committee on
Radiation Oncology Practice (ACROP) consensus
guideline on implementation and practice of SBRT
for peripherally located early stage NSCLC was
published (75). The UK SABR consortium (76) suggests using 54 Gy in three fractions as the standard
fractionation, 55 to 60 Gy in five fractions if the
volume touches or extends into the ribs or pleura,
and 60 Gy in eight fractions if the OAR constraints
cannot be met at three or five fractions. Table 12.1
shows common dose regimens and BED.
Dose constraints also need further study. Given
that typical patients with NSCLC have poor respiratory function, it is clear that the risk of radiation pneumonitis and fibrosis as a result of the
SABR should be minimized. The most common
constraints for ipsilateral lung are a V20 10% or
less and V12.5 less than 15%, principally on the
basis of work by Timmerman et al. (27). They also
described the impact of the V40 and mean lung
dose as predictive for pneumonitis. The relationship between the dose and changes in pulmonary
function is less well studied.

23/08/18 5:48 PM

12: LUNG SBRT

191

TABLE 12.1 The Most Common Dose Fractionation, BED10 Equivalence (Tumors), and BED3 (Organ at Risk)
Total Dose

Number of Fractions

Dose Per Fraction

BED10

48

4

12

106

50

5

10

100

54

3

18

151

55

5

11

116

60

8

7.5

105

60

3

20

180

Number of Fractions

Dose Per Fraction

BED3

48

4

12

240

50

5

10

216

54

3

18

378

55

5

11

257

60

8

7.5

210

60

3

20

460

Total Dose

BED, biological effective dose.

For chest pain and skin toxicity, many authors
report different results, such as a V30 threshold of
70 cm3 of the chest wall volume for chest pain and
50 mL for skin toxicity but without confirmation by
large-data analysis. A significant increase in the rate
of rib fractures appeared for BED greater than 132
Gy (11% vs. 5%, p = .007) (77). In patients with
pleural involvement, Kimsey et al. described a 10%
risk level for grade 2 or more for D70 mL of 16.2
Gy in four fractions and 65.1 Gy for the 50% risk
level. In a same way, they also described, using D2
mL, 10% and 50% risk levels for toxicity grade 2
or more that were 43 and 87.9 Gy, respectively, in
four fractions (78). Brachial plexus and nerve injuries are uncommon, and only dosimetric studies for
brachial plexopathy described a threshold with a
BED3 more than 100 Gy. The main significant risk
factor is the apical location of the tumor (52).
For other constraints, data are available only for
central tumors, and no specific data are available
for peripheral lung SBRT. A meta-analysis published by Senthi et al. (55) estimated a normaltissue BED3 (␣/␤ ratio of 3) threshold of 210 Gy
for limiting toxicities and treatment-related mortality. Duijm et al. (79) described a normal-tissue
complication probability (NTCP) model, with, for
example, a risk of 50% to occlude segmental bronchi if 0.5 mL of tissue is irradiated with up to 50 Gy

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 191

in five fractions. They also defined a 50% risk level
of grade 1 side effects, for a five-fraction Dmax of
55 Gy midbronchi and 65 Gy for mainstem bronchi. Concerning the aorta and major vessels, Xue
et al. (80), on the basis of RTOG 0813 and the
findings of Timmerman, reported a maximum dose
(Dmax) range from 45 Gy (three fractions) to 52.5
Gy (five fractions) for a grades 3 to 5 toxicity rate
inferior to 2.5%, but other authors report a higher
threshold of 120 Gy. Figure 12.2 shows an example
of treatment planning. Table 12.2 shows the results
from the survey published by Redmond et al. about
OAR constraints (70).

Physics Specificities and Motion
Management

Impact of Accelerators
Currently, many accelerators for SBRT exist with
dosimetric and treatment duration differences;
they have not been demonstrated to differ in
clinical outcomes. However, the volume exposed
to very low radiation doses is more important
if intensity-modulated radiation therapy, helical
tomotherapy, or volumetric-modulated arc therapy
(VMAT) is used. Thanks to high-dose-rate, flattening, filter-free (FFF) radiation therapy, which allows
a dose rate of up to 2,400 monitor units/min,

23/08/18 5:48 PM

192

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

VOI
DVH: Relative dose

VOI list

100

Volume (%)

Spine TV

Mean
(cGy)

Max
(cGy)

CI

nCI

HI

3.47

168.59

5043.84

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

Coverage
%
n/a

80

ITV

4650.86

5360.31

5738.05

n/a

n/a

n/a

70

GTV

4902.22

5373.19

5725.21

6.40 13.61 1.06

47.05

60

Poumon d

13.10

824.78

5744.68

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

50

Poumon g

2.77

31.21

679.62

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

40

Coeur

8.30

329.43

1905.26

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

30

Oesophage

19.80

67.50

310.66

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

20

Moelle

17.05

259.41

1184.91

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

10

External

0.01

135.37

5744.68

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

3486.77

5159.41

5744.68

1.23

4.83 1.06

25.51

PTVext

6.50

321.00

5744.68

1.00 1393. 1.06
01

0.07

Critical 12

0.06

82.49

5744.68

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

Bloc

0.01

3.95

127.02

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

Center

4980.10

5417.12

5741.41

3.33

5.79 1.06

57.58

[PTV] Shell 1

133.51

1333.96

3418.11

0.00

0.00 0.00

0.00

[PTV] Shell 2

32.26

271.96

1312.89

0.00

0.00 0.00

0.00

80

[PTV] Shell 3

6.50

98.50

812.30

0.00

0.00 0.00

0.00

70

[PTVext] Shell 1

0.32

15.58

826.83

0.00

0.00 0.00

0.00

0

PTV

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Dose (%)
DVH: Absolute dose
100
90

Volume (%)

Min
(cGy)

VOI

90

60

Dx Vx values

50

DVH

40

Dose (cGy)

Dose (%)

Volume (mm3)

Volume (%)

30
20
10
0
0

574 1148 1722 2296 2870 3444 4018 4592 5166 5740

Dose (cGy)

FIGURE 12.2 Example of treatment planning using CyberKnife® (Accuray).
Image courtesy of Accuray Incorporated–©2018 Accuray Incorporated. All Rights Reserved.

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 192

23/08/18 5:48 PM

12: LUNG SBRT

193

TABLE 12.2 Organ-at-Risk Constraintsa Modified According to the UK SABR Consortium Guidelines
Structure

Number of Fractions
1

2

3

4

5–8

Spinal cord, Dmax
(Gy)

12–12.5

17

18–21

23

25–29

Brachial plexus,
Dmax (Gy)

16–17.5

18–20

24

27–30.5

30–32

Esophagus,
Dmax (Gy)

14–15.4

16–20

24–26

26–30

27–29

Heart, Dmax (Gy)

18–22

20–24

24–26

24–29

27–29 (32–35)

Lung

7 Gy <1,500 mL

V10 <10%

12.5 <1,000 mL

V10 <10%

13 <1,000 mL

V20 <30%

V5 <3%–5%

V20 <10%

V20 <30%

12.5 <1,500 mL

Large airway,
Dmax (Gy)

20

—

30

34.8

6–40

Large vessels,
Dmax (Gy)

37

—

30–45

49

V47 <10 mL

Skin, Dmax (Gy)

—

—

33

—

32

Chest wall

—

—

V30 mL <30 Gy

—

V30 mL <32 Gy

V0.1 mL <37 Gy

V0.1 mL <39 Gy

aWithin the frame of the survey by Redmond et al. (70).
Dmax, maximum dose; SABR, stereotactic ablative radiation therapy.

Source: A multinational report of technical factors on stereotactic body radiotherapy for oligometastases. Kristin J. Redmond, Simon S. Lo,
Roi Dagan, Ian Poon, Matthew C. Foote, Darby Erler, Young Lee, Frank Lohr, Tithi Biswas, Umberto Ricardi, Arjun Sahgal, Future Oncol 2017
May;13(12):1081-1089.

treatment time progressively decreased without
compromising treatment delivery (81). However,
FFF VMAT could present an interplay effect without proven clinical impact (82). The development
of the MRI–linac, coupling MRI imaging with a
medical linear accelerator (83), seems promising,
because it may be able to track more nonfiducial
tumors. With only limited data and no clinical
outcomes reported, further studies are needed.

Impact of Lung Characteristics
Tumor Heterogeneity
Lung SBRT is a challenge for medical physicists
for two primary reasons: tissue heterogeneity and
tumor motion. The management of electron density discrepancies may vary greatly. Correction
for changes in electron transport or lateral scatter
disequilibrium is essential in lung; however, only
the type B dose algorithm or Monte Carlo algorithm
takes it into account. Haedinger et al. (84) reported
that absorbed dose at the lung–tumor interface
was different depending on the dose calculation
algorithm applied. In addition, the normalization
of optimization techniques and reporting is
important and needed to compare treatments.

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 193

Lacornerie et al. (85) published a major study of
the physics of lung SBRT. They suggest robust optimization using type A algorithms to target the PTV
and then calculation using the type B algorithms
and rescaling the prescription to the GTV median
dose (85). This method was validated through
a clinical retrospective comparative cohort of
205 patients who were treated by SBRT (86).
Discrepancy in the dose calculation between the
two algorithms was major in small peripheral
targets and reflected that the type A algorithm
does not faithfully reflect the dose received by
the target volume, but this did not have any
clinical impact. Song et al. reported the clinical outcomes for 47 patients treated by SBRT
for lung tumors with planning using either RayTracing (22 targets) or Monte Carlo (25 targets)
algorithms. Although response rate was lower in
the Ray-Tracing group (p = .008), no significant
differences were found in local control or toxicity
(87). These results may lead to studies evaluating
the impact of reducing doses for protocol compliance using the Monte Carlo algorithm (88).
Figure 12.3 shows the differences between RayTracing and Monte Carlo algorithms. Some
authors also report an important GTV shrinkage

23/08/18 5:48 PM

194

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

Volume (%)

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

67
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

FIGURE 12.3 Differences between Ray-Tracing and Monte Carlo algorithms for an extreme case (GTV in red, PTV in blue,
lung in light blue, Ray-Tracing in solid lines, Monte Carlo in dashed lines).

GTV, gross tumor volume; PTV, planning target volume.

during SBRT, even in five fractions. This finding
should lead to exploration of the potential for
adaptive SBRT because of the modification of
electron transport (89).

Tumor Motion
Management of tumor motion is essential, as several authors have reported tumor motion of up to
1 cm for both the central and the peripheral lesion.
There are a few frequently used approaches to
account for lung tumor motion: large PTV, ITV,
gating, tracking with or without fiducial markers,
and ventilation techniques. Using a large PTV is
the easiest technique. The second easiest approach
is a simple four-dimensional CT scan with delineation of an ITV (Figure 12.4). However, this leads to
an increase in the volume of the normal lung irradiated and should be recommended only for small
tumors with little motion. In a same way, it is also
possible to delineate only on a time-weighted average CT dataset with a large PTV.
Other techniques that address important motion
(>1 cm in the craniocaudal direction) have been
studied, such as breath-hold techniques or abdominal compression to decrease the tumor motion.
Solutions exist to reduce the PTV margin. First,

there is an active breath-hold technique using a
spirometer-closed scissor valve at a predefined volume. Next, a gating system, such as the ExacTrac®
for the Novalis Tx system (Brainlab AG, Feldkirchen,
Germany), can synchronize the time when the
external beam is switched on with the respiratory
phase. Underberg et al. described the benefits of
this technique with PTV reduced by 15% and mean
volume of normal tissue irradiated reduced by 18%
when the respiration-gated technique was used (90).
However, dynamic tracking using fiducial markers
or tumor visualization represents the best strategy to
decrease normal irradiated tissue volume and achieve
superior tumor-dose coverage (91). CyberKnife®
(Accuray, Inc., Sunnyvale, California) is one of the
most commonly used commercial systems, and uses
an x-ray imaging device to detect and continuously
monitor the tumor position during treatment thanks
to the six-axis accelerator (Figure 12.5). CyberKnife®
XSight Lung can also track without a fiducial marker
if the target can be seen on an x-ray device. Bahig et
al. tested 113 targets and found that tumor diameter, volume, and density are predictive of the ability
to track without fiducial markers (92). Finally, the
CyberKnife system can use both external and fiducial markers to increase the accuracy of the tracking

FIGURE 12.4 Motion management using ITV delineation.
ITV, internal target volume.

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 194

23/08/18 5:48 PM

12: LUNG SBRT

195

FIGURE 12.5 Examples of tracking with CyberKnife® (Accuray): (A) using fiducial markers (Synchrony®) and (B) without
fiducial markers (XSight Lung®).

Image courtesy of Accuray Incorporated-©2018 Accuray Incorporated. All Rights Reserved.

system or perform double tracking using vertebrae
and fiducial markers.
When fiducial markers are used, they are inserted
1 to 2 weeks before the treatment planning. The
main complication encountered with fiducial markers is pneumothorax, but patients can also present
with fiducial migration, pain, or hematoma. Van
der Voort van Zyp et al. (93) found that although
median marker displacement is small (1.3 mm),
displacements greater than 5 mm occurred for
12% of the markers. Therefore, multiple markers
are needed to compensate for those that present
important displacement. Numerous solutions are
in development to improve tumor marking, such as
electromagnetic navigational bronchoscopy-guided
fiducial marker placement or intrabronchial coils (94).

QUALITY OF LIFE AND TOXICITY
Toxicity
Toxicities from SBRT are low, but depend on the
tumor size, tumor localization, and patient characteristics. Thus, the first studies of SBRT on central
tumors reported some fatal complications (fistula,
bronchial stricture, heart failure, pneumothorax,
pneumomediastinum, and hemoptysis) or important
toxicity (brachial plexopathy), but these complications have been reduced by adapting the dose and
fractionation. Major tumor cavitation and suspicion
of endobronchial involvement are considered risk
factors for hemorrhage and hemoptysis.
Currently, the toxicities reported for lung
SBRT are pneumonitis (ⱖG3, 4%–25%), fibrosis

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 195

(12%–15%), chest pain (5%–25%), rib fracture
(2%–3%), and fatigue. Grade 1 or 2 toxicities are
reported in up to 100% of cases. Reports of grade
3 or 4 toxicities range between 2.7% and 27%, but
late radiological changes are seen in 50% to 80%
of patients (77). Interestingly, Alite et al. explored
the impact of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) on SBRT toxicity and found a lower rate
of clinical pneumonitis for patients using ACEi
(p = .04) (95). Some cases of organizing pneumonia,
vertebral fracture, or pseudosclerodermatous panniculitis have been reported following lung SBRT.

UPMC Multicenter Quality of Life Study
The impact of SRS on the QOL in medically inoperable patients with NSCLC has not been fully evaluated. We reported preliminary results regarding the
QOL after SRS in a prospective multicenter study,
led by UPMC, that evaluated outcomes following
SRS for stage I NSCLC in medically inoperable
patients (96). The dose prescribed ranged from
48 to 60 Gy in three to four fractions. The general QOL was assessed by the SF-36 questionnaire
(physical component score [PCS]/mental component score [MCS]; normal mean score 50). Dyspnea was evaluated with the validated University of
California, San Diego (UCSD) Shortness of Breath
Questionnaire. These were administered at baseline
and after treatment (4–6 weeks; 3–6 months). There
was early preservation of QOL after treatment with
no significant changes in the PCS/MCS or dyspnea
score after SRS. Further investigations with longer
follow-up are required to evaluate the durability of

23/08/18 5:48 PM

196

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

this preservation in QOL following treatment with
SRS. Videtic (97) reported no change in QOL even
if the lung volume was significantly decreased after
SBRT (mean 10%). There were also no significant
pulmonary function changes after SBRT in that study.

FOLLOW-UP AFTER TREATMENT
After SBRT, follow-up with a CT scan at least every
6 months for 3 years is needed in accordance with
the ESMO clinical guidelines in patients who may
be candidates for salvage treatment. The scheduling
of follow-up CT scans should be tailored for other
patients. At UPMC, patients are followed routinely
in the thoracic surgery and/or radiation oncology
clinic every 4 to 6 months and undergo physical
examination in addition to imaging. At UPMC, we
routinely obtain a chest CT scan during follow-up
and obtain a PET scan selectively in some patients.
During follow-up with CT scanning, only 20%
of patients will present a complete response with
a disappearance of the tumor, but nearly 90% of
cases present CT density changes after 2 years
(Figure 12.6) (98). It is important to recognize
some high-risk radiological features in serial CT
scans of local relapse: enlarging opacity, history
of enlargement (sequential or late), craniocaudal
growth, pleural effusion, condensation increasing, bronchiectasis disappearance, and margin
modification. Peulen et al. (99) validated the
ability of these features to diagnose local recurrence and saw a specificity and sensitivity of up
to 100% in patients with four or more highrisk radiological features seen on CT scanning.
At UPMC, we have used a modified response
evaluation criteria in solid tumors (RECIST) system incorporating both CT scanning and PET
scanning to evaluate response to treatment and
tumor progression (8). Some authors have also
explored radiomic features indicative of recurrence and progression, but little data have been

published, and only high-risk validated clinical
features are used in clinical practice (100).

CONCLUSIONS
SBRT/SABR/SRS for lung tumors, including
primary NSCLC, recurrent lung cancer, and pulmonary metastases, is already a reality. Encouraging outcomes have been reported for medically
inoperable patients with early stage NSCLC or
recurrent lung cancer, and in selected patients
with oligometastatic lung disease. SBRT is considered to be a standard treatment for early stage
NSCLC in medically inoperable patients. However, many questions need to be resolved, such as
optimal patient selection, optimization of treatment, dose schema, and standards for reporting
results. Studies are ongoing to further evaluate the
role of SBRT in lung cancer treatment including
prospective multicenter studies evaluating SRS/
SBRT/SABR for stage I NSCLC, randomized trials
comparing SBRT with sublobar resection in highrisk operable patients with stage I NSCLC, and
trials of SBRT in patients with oligometastatic
disease or recurrent disease.

SUMMARY OF DOSE CONSTRAINTS
(TABLE 12.3)
TABLE 12.3 Dose Constraints for Lung Primary
and Metastases Using SBRT
Unresected
Target

54 Gy (Three Fractions)
48 Gy (Four Fractions)
50 Gy (Five Fractions)

Critical
Structures

Suggested Dose Limits

Chest wall

V30 ≤70 mL

Ipsilateral lung

V20 ≤10%, V12.5 <15%

Brachial plexus

BED3 <100 Gy, ≤24 Gy (three fractions)

Aorta; main
vessel

Dmax 45 Gy (three fractions) or 52.5 Gy
(five fractions)

Central
bronchial
tree

<30 Gy (three fractions); 15.6 Gy <4 mL

Spinal cord
(canal)

Dmax 18 Gy (three fractions)
Dmax 20 Gy (five fractions)

Stomach

Dmax 30 Gy (three fractions)
Dmax 35 Gy (five fractions)

FIGURE 12.6 Chest CT scan before SBRT (left panel)

Skin

≤24 Gy in three fractions

SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

BED, biological effective dose; Dmax, maximum dose; SBRT,
stereotactic body radiation therapy.

and after 2 years of follow-up (right panel).

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 196

23/08/18 5:48 PM

12: LUNG SBRT

REFERENCES
1. Song DY, Kavanagh BD, Benedict SH, et al. Stereotactic
body radiation therapy: rationale, techniques, applications,
and optimization. Oncology (Williston Park). 2004;18:
1419-1430. PubMed PMID: 15609470.
2. Lax I, Blomgren H, Näslund I, et al. Stereotactic radiotherapy
of malignancies in the abdomen: methodological aspects. Acta
Oncol. 1994;33:677-683. PubMed PMID: 7946448.
3. Blomgren H, Lax I, Näslund I, et al. Stereotactic high dose
fraction radiation therapy of extracranial tumors using
an accelerator: clinical experience of the first thirty-one
patients. Acta Oncol. 1995;34(6):861-870. PubMed PMID:
7576756.
4. Whyte RI, Crownover R, Murphy MJ, et al. Stereotactic
radiosurgery for lung tumors: preliminary report of a phase I
trial. Ann Thorac Surg. 2003;75:1097-1101. PubMed PMID:
12683544.
5. Timmerman R, Papiez L, McGarry R, et al. Extracranial stereotactic radioablation: results of a phase I study in medically inoperable stage I non–small cell lung cancer. Chest.
2003;124:1946-1955. PubMed PMID: 14605072.
6. Timmerman R, McGarry R, Yiannoutsos C, et al. Excessive
toxicity when treating central tumors in a phase II study of
stereotactic body radiation therapy for medically inoperable
early-stage lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:4833-4839.
doi:10.1200/JCO.2006.07.5937
7. Onishi H, Araki T, Shirato H, et al. Stereotactic hypofractionated high-dose irradiation for stage I nonsmall cell lung
carcinoma: clinical outcomes in 245 subjects in a Japanese
multiinstitutional study. Cancer. 2004;101:1623-1631.
doi:10.1002/cncr.20539
8. Pennathur A, Luketich JD, Heron DE, et al. Stereotactic
radiosurgery for the treatment of lung neoplasm: experience in
100 consecutive patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 2009;88(5):
1594-1600. doi:10.1016/j.athoracsur.2009.05.020
9. Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics 2012. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2012;62(1):10-29. doi:10.3322/caac.20138
10. Stewart BW, Wild CP, eds. World Cancer Report 2014. Lyon,
France: IARC Press; 2014:350-352.
11. Sibley GS, Jamieson TA, Marks LB, et al. Radiotherapy
alone for medically inoperable stage I non-small-cell lung
cancer: the Duke experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
1998;40:149-154. PubMed PMID: 9422571.
12. Karam SD, Horne ZD, Hong RL, et al. Dose escalation with
stereotactic body radiation therapy boost for locally advanced
non small cell lung cancer. Radiat Oncol. 2013;8:179.
doi:10.1186/1748-717X-8-179
13. Hellman S, Weichselbaum RR. Oligometastases. J Clin Oncol.
1995;13:8-10. doi:10.1200/JCO.1995.13.1.8
14. Pennathur A, Luketich JD, Heron DE, et al. Stereotactic
radiosurgery/stereotactic body radiotherapy for recurrent
lung neoplasm: an analysis of outcomes in 100 patients.
Ann Thorac Surg. 2015;100:2019-2024. doi:10.1016/j.
athoracsur.2015.04.113
15. Shultz DB, Filippi AR, Thariat J, et al. Stereotactic ablative
radiotherapy for pulmonary oligometastases and oligometastatic lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2014;9(10):1426-1433.
doi:10.1097/JTO.0000000000000317
16. ICRU Report 91: Prescribing, recording, and reporting of
stereotactic treatments with small photon beams. J ICRU.
2014;14(2):1-160. doi:10.1093/jicru/ndx017
17. Chi A, Nguyen NP, Komaki R. The potential role of respiratory
motion management and image guidance in the reduction of
severe toxicities following stereotactic ablative radiation therapy for patients with centrally located early stage non-small

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 197

197

cell lung cancer or lung metastases. Front Oncol. 2014;4:151.
doi:10.3389/fonc.2014.00151
18. Pennathur A, Luketich JD, Burton S, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery for the treatment of lung neoplasm: initial experience. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83(5):1820-1824. doi:10.1016/
j.athoracsur.2006.11.077
19. Pennathur A, Luketich JD, Heron DE, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery for the treatment of stage I non-small cell
lung cancer in high-risk patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg.
2009;137(3):597-604. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2008.06.046
20. Banki F, Luketich JD, Chen H, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery
for lung cancer. Minerva Chir. 2009;64(6):589-598. PubMed
PMID: 20029356.
21. Christie NA, Pennathur A, Burton SA, et al. Stereotactic
radiosurgery for early stage non-small cell lung cancer: rationale, patient selection, results, and complications. Semin
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2008;20(4):290-297. doi:10.1053/
j.semtcvs.2008.12.001
22. Raz DJ, Zell JA, Ou SH, et al. Natural history of stage I nonsmall cell lung cancer: implications for early detection. Chest.
2007;132(1):193-199. doi:10.1378/chest.06-3096
23. Palma D, Visser O, Lagerwaard FJ, et al. Impact of introducing
stereotactic lung radiotherapy for elderly patients with stage I
non-small-cell lung cancer: a population-based time-trend
analysis. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:5153-5159. doi:10.1200/
JCO.2010.30.0731
24. Zimmermann FB, Geinitz H, Schill S, et al. Stereotactic
hypofractionated radiation therapy for stage I non-small cell
lung cancer. Lung Cancer. 2005;48(1):107-114. doi:10.1016/
j.lungcan.2004.10.015
25. Onishi H, Shirato H, Nagata Y, et al. Hypofractionated stereotactic radiotherapy (HypoFXSRT) for stage I non-small cell
lung cancer: updated results of 257 patients in a Japanese multiinstitutional study. J Thorax Oncol. 2007;2(suppl 3):S94-S100.
doi:10.1097/JTO.0b013e318074de34
26. Pennathur A, Loo BW, Heron DE, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery for stage I NSCLC in medically inoperable patients: a
prospective multicenter phase II study. American Society for
Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology (ASTRO) 54th Annual
Meeting, Boston, MA, 2012.
27. Timmerman R, Paulus R, Galvin J, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for inoperable early stage lung cancer. JAMA.
2010;303(11):1070-1076. doi:10.1001/jama.2010.261
28. Fakiris AJ, McGarry RC, Yiannoutsos CT, et al. Stereotactic
body radiation therapy for early-stage non-small-cell lung carcinoma: four-year results of a prospective phase II study. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2009;75(3):677-682. doi:10.1016/j.
ijrobp.2008.11.042
29. Chang JY, Senan S, Paul MA, et al. Stereotactic ablative
radiotherapy versus lobectomy for operable stage I nonsmall-cell lung cancer: a pooled analysis of two randomised
trials. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16:630-637. doi:10.1016/
S1470-2045(15)70168-3
30. Meyers BF, Puri V, Broderick SR, et al. Lobectomy versus
stereotactic body radiotherapy for stage I non-small cell
lung cancer: post hoc analysis dressed up as level-1 evidence? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2015;150(3):468-471.
doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2015.06.086
31. Crabtree TD, Denlinger CE, Meyers BF, et al. Stereotactic
body radiation therapy versus surgical resection for stage
I non-small cell lung cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg.
2010;140:377-386. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2009.12.054
32. Palma DA, Nguyen TK, Kwan K, et al. Short report:
interim safety results for a phase II trial measuring the
integration of stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR)
plus surgery for early stage non-small cell lung cancer

23/08/18 5:48 PM

198

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

(MISSILE-NSCLC). Radiat Oncol. 2017;12(1):30. doi:10
.1186/s13014-017-0770-7
33. Matsuo Y, Shibuya K, Nagata Y, et al. Preliminary report of late
recurrences, at 5 years or more, after stereotactic body radiation therapy for non-small cell lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol.
2012;7(2):453-456. doi:10.1097/JTO.0b013e31823c5b29
34. Shaverdian N, Veruttipong D, Wang J, et al. Location matters:
stage I non-small-cell carcinomas of the lower lobes treated
with stereotactic body radiation therapy are associated with
poor outcomes. Clin Lung Cancer. 2017;18(2):e137-e142.
doi:10.1016/j.cllc.2016.09.001
35. Takeda A, Yokosuka N, Ohashi T, et al. The maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) on FDG-PET is a strong
predictor of local recurrence for localized non-small-cell
lung cancer after stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT).
Radiother Oncol. 2011;101(2):291-297. doi:10.1016/
j.radonc.2011.08.008
36. Horne ZD, Clump DA, Vargo JA, et al. Pretreatment SUVmax
predicts progression-free survival in early-stage non-small cell
lung cancer treated with stereotactic body radiation therapy.
Radiat Oncol. 2014;9:41. doi:10.1186/1748-717X-9-41
37. Pyka T, Bundschuh RA, Andratschke N, et al. Textural features in pre-treatment [F18]-FDG-PET/CT are correlated
with risk of local recurrence and disease-specific survival in
early stage NSCLC patients receiving primary stereotactic
radiation therapy. Radiat Oncol. 2015;10:100. doi:10.1186/
s13014-015-0407-7
38. Huynh E, Coroller TP, Narayan V, et al. Association of radiomics data extracted from static and respiratory-gated CT
scans with disease recurrence in lung cancer patients treated
with SBRT. PLoS One. 2017;12(1):e0169172. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0169172
39. Eriguchi T, Takeda A, Sanuki N, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy for T3 and T4N00 non-small cell lung cancer.
J Radiat Res. 2016;57(3):265-272. doi:10.1093/jrr/rrw023
40. Cho WK, Noh JM, Ahn YC, et al. Radiation therapy alone in
cT1-3N0 non-small cell lung cancer patients who are unfit
for surgical resection or stereotactic radiation therapy: comparison of risk-adaptive dose schedules. Cancer Res Treat.
2016;48(4):1187-1195. doi:10.4143/crt.2015.391
41. Berriochoa C, Videtic GM, Woody NM, et al. Stereotactic
body radiotherapy for T3N0 lung cancer with chest wall invasion. Clin Lung Cancer. 2016;17(6):595-601. doi:10.1016/
j.cllc.2016.04.007
42. Hepel JT, Leonard KL, Safran H, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy boost after concurrent chemoradiation for
locally advanced non-small cell lung cancer: a phase 1 dose
escalation study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2016;96(5):
1021-1027. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2016.08.032
43. Luketich JD, Martini N, Ginsberg RJ, et al. Successful treatment of solitary extracranial metastases from non-small
cell lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg. 1995;60:1609-1611.
doi:10.1016/0003-4975(95)00760-1
44. Pastorino U, Buyse M, Friedel G, et al. Long-term results of
lung metastasectomy: prognostic analyses based on 5,206
cases. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1997;113:37-49. PubMed
PMID: 9011700.
45. Le QT, Loo BW, Ho A, et al. Results of a phase I doseescalation study using single-fraction stereotactic radiosurgery for lung tumors. J Thorac Oncol. 2006;1:802-809.
PubMed PMID: 17409963.
46. Widder J, Klinkenberg TJ, Ubbels JF, et al. Pulmonary oligometastases: metastasectomy or stereotactic ablative radiotherapy? Radiother Oncol. 2013;107(3):409-413. doi:10.1016/
j.radonc.2013.05.024

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 198

47. Franceschini D, Cozzi L, De Rose F, et al. Role of stereotactic body radiation therapy for lung metastases from
radio-resistant primary tumours. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol.
2017;143(7):1293-1299. doi:10.1007/s00432-017-2373-y
48. Pisters KM, Le Chevalier T. Adjuvant chemotherapy in completely resected non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol.
2005;23:3270-3278. doi:10.1200/JCO.2005.11.478
49. Zimmermann FB, Molls M, Jeremic B. Treatment of recurrent
disease in lung cancer. Semin Surg Oncol. 2003;21:122-127.
doi:10.1002/ssu.10029
50. Hou Y, Hermann G, Lewis JH, et al. Clinical outcomes after
lung stereotactic body radiation therapy in patients with or
without a prior lung resection [published online ahead of
print November 4, 2016]. Am J Clin Oncol. doi:10.1097/
COC.0000000000000344
51. Amini A, Yeh N, Gaspar LE, et al. Stereotactic body radiation
therapy (SBRT) for lung cancer patients previously treated
with conventional radiotherapy: a review. Radiat Oncol.
2014;9:210. doi:10.1186/1748-717X-9-210
52. Forquer JA, Fakiris AJ, Timmerman RD, et al. Brachial
plexopathy from stereotactic body radiotherapy in earlystage NSCLC: dose-limiting toxicity in apical tumor sites.
Radiother Oncol. 2009;93(3):408-413. doi:10.1016/j.radonc
.2009.04.018
53. Chang JY, Bezjak A, Mornex F, et al. Stereotactic ablative
radiotherapy for centrally located early stage non-smallcell lung cancer: what we have learned. J Thorac Oncol.
2015;10:577-585. doi:10.1097/JTO.0000000000000453
54. Davis JN, Medbery C, Sharma S, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy for centrally located early-stage non-small
cell lung cancer or lung metastases from the RSSearch(®)
patient registry. Radiat Oncol. 2015;10:113. doi:10.1186/
s13014-015-0417-5
55. Senthi S, Haasbeek CJ, Slotman BJ, et al. Outcomes of stereotactic ablative radiotherapy for central lung tumours:
a systematic review. Radiother Oncol. 2013;106:276-282.
doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2013.01.004
56. Al-Ameri A, Malhotra P, Thygesen H, et al. Risk of malignancy in pulmonary nodules: a validation study of four prediction models. Lung Cancer. 2015;89(1):27-30. doi:10
.1016/j.lungcan.2015.03.018
57. Swensen SJ, Silverstein MD, Ilstrup DM, et al. The probability of malignancy in solitary pulmonary nodules: application
to small radiologically indeterminate nodules. Arch Intern
Med. 1997;157:849-855. PubMed PMID: 9129544.
58. Reed CE, Harpole DH, Posther KE, et al. Results of the American College of Surgeons Oncology Group Z0050 trial: the
utility of positron emission tomography in staging potentially
operable non-small cell lung cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg.
2003;126(6):1943-1951. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2003.07.030
59. Verma V, Shostrom VK, Kumar SS, et al. Multiinstitutional experience of stereotactic body radiotherapy
for large (≥5 centimeters) non-small cell lung tumors.
Cancer. 2017;123(4):688-696. doi:10.1002/cncr.30375
60. Ricco A, Davis J, Rate W, et al. Lung metastases treated with
stereotactic body radiotherapy: the RSSearch® patient registry’s experience. Radiat Oncol. 2017;12(1):35. doi:10.1186/
s13014-017-0773-4
61. Roesch J, Panje C, Sterzing F, et al. SBRT for centrally localized NSCLC: what is too central? Radiat Oncol. 2016;11(1):
157. doi:10.1186/s13014-016-0732-5
62. Griffioen GH, Lagerwaard FJ, Haasbeek CJ, et al. Treatment of multiple primary lung cancers using stereotactic
radiotherapy, either with or without surgery. Radiother
Oncol. 2013;107:403-408. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2013.04.026

23/08/18 5:48 PM

12: LUNG SBRT
63. Hayashi S, Tanaka H, Kajijura Y, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy for very elderly patients (age, greater than or
equal to 85 years) with stage I non-small cell lung cancer.
Radiat Oncol. 2014;9:138. doi:10.1186/1748-717X-9-138
64. Guckenberger M, Allgäuer M, Appold S, et al. Safety and
efficacy of stereotactic body radiotherapy for stage 1 nonsmall-cell lung cancer in routine clinical practice: a patternsof-care and outcome analysis. J Thorac Oncol. 2013;8(8):
1050-1058. doi:10.1097/JTO.0b013e318293dc45
65. Ueki N, Matsuo Y, Togashi Y, et al. Impact of pretreatment
interstitial lung disease on radiation pneumonitis and survival after stereotactic body radiation therapy for lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2015;10(1):116-125. doi:10.1097/
JTO.0000000000000359
66. Jumeau R, Bahig H, Filion E, et al. Assessing the need for
adjuvant chemotherapy after stereotactic body radiation
therapy in early-stage non-small cell lung carcinoma. Cureus.
2016;8(11):e901. doi:10.7759/cureus.901
67. Iyengar P, Kavanagh BD, Wardak Z, et al. Phase II trial of
stereotactic body radiation therapy combined with erlotinib
for patients with limited but progressive metastatic nonsmall-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(34):3824-3830.
doi:10.1200/JCO.2014.56.7412
68. Hanna GG, van Sörnsen de Koste JR, Dahele MR, et al. Defining target volumes for stereotactic ablative radiotherapy of
early-stage lung tumours: a comparison of three-dimensional
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography and
four-dimensional computed tomography. Clin Oncol. 2012;24:
e71-e80. doi:10.1016/j.clon.2012.03.002
69. Fleckenstein J, Jelden M, Kremp S, et al. The impact of
diffusion-weighted MRI on the definition of gross tumor volume in radiotherapy of non-small-cell lung cancer. PLoS One.
2016;11(9):e0162816. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0162816
70. Redmond KJ, Lo SS, Dagan R, et al. A multinational report
of technical factors on stereotactic body radiotherapy for
oligometastases. Future Oncol. 2017;13(12):1081-1089.
doi:10.2217/fon-2016-0479
71. Fowler JF. 21 years of biologically effective dose. Br J Radiol.
2010;83(991):554-568. doi:10.1259/bjr/31372149
72. Zhang J, Yang F, Li B, et al. Which is the optimal biologically effective dose of stereotactic body radiotherapy for
stage I non-small-cell lung cancer? A meta-analysis. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;81:e305-e316. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2011.04.034
73. Videtic GM, Hu C, Singh AK, et al. A randomized phase 2
study comparing 2 stereotactic body radiation therapy schedules for medically inoperable patients with stage I peripheral non-small cell lung cancer: NRG Oncology RTOG
0915 (NCCTG N0927). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2015;93(4):757-764. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.07.2260
74. Alite F, Stang K, Balasubramanian N, et al. Local control
dependence on consecutive vs. nonconsecutive fractionation
in lung stereotactic body radiation therapy. Radiother Oncol.
2016;121(1):9-14. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2016.07.026
75. Guckenberger M, Andratschke N, Dieckmann K, et al. ESTRO
ACROP consensus guideline on implementation and practice of stereotactic body radiotherapy for peripherally located
early stage non-small cell lung cancer. Radiother Oncol.
2017;124(1):11-17. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2017.05.012
76. Stereotactic Ablative Body Radiation Therapy. A Resource.
SABR UK Consortium. Version 4.0, January 2013. Available
at: http://www.sabr.org.uk/. Accessed Oct 12, 2017.
77. Aoki M, Sato M, Hirose K, et al. Radiation-induced rib fracture after stereotactic body radiotherapy with a total dose
of 54-56 Gy given in 9-7 fractions for patients with peripheral

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 199

199

lung tumor: impact of maximum dose and fraction size.
Radiat Oncol. 2015;10:99. doi:10.1186/s13014-015-0406-8
78. Kimsey F, McKay J, Gefter J, et al. Dose-response model for
chest wall tolerance of stereotactic body radiation therapy.
Semin Radiat Oncol. 2016;26(2):129-134. doi:10.1016/
j.semradonc.2015.11.003
79. Duijm M, Schillemans W, Aerts JG, et al. Dose and volume
of the irradiated main bronchi and related side effects in the
treatment of central lung tumors with stereotactic radiotherapy. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2016;26(2):140-148. doi:10.1016/
j.semradonc.2015.11.002
80. Xue J, Kubicek G, Patel A, et al. Validity of current stereotactic body radiation therapy dose constraints for aorta and
major vessels. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2016;26(2):135-139.
doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.2015.11.001
81. Stieb S, Lang S, Linsenmeier C, et al. Safety of high-dose-rate
stereotactic body radiotherapy. Radiat Oncol. 2015;10:27.
doi:10.1186/s13014-014-0317-0
82. Ong CL, Dahele M, Slotman BJ, et al. PD-0040: dosimetric
impact of interplay during lung SBRT with FFF RapidArc.
Radiother Oncol. 2013;106(suppl 2):S14. doi:10.1016/
S0167-8140(15)32346-X
83. Whelan B, Gierman S, Holloway L, et al. A novel electron
accelerator for MRI-linac radiotherapy. Med Phys. 2016;43:
1285-1294. doi:10.1118/1.4941309
84. Haedinger U, Krieger T, Flentje M, et al. Influence of calculation model on dose distribution in stereotactic radiotherapy for pulmonary targets. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2005;61(1):239-249. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2004.03.028
85. Lacornerie T, Lisbona A, Mirabel X, et al. GTV-based prescription in SBRT for lung lesions using advanced dose calculation algorithms. Radiat Oncol. 2014;9:223. doi:10.1186/
s13014-014-0223-5
86. Bibault JE, Mirabel X, Lacornerie T, et al. Adapted prescription dose for Monte Carlo algorithm in lung SBRT: clinical
outcome on 205 patients. PLoS One. 2015;10(7):e0133617.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0133617
87. Song JH, Kang KM, Choi HS, et al. Comparing the clinical
outcomes in stereotactic body radiotherapy for lung tumors
between Ray-Tracing and Monte-Carlo algorithms. Oncotarget. 2016;7(14):19045-19053. doi:10.18632/oncotarget
.5992
88. Pokhrel D, Sood S, Badkul R, et al. Assessment of Monte
Carlo algorithm for compliance with RTOG 0915 dosimetric criteria in peripheral lung cancer patients treated
with stereotactic body radiotherapy. J Appl Clin Med Phys.
2016;17(3):277-293. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v17i3.6077
89. Bhatt AD, El-Ghamry MN, Dunlap NE, et al. Tumor volume change with stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for
early-stage lung cancer: evaluating the potential for adaptive
SBRT. Am J Clin Oncol. 2015;38(1):41-46. doi:10.1097/
COC.0b013e318287bd7f
90. Underberg RW, Lagerwaard FJ, et al. A dosimetric analysis of
respiration-gated radiotherapy in patients with stage III lung
cancer. Radiat Oncol. 2006;1:8. doi:10.1186/1748-717X-1-8
91. Katoh N, Soda I, Tamamura H, et al. Clinical outcomes of
stage I and IIA non-small cell lung cancer patients treated
with stereotactic body radiotherapy using a real-time tumortracking radiotherapy system. Radiat Oncol. 2017;12(1):3.
doi:10.1186/s13014-016-0742-3
92. Bahig H, Campeau MP, Vu T, et al. Predictive parameters of
CyberKnife fiducial-less (XSight Lung) applicability for treatment of early non-small cell lung cancer: a single-center experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013;87(3):583-589.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.06.2048

23/08/18 5:48 PM

200

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

93. van der Voort van, Hoogeman MS, van de Water S,
et al. Stability of markers used for real-time tumor tracking
after percutaneous intrapulmonary placement. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;81(3):e75-e81. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2010.12.026
94. Anantham D, Feller-Kopman D, Shanmugham LN, et al. Electromagnetic navigation bronchoscopy-guided fiducial placement for robotic stereotactic radiosurgery of lung tumors.
Chest. 2007;132:930-935. doi:10.1378/chest.07-0522
95. Alite F, Balasubramanian N, Adams WH, et al. Decreased risk
of radiation pneumonitis with coincident concurrent use of
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in patients receiving lung stereotactic body radiation therapy. Am J Clin Oncol.
2016;41(6):1. doi:10.1097/COC.0000000000000324
96. Pennathur A, Luketich JD, Zajac A, et al. Multicenter Stereotactic Radiosurgery Investigators for the Treatment of
Lung Cancer. Quality of Life After Stereotactic Radiosurgery for Stage I Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer in High-Risk
Medically Inoperable Patients: A Prospective Multicenter

Heron_68566_PTR_12_183-200_08-23-18.indd 200

Study. Presented at the Society of Thoracic Surgeons 45th
annual meeting. Jan 26-28, 2009; San Francisco, CA.
97. Videtic GM. Early-Stage lung cancer, surgery, and stereotactic
body radiation therapy: quality of life. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2016;96(5):927-930. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2016.06.004
98. Bibault JE, Ceugnart L, Prevost B, et al. CT appearance of
pulmonary carcinomas after stereotactic radiation therapy.
Diagn Interv Imaging. 2013;94(3):255-262. doi:10.1016/
j.diii.2012.06.006
99. Peulen H, Mantel F, Guckenberger M, et al. Validation of
high-risk computed tomography features for detection of
local recurrence after stereotactic body radiation therapy for
early-stage non-small cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2016;96(1):134-141. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2016.04.003
100. Mattonen SA, Palma DA, Johnson C, et al. Detection
of local cancer recurrence after stereotactic ablative
radiation therapy for lung cancer: physician performance
versus radiomic assessment. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2016;94:1121-1128. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.12.369

23/08/18 5:48 PM

C H A P T E R

13

Pancreas SBRT
Eric D. Miller, Steven A. Burton, Lauren M. Rosati, and Terence M. Williams

Pancreatic cancer is arguably the most lethal cancer
with over 53,000 new cases estimated in 2017 and
over 43,000 deaths (1). It is now the third leading
cause of cancer-related death in the United States
with a 5-year survival of less than 10% (1,2). More
than 90% of patients diagnosed with pancreatic
cancer succumb to the disease with approximately
70% of patients passing away because of extensive
disease metastasis (3,4). Although modern combination chemotherapy has resulted in improved
survival, control of metastatic disease remains a
challenging problem (4–6). In addition, local recurrence may also result in significant morbidity and
has been shown to be an independent predictor
of worse survival (7). Locoregional failure rates
ranging from 28% to 63% have been reported
(8–13), with locally destructive disease as the direct
cause of death in up to 20% to 30% of pancreatic cancer patients on the basis of autopsy series
(3,14). Thus, with local failure contributing to
poor outcomes, the addition of radiation therapy
(RT) to the multidisciplinary management of pancreatic cancer is a logical choice in an attempt to
decrease the risk of local recurrence.

THE ROLE OF RADIATION THERAPY
IN PANCREATIC CANCER AND THE
EVOLUTION OF DOSE ESCALATION
The role of conventional chemoradiation in unresectable, locally-advanced pancreatic cancer
remains unclear because of conflicting results from
several randomized trials. The Gastrointestinal

Tumor Study Group (GITSG) conducted two randomized trials in the 1980s demonstrating a benefit to combined modality treatment compared with
radiation or chemotherapy alone (15). GITSG
9273 randomized 194 unresectable pancreatic
cancer patients to three arms: (a) high-dose (60
Gy) RT alone; (b) moderate-dose (40 Gy) RT with
concurrent fluorouracil (5-FU); or (c) high-dose
(60 Gy) RT with concurrent 5-FU. The chemoradiation arms had superior survival compared
with the radiation-alone arm with no difference
in overall survival (OS) observed between the
40- and 60-Gy arms with concurrent 5-FU. GITSG
9283 compared chemotherapy alone (streptozocin,
mitomycin, 5-FU [SMF]) with chemoradiation
(concurrent 5-FU) with adjuvant chemotherapy
(SMF) in patients with unresectable disease (16).
Patients treated with combined modality therapy
had superior survival compared with those treated
with chemotherapy alone. A survival benefit was
also observed in Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Trial (ECOG) 4201, which compared
gemcitabine alone with gemcitabine with concurrent RT despite terminating early because of poor
accrual (17). Higher rates of grades 4 and 5 toxicity were observed in the chemoradiation arm
compared with the chemotherapy arm. In contrast, the Fédération Francophone de Cancérologie
Digestive (FFCD) and the Société Francophone de
Radiothérapie Oncologique (SFRO) conducted a
phase III trial comparing RT with concurrent 5-FU
and cisplatin followed by maintenance gemcitabine
compared with gemcitabine alone (18). OS was
201

Heron_68566_PTR_13_201-214_08-23-18.indd 201

21/08/18 2:08 PM

202

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

shorter in the chemoradiation arm compared with
the chemotherapy-alone arm with a median OS
of 8.6 months versus 13.0 months, respectively.
Again, higher rates of grades 3 to 4 toxicity were
observed in the chemoradiation arm compared
with the chemotherapy-alone arm, and were attributable to escalated doses of radiation (up to 60 Gy)
with doublet chemotherapy.
Moderately hypofractionated RT with concurrent chemotherapy has been shown to be well
tolerated by several studies. Small et al. conducted
a multi-institutional phase II study evaluating the
safety and efficacy of neoadjuvant and concurrent full-dose gemcitabine for 39 patients with
localized pancreatic cancer (19). The treatment
regimen consisted of three treatment cycles. In
cycles 1 and 3, patients were treated with full-dose
gemcitabine on days 1 and 8 of a 21-day cycle.
During cycle 2, the same dose of gemcitabine was
given on days 1, 8, and 15 of a 28-day cycle with
RT starting on day 1 of cycle 2. The radiation
dose was 36 Gy delivered in 2.4-Gy fractions and
included the gross disease with a margin without elective nodal irradiation or use of intensitymodulated radiation therapy (IMRT). Grade 3 or 4
nonhematologic toxicity was observed in 48.7%
of patients with 25.6% of patients experiencing
grade 3 to 4 nonhematologic toxicities related to
treatment. The overall response rate to treatment
was 5.1% with a disease control rate of 84.6%.
Following treatment, 81% of initially resectable,
33% of borderline resectable, and 7% of unresectable patients completed surgical resection.
The 1-year survival rate for all patients was 73%.
Attempts to dose escalate with chemoradiation
have shown some improvement, but also with
increased toxicity. Ben-Josef et al. conducted a
phase I/II trial using IMRT with concurrent gemcitabine to determine the maximum tolerated radiation dose in 50 patients with unresectable pancreatic
cancer (20). The radiation dose was escalated to
50 to 60 Gy and delivered over 25 fractions
over 5 weeks. The treatment volumes included the
gross tumor volume (GTV) delineated on CT
and a planning target volume (PTV) consisting
of the GTV plus 1 cm expansion. The dose
associated with dose-limiting toxicity in 25% of
the patients was 55 Gy. Dose-limiting toxicities
included grade 3 or 4 gastrointestinal (GI) toxicity in seven patients, duodenal bleeding in three
patients, and duodenal perforation in one patient.
There were two patient deaths possibly attributed
to therapy, a possible duodenal perforation and

Heron_68566_PTR_13_201-214_08-23-18.indd 202

possible duodenal bleeding either secondary to
tumor infiltration or treatment-related toxicity. The
2-year freedom from local progression (FFLP) was
59% with a median OS of 14.8 months. Twelve
patients (24%) were able to undergo resection
following neoadjuvant treatment with 83% of
patients completing an R0 resection. Importantly,
patients who completed resection had a FFLP of
92% with an OS of 32 months.
Most recently, the Groupe Cooperateur Multidisciplinaire en Oncologie (GERCOR) LAP07
clinical trial was an international phase III trial
designed to decisively determine the role of chemoradiation in locally-advanced pancreatic cancer
(21). Patients underwent two randomizations. In
the first randomization, 442 patients were randomized to either weekly gemcitabine alone for
3 weeks followed by a 1-week break for four cycles
or the same dose of gemcitabine with the addition
of daily erlotinib. For the second randomization,
269 patients free from progression following
induction chemotherapy were randomized to the
same chemotherapy or chemoradiation (54 Gy
with capecitabine). For the first randomization,
no difference in OS or progression-free survival
was observed in patients receiving gemcitabine alone
versus gemcitabine/erlotinib. For the second randomization, no difference in OS was observed
between the chemotherapy-alone and chemoradiation arms with a median survival of 16.5 months
versus 15.2 months (p = .83), respectively. However, in the chemoradiotherapy group, there was
significantly less local progression compared with
the chemotherapy-alone group, 32% versus 46%
(p = .03), respectively. Similar rates of grades 3 to 4
toxicity were observed between the arms with significantly more nausea in the chemoradiation group.
In addition, those patients who went to surgery had
a more prolonged survival than those who did not.

STEREOTACTIC BODY RADIATION
THERAPY IN PANCREATIC CANCER
As observed in these studies, the use of conventionally fractionated chemoradiation (or slightly moderate hypofractionation) for pancreatic cancer results
in suboptimal outcomes, including local control,
with approximately 30% to 60% of patients having
local progression. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is an established ablative therapy with
high local control rates in the lung (22,23). Thus,
there has been recent enthusiasm for testing this
modality in pancreatic cancer. SBRT has several

21/08/18 2:08 PM

13: PANCREAS SBRT

advantages over conventional RT. The higher dose
per fraction with SBRT has the potential for “biologic” dose escalation, which may serve to reduce
positive margins in the preoperative setting and
may provide superior local control when compared
with conventional fractionation. With such a high
metastatic burden in pancreatic cancer, SBRT also
provides significantly shortened treatment courses
compared with conventional fractionation, thereby
providing less time off of full-dose systemic doses
of chemotherapy. Furthermore, shortened treatment courses improve quality of life with less time
away from work and family (24). Although additional investigation is needed, there is mounting
evidence demonstrating the utility of SBRT in the
management of this difficult disease.

SBRT in Locally-Advanced
Pancreatic Cancer
SBRT for the treatment of pancreatic cancer was
first reported by Koong et al. at Stanford. This
phase I dose escalation study involved 15 patients
with locally-advanced pancreatic cancer (25). The
patients underwent fiducial marker placement followed by CT simulation performed 1 to 2 weeks
later using Alpha Cradle immobilization. Treatment
was performed using a breath-hold technique on
the CyberKnife® platform. The starting dose was
15 Gy, the next dose was 20 Gy, and the highest dose
was 25 Gy delivered in one fraction. The maximum
tolerated dose was defined as greater than 50% of
patients experiencing a grade 3 or higher toxicity.
During the 12-week follow-up time, no grade 3 or
higher acute GI toxicity was observed. Of the evaluable patients treated at the 25-Gy dose, the median
OS was 8 months. All of the patients treated at
the highest dose had local control either at the last
follow-up or until death. A phase II study was conducted by the same group evaluating the efficacy of
concurrent 5-FU with IMRT followed by an SBRT
boost in 19 patients with locally-advanced pancreatic cancer (26). Patients in the study were treated
with IMRT to the primary tumor and regional
lymph nodes receiving a dose of 45 Gy in 1.8-Gy
fractions with either concurrent 5-FU or capecitabine. Within 1 month of finishing chemoradiation, the patients completed an SBRT boost to the
pancreatic tumor. Sixteen of the 19 patients completed the planned treatment with three patients
developing distant disease prior to the SBRT
boost. Grade 3 toxicity was reported in 12.5% of
the patients, with additional patients developing

Heron_68566_PTR_13_201-214_08-23-18.indd 203

203

duodenal ulcers 4 to 6 months after completing
treatment. The median OS for the entire cohort was
33 weeks with a 93.8% local control rate prior to
death. OS in the study was poor overall because of
rapid systemic progression.
A phase II study performed in Denmark was
conducted by Hoyer et al. and showed high toxicity with poor treatment outcomes (27). This study
involved 22 patients, 19 with inoperable primary
pancreatic cancer and 3 with local recurrence following Whipple resection, with all tumors measuring less than 6 cm in diameter. The GTV was
delineated and the clinical target volume (CTV)
included the GTV with surrounding edema. A 5-mm
radial and 10-mm superior–inferior margin was used
to create the PTV. Treatment was delivered using
standard linear accelerators with a planned dose of
45 Gy in three fractions. Of note, the median volume receiving above 67% of the prescription dose
was 136 cm3, which was relatively large, thought
to be attributed to uncertainty in defining the
CTV because of reaction and edema of the adjacent tissues. The study did not include CT- or
fiducial-based image guidance. On the basis of
imaging response that was unclear because of
treatment-related fibrosis, 9% of patients had a
partial response with the remaining patients having
stable or progressive disease. Local progression was
observed in six patients (27%) with only one patient
having an isolated local failure. The median survival
time was 5.4 months and the 1-year OS was 5%.
Following treatment, there was a significant decrease
in performance status as well as increased pain and
nausea. Four patients (18%) experienced severe
mucositis or stomach/duodenum ulceration and one
patient (5%) required surgery for an ulcer with perforation of the stomach. This study concluded that
SBRT for pancreatic cancer was of questionable benefit with severe toxicity.
Because of the high metastatic disease burden
associated with pancreatic cancer, subsequent
studies incorporated systemic therapy with SBRT.
In a follow-up prospective study from the Stanford group, the efficacy of a single fraction of
SBRT interdigitated with full-dose gemcitabine for
patients with locally-advanced disease was investigated (28). Patients were treated with gemcitabine
1,000 mg/m2 weekly on days 1, 8, and 15 followed
by a single fraction of 25 Gy of SBRT delivered
on day 29. Following 2 or more weeks after RT,
weekly gemcitabine was restarted with a 3-week-on,
1-week-off schedule until disease progression or
treatment intolerance. The GTV was delineated

21/08/18 2:08 PM

204

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

using a PET scan as guidance and the internal target
volume (ITV) was created on the basis of the respiratory-gated CT scans. An additional 2- to 3-mm
uniform expansion was created for the PTV. The
median target volume was 48 cm3, compared with
136 cm3 in the Danish study (27). Acute toxicities included pain and gastritis in 19% of patients
with one patient with gastric outlet obstruction
symptoms requiring J-tube placement. Late toxicities occurred in 47% of patients surviving greater
than 4 months after RT. Five patients were treated
for ulcers (grade 2); one patient required a duodenal stent for a stricture (grade 3); and one patient
required surgery for a duodenal perforation. The
median survival was 11.4 months with 50% of
patients alive at 1 year and local disease progression in 19%.
The Stanford group conducted a separate phase II
trial evaluating toxicity, local control, and OS in
patients treated with sequential gemcitabine and
SBRT delivered using a linear accelerator rather
than CyberKnife (on which their previous studies
were based) (29). The chemotherapy and radiation
schedule and dose were the same as the prior study
with a minimum of 2 weeks required between
SBRT and restarting gemcitabine (28). Following SBRT, three to five cycles of additional gemcitabine were recommended. Target delineation
was performed in the same manner as on the prior
study (28). All 20 patients in the study completed
RT and a median of five chemotherapy cycles
following SBRT. No acute grade 3 or greater toxicities were observed and only one patient experienced a late grade 3 or higher toxicity, which was a
duodenal perforation requiring surgery 5.4 months
after SBRT. Three additional patients developed
grade 2 toxicity (two gastric ulcers, one duodenal
ulcer), which was treated medically. The median
survival was 11.8 months with a 1-year survival
of 50%. The median time to progression was
9.2 months and 10% of patients had local recurrence as the first site of progression.
A retrospective study from Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center conducted by Mahadevan
et al. reported on 36 locally-advanced, unresectable pancreatic cancer patients treated using a
three-fraction SBRT approach followed by gemcitabine (30). The CTV was defined as the gross
disease with a 5-mm or less margin except where
the tumor was in contact with the bowel. It is
important to note that this was not the PTV, but
rather was used to prevent any areas of decreased
dose adjacent to the tumor directly outside the

Heron_68566_PTR_13_201-214_08-23-18.indd 204

prescription volume. The radiation dose was
determined based on the proximity of the tumor
to the duodenum with a maximum dose of 36 Gy,
an intermediate dose of 30 Gy, and a minimum
dose of 24 Gy to the PTV delivered in three fractions using the CyberKnife platform. Patients were
recommended to start chemotherapy 1 month after
completing SBRT. Treatment was well tolerated
with 25% of patients experiencing grade 2 toxicity,
primarily nausea. Grade 3 toxicity was observed
in 14% of patients. There were two patients who
developed GI bleeding following treatment that
required transfusion. At a median follow-up of
24 months, the local control rate was high at 78%
with a median OS of 14.3 months. As expected, 78%
of patients eventually developed distant metastasis.
A follow-up retrospective study from the same
group reported on the use of SBRT between cycles
of chemotherapy for 47 patients with locallyadvanced pancreatic cancer (31). Patients completed two cycles of gemcitabine 1,000 mg/m2
delivered weekly with 3 weeks on and 1 week off.
Following the second cycle, patients were restaged.
Patients without metastatic disease received a
third dose of gemcitabine and completed fiducial placement followed by SBRT planning. After
SBRT completion, patients received gemcitabine
until progression or intolerance. SBRT was performed in the same manner as in the prior study
(30). Grade 2 toxicity was observed in 23% of the
patients and consisted of nausea requiring antiemetics. Although no acute grade 3 toxicities were
observed, 9% of patients experienced late grade 3
toxicity including two duodenal bleeds requiring
transfusions and endoscopy and one patient with
gastric outlet obstruction. In one of the duodenal
bleeds and the gastric outlet obstruction, it was
uncertain whether the toxicity was from treatment
or related to tumor progression. Of the 47 patients
included in the study, eight developed metastatic
disease after two cycles of gemcitabine. The median
follow-up was 21 months and the median OS was
20 months for patients who completed SBRT. Of
the patients who were treated with SBRT, the local
control rate was quite high at 85%, whereas 54%
of the patients developed metastatic disease.
A prospective Italian study also evaluated treating patients with locally-advanced pancreatic cancer with SBRT and gemcitabine (32). Twenty-three
patients were treated with gemcitabine 1,000 mg/
m2 delivered weekly for 6 weeks prior to SBRT.
Treatment volumes were planned according to
Koong et al. (25). A dose of 30 Gy in three fractions

21/08/18 2:08 PM

13: PANCREAS SBRT

was delivered using the CyberKnife system. Following treatment, patients resumed gemcitabine.
No grade 2 or greater toxicities were observed. At a
median follow-up of 9 months, the median OS was
10.6 months. Ultimately, 8% of patients became
resectable.
In a separate prospective study from Georgetown, Gurka et al. evaluated the safety of delivering SBRT for 10 unresectable pancreatic cancer
patients who were receiving concurrent gemcitabine
(33). Following gold marker placement, patients
were treated with gemcitabine 1,000 mg/m2
delivered on days 1, 8, and 15. SBRT was delivered during cycle 1, week 4. Cycle 2 of gemcitabine
was then administered without any planned delay.
Patients also underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) prior to any treatment and at 2 and
6 months following treatment to assess mucosal
toxicity. Patients who were tolerating gemcitabine
without any issues continued for a maximum of six
cycles. The GTV included the pancreatic tumor and
the PTV encompassed the GTV plus adjacent vasculature without additional margin. The PTV was
planned to receive 25 Gy delivered in five fractions
over 5 days. Of note, the mean PTV was relatively
large with a mean volume of 360 cm3. However,
patients tolerated treatment well with no grade 3
acute toxicities and no delays in initiating cycle
2 of gemcitabine. On serial EGDs, grade 1 mucosal
ulcerations were seen in 60% of patients at
2 months after treatment, all of whom were
asymptomatic. At 6 months, there were no grade
2 or higher mucosal toxicities. Local control was
suboptimal with six patients (60%) developing a
local progression before death. The median OS was
12.2 months. In a follow-up retrospective study
from the same group, 38 patients treated with
SBRT and chemotherapy were reviewed, which
included locally-advanced, borderline resectable,
and medically inoperable patients (34). SBRT
planning and delivery was performed in the same
manner as in the pilot study; however, chemotherapy regimens on the study also included modified
FOLFOX (fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin), 5-FU, and capecitabine in addition to gemcitabine (33). Patients were treated with either 25 or
30 Gy delivered in five fractions. There were three
grade 3 or greater late toxicities including one
grade 5 toxicity because of gastric hemorrhage. At
a median follow-up of 7.2 months, the local control
rate was 79% with a trend toward significance for
improved local control with 30 Gy versus 25 Gy.
The median OS was 14.3 months.

Heron_68566_PTR_13_201-214_08-23-18.indd 205

205

Multiple other groups have explored the use of
multifraction regimens. Goyal et al. reported on
20 patients with locally-advanced pancreatic cancer treated on a prospective database at University
Hospitals-Case Medical Center (35). The median
prescription dose was 25 Gy (range, 20–30 Gy)
delivered in one to three fractions. Grades 1 to
2 toxicity were observed in 11% of patients and
16% of patients developed GI ulcers that were
managed medically. FFLP at 6 months and 1 year
were 88% and 65%, respectively, and the median
OS was 14.4 months. The overall local control rate
was 81%. Pollom et al. conducted a retrospective
review comparing single-fraction with five-fraction
SBRT in 167 patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer treated at Stanford (36). No differences in cumulative incidence rates (CIRs) of local
recurrence or survival were observed between the
single-fraction and multifraction groups. At 1 year,
the CIR of local recurrence for patients treated
with a single-fraction and multifraction regimen
was 9.5% and 11.7%, respectively. The survival
rates at 1 year for the single-fraction and multifraction regimens were 30.8% and 34.9%, respectively. However, there was a difference in toxicity
with significantly fewer occurrences of grade 2 or
higher toxicity with the multifraction regimen.
A retrospective study from Johns Hopkins
reported on the use of a five-fraction regimen for
both locally-advanced and borderline resectable
pancreatic cancer (37). A total of 88 patients were
reviewed with 84% of the patients with locallyadvanced disease. The PTV was defined as the
GTV with a 2- to 3-mm margin to account for
microscopic disease and setup error with exclusion
of critical structures that was primarily bowel. The
PTV received a dose of 25 to 33 Gy in five fractions.
Treatment was well tolerated with an acute grade
3 or higher GI toxicity rate of 3.4% with one case
of grade 4 GI bleeding. Late grade 2 or higher GI
toxicity was observed in 5.7% of patients with one
grade 5 toxicity. The median OS was very promising at 18.4 months. Of note, 21.6% of patients
underwent surgical resection (84% of these had
R0 resection), with 79% of those patients having
locally-advanced disease at presentation. Moffitt
Cancer Center also published their experience
using a five-fraction SBRT regimen following
induction chemotherapy (38,39). In an updated
review consisting of 159 patients, all patients
reviewed received at least one dose of induction
chemotherapy with SBRT delivery at least 1 week
following the last chemotherapy dose (39). RT was

21/08/18 2:08 PM

206

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

delivered using IMRT with a planned dose of 28 to
30 Gy to the PTV with use of dose painting up to 50
Gy to areas of vessel involvement. Treatment was
well tolerated with 7% of patients experiencing a
grade 3 or higher acute and/or late toxicity with
the most common toxicity consisting of a GI bleed.
With a median follow-up of 14 months, the median
OS was also high at 18.1 months. For locallyadvanced patients treated with FOLFIRINOX
(oxaliplatin, irinotecan, 5-fluorouracil), 24%
were able to undergo an R0 resection. A trend for
improved survival was seen in the locally-advanced
patients able to undergo resection.
A recent Italian study reported promising results
using a six-fraction regimen (40). This phase II
study reported by Comito et al. used volumetricmodulated arc therapy (VMAT) to deliver a dose
of 45 Gy in six fractions to patients with locallyadvanced pancreatic cancer (40). The PTV was
created by adding a 5-mm radial and 10-mm
superior–inferior margin. A total of 45 patients
were enrolled in the study with 43 patients evaluable. The majority (71%) of patients received preSBRT chemotherapy completed at least 2 weeks
prior to SBRT. There were no acute or late grade
3 or higher toxicities reported. At a median
follow-up of 13.5 months, FFLP was 87% at 1 year
with a median OS from diagnosis of 19 months.
Herman et al. conducted a single-arm phase II
multi-institutional study to determine whether
gemcitabine delivered with more prolonged fractionated SBRT would reduce late grades 2 to
4 GI toxicity when compared with the early Stanford experience of gemcitabine and a single 25-Gy
fraction of SBRT (41). A total of 49 patients
with locally-advanced pancreatic cancer (<7.5 cm)
received up to three doses of 1,000 mg/m2 of
gemcitabine followed by a 1-week break and then
SBRT with additional gemcitabine until progression or toxicity. The SBRT dose was 33 Gy delivered in five fractions. At a median follow-up from
SBRT of 13.9 months, 2% of patients experienced acute (within 90 days of SBRT) grade 2 or
higher GI toxicity, whereas 11% experienced late
(>90 days from SBRT) grade 2 or higher GI toxicity.
The 1- and 2-year OS rates were 59% and 18%,
respectively, and the 1-year FFLP rate was 78%.
Following treatment, five patients were deemed to
be resectable and four underwent surgery with all
of the patients completing a margin- and lymph
node–negative resection.
A summary of selected prospective studies is
provided in Table 13.1. Given the reasonable local

Heron_68566_PTR_13_201-214_08-23-18.indd 206

control and acceptable toxicity rates, a multifraction regimen has evolved as the preferred SBRT
regimen for locally-advanced pancreatic cancer.
Indeed, the dosing regimen of 33 Gy in five fractions from the aforementioned single-arm phase II
trial now serves as the preferred dose in patients
randomized to SBRT for the borderline resectable
Alliance A021501 randomized phase II trial (42).
A021501 is the first trial to prospectively test SBRT
in patients with pancreatic cancer in a cooperative
group setting in North America.

SBRT in the Preoperative Setting
Surgical resection offers the only possibility of cure
for localized pancreatic cancer (4). However, only
15% to 20% of patients are able to undergo resection at initial diagnosis (43). Neoadjuvant therapy
including RT has the potential to select patients
who develop early metastasis and would not benefit from surgical resection (43). It also allows for
tumor downstaging, increases the possibility of an
R0 resection, and eradicates occult micrometastatic disease (43).
Data about the use of SBRT for borderline
resectable pancreatic patients is currently limited,
but is an area of increased interest. Rajagopalan
et al. reported on the University of Pittsburgh
experience using neoadjuvant chemotherapy and
SBRT prior to surgery for borderline resectable
and locally-advanced pancreatic cancer patients
(44). Twelve patients were included in the study,
with 92% receiving chemotherapy prior to SBRT
treatment. Patients were treated with either 24 Gy
in a single fraction or 30 to 36 Gy in three fractions. Patients completed surgery at a mean time
of 3.3 months following SBRT. Two patients developed pseudoaneurysms felt to be related to SBRT
with one patient dying from complications related
to this toxicity. An R0 resection was achieved in
91.7% of patients with 25% achieving a complete
pathologic response to treatment. The median OS
for the study was 47.2 months with a 1-year OS of
92%. The retrospective series from Moffitt Cancer
Center by Mellon et al. included 110 patients with
borderline resectable disease (39). A total of 51%
of the patients underwent curative intent resection
with the remaining 49% developing local or distant
progression or a decline in performance status that
prohibited resection. An R0 resection was achieved
in 96% of the borderline resectable group with a
median OS of 19.2 months. A small number of
borderline resectable patients were included in the

21/08/18 2:08 PM

13: PANCREAS SBRT

207

TABLE 13.1 Selected Prospective Studies of SBRT in Pancreatic Cancer

Study

Patients (n)

SBRT Dose/
Fraction

Chemotherapy

1-Year Local
Control (%)

Median Survival
(months)

Toxicity

Koong
et al. (25)

15

15–25 Gy/one
fraction

None

100

11

33% grades 1–2
0% grade 3

Koong
et al. (26)

16

45 Gy IMRT
followed by
25 Gy/one
fraction boost

5-FU with IMRT

94

8.3

69% grades 1–2
12.5% grade 3

Hoyer
et al. (27)

22

45 Gy/three
fractions

None

57

5.4

79% grade 2+

Schellenberg
et al. (28)

16

25 Gy/one
fraction

Induction/
adjuvant
gemcitabine

100

11.4

6% acute grade 3+
13% late grade 3+

Schellenberg
et al. (29)

20

25 Gy/one
fraction

Induction/
adjuvant
gemcitabine

94

11.8

0% acute grade 3+
5% late grade 3+

Polistina
et al. (32)

23

30 Gy/three
fractions

Induction
gemcitabine

50

10.6

0% grade 2+

Gurka
et al. (33)

10

25 Gy/five
fractions

Concurrent
gemcitabine

40

12.2

0% grade 3+

Herman
et al. (41)

49

33 Gy/five
fractions

Induction/
adjuvant
gemcitabine

78

13.9

2% acute grade 2+
11% late grade 2+

5-FU, fluorouracil; IMRT, intensity-modulated radiation therapy; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

review of the Johns Hopkins experience with SBRT
by Moningi et al. (37). Of the 14 borderline resectable patients included in the study, four underwent
surgery. Overall, 84% of patients had R0 resections
with a completed pathologic response observed in
16% of patients and a partial response in 74%.
Patients who were able to complete resection had
a median OS of 20.2 months compared with those
unable to complete surgery, 12.3 months.
A dose escalation phase 1 study was performed
at Emory University for patients with borderline
resectable disease (45). Patients were treated with
modified FOLFIRINOX (mFOLFIRINOX) administered every 14 days for four treatments. SBRT
was then started 2 weeks after completing chemotherapy. The PTV included any gross disease and
areas of at-risk microscopic spread with a uniform
5-mm margin. Lymph nodes were not included in
the volume. The posterior margin, the area at the
highest risk of a positive margin, was defined as
the volume between the posterior 1 cm of the GTV
and either the mesenteric vessels or the soft tissues in the retroperitoneum, or both. There were
four dose levels for the study. Dose level 1 for the
PTV was 30 Gy in three fractions and for dose

Heron_68566_PTR_13_201-214_08-23-18.indd 207

levels 2 to 4, the PTV dose was 36 Gy in three fractions. For the posterior (retroperitoneal) margin,
a simultaneous integrated boost (SIB) was used
and varied by dose level. For dose levels 1 and 2,
the SIB was 6 Gy. For dose level 3, it was 7.5 Gy
and for dose level 4, it was 9 Gy. RT was planned
and delivered using VMAT. A total of 13 patients
were accrued with 12 patients who completed
the planned treatment course with three patients
treated at each dose level. No dose-limiting or
grades 3 to 4 toxicities were observed on the study.
Five patients (42%) in the study were not able to
complete surgical resection because of progressive
disease with one local progression and four distant
progressions reported. The remaining eight patients
underwent an R0 resection with 63% of the patients
requiring vessel reconstruction. The postoperative adverse events were as expected. Of the eight
patients who completed resection, only one local
recurrence was reported. At a median follow-up of
18 months, the median OS was 11 months.
Although there are limited data on the use of
SBRT in the preoperative setting, the available
studies show that it is a useful neoadjuvant therapy
with a high rate of margin-negative resections and

21/08/18 2:08 PM

208

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

no apparent increase in treatment-related toxicity,
although additional larger prospective studies are
needed. A currently enrolling study in the United
Kingdom, the “SPARC” trial, is a phase I dose
escalation study with borderline resectable pancreatic cancer patients using five-fraction SBRT with
an SIB to the area at the highest risk of a positive
margin followed by resection (46). In the United
States, the Alliance A021501 randomized phase
II clinical trial is testing the role of hypofractionated RT in borderline resectable patients by randomizing patients to preoperative mFOLFIRINOX
versus mFOLFIRINOX followed by hypofractionated RT (ranging from 5 or 6.6 Gy per fraction in
five fractions with up to 8 Gy per fraction allowed
to the tumor–vessel interface) (42). Additional
prospective studies including the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with SBRT in borderline
resectable patients are also being conducted at
the University of Maryland and University of
Pittsburgh (47,48).

SBRT in the Postoperative Setting
SBRT can also be considered after resection for
close or positive margins; however, data regarding the use of SBRT as adjuvant therapy following resection is even more limited. A study by
Rwigema et al. from the University of Pittsburgh
published a retrospective series consisting of
24 patients treated using primarily a single-fraction
regimen (49). The majority (66.7%) of patients
treated had a positive margin, whereas the balance (33.3%) had margins that were 1 to 2.5 mm
from the retroperitoneal, vascular structures, and
periduodenal adipose tissue. Patients were treated
with a median dose of 24 Gy in one fraction to
a relatively small median volume of 11 cm3.
The majority of patients were treated with chemotherapy both before and after SBRT. The
overall local control rates were 66% and 44% at
1 and 2 years, respectively, with 87.5% with close
margins and 62.5% of those patients with positive margins not progressing locally. The median
OS was 26.7 months with 1- and 2-year OS
rates of 80.4% and 57.2%, respectively. Overall,
79% of patients were able to start or continue
with chemotherapy at a median of 18 days postSBRT. There were no grade 3 or higher toxicities
reported. Additional studies including prospective trials need to be performed to determine the
efficacy and safety of SBRT as adjuvant therapy,
particularly in the setting of a close or positive
resection margin.

Heron_68566_PTR_13_201-214_08-23-18.indd 208

SBRT in the Recurrent Setting
Although distant failure remains the predominant
cause of death in pancreatic cancer, local recurrence is the cause of death in approximately 30%
of patients (3,4). Treatment options for patients
with an isolated local recurrence are limited, particularly in patients who have had prior adjuvant
or definitive RT (50). A systematic review by Groot
et al. found that mortality for treatment of an
isolated local recurrence with re-resection, chemoradiation, and SBRT was quite low (0%–1%),
but morbidity could be quite high reaching approximately 30% with re-resection and 50% with
chemoradiation, but only 3% with SBRT (51).
Furthermore, in patients with likely incurable
disease, a repeat laparotomy can adversely affect
patient quality of life (51). SBRT is a noninvasive
method of delivering a high radiation dose to an
area of local recurrence with the goal of improved
local control.
Several studies have reported on the use of SBRT
in the reirradiation setting for a local recurrence. A
pooled retrospective review of patients treated at
Johns Hopkins and Stanford with reirradiation for
an isolated locally recurrent pancreatic cancer was
reported by Wild et al. (52). A total of 18 patients
were included in the study with 15 receiving resection earlier with adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemoradiation and three patients treated with definitive
chemoradiation. The median dose for the first
course of RT was 50.4 Gy. Patients were treated
using a five-fraction regimen with a median dose
of 25 Gy. Median survival following SBRT was
8.8 months. FFLP at 6 and 12 months following
SBRT was 78% and 62%, respectively. Treatment
was well tolerated with no acute grade 3 or higher
toxicity and only one patient (6%) who developed
late toxicity with a small bowel obstruction. A
retrospective study from Harvard also reported
on 30 patients reirradiated with SBRT for recurrent pancreatic cancer (50). Patients included
in the study either completed adjuvant RT after
resection or were treated with definitive conventional chemoradiation or SBRT. All patients were
felt to be unresectable at the time of recurrence
and received systemic therapy both before and
after SBRT delivery. Patients were treated to a
total SBRT dose of 24 to 36 Gy (median 25 Gy)
in three to five fractions (median 5). The median
OS following SBRT for recurrence was 14 months
with local control rates of 78% at 1 and 2 years.
Treatment was well tolerated with a rate of acute
and late grade 3 or higher toxicity of 11% and

21/08/18 2:08 PM

13: PANCREAS SBRT

7%, respectively. In the difficult setting of a local
recurrence after either resection or treatment with
adjuvant or definitive radiation/chemoradiation,
SBRT offers a potential therapeutic option to gain
local control with acceptable toxicity. Additional
studies are needed, however, particularly in the
prospective setting, to further define the role of
SBRT for recurrent pancreatic cancer.

TREATMENT PLANNING
AND DELIVERY
Patient Selection
Ideally, patients with pancreatic cancer should be
evaluated by a multidisciplinary team specializing
in GI malignancies including surgical oncology,
medical oncology, radiation oncology, radiology,
and pathology in addition to other supportive staff
such as palliative medicine and nutrition (53). As
part of the staging workup, patients should undergo
endoscopy for tissue diagnosis and possible stent
placement in the setting of a biliary obstruction, and
to evaluate the presence or extent of local invasion.
A relative contraindication to SBRT is direct
invasion of the tumor into the duodenum or stomach (53). Although patients with positive lymph
nodes are not necessarily excluded given that the
regional lymph nodes can sometimes be included
in the target volume as long as dose constraints are
still met, extensive regional lymphadenopathy is a
relative contraindication to SBRT (41,53). Given
the high risk of distant metastasis, SBRT delivery following induction chemotherapy with either
mFOLFIRINOX or gemcitabine/nab-paclitaxel
is preferred and has been shown to be feasible
and well tolerated in multiple studies (28,29,31–
33,39,41,45). Ideally, patients should undergo
restaging studies prior to delivery of SBRT to rule
out the presence of metastatic disease.

Treatment Simulation
Prior to completing CT simulation, patients should
undergo either CT or endoscopic ultrasonography
(EUS)-guided fiducial marker placement either into
or adjacent to the tumor approximately 1 day prior
to CT simulation because of possible seed migration (53,54). Because tumors cannot be seen on kV
imaging or cone-beam CT, fiducial markers allow
for precise alignment with the treatment planning
CT and for fluoroscopic verification of the tumor
motion during respiration. CT simulation should be
performed with the patient in the supine position

Heron_68566_PTR_13_201-214_08-23-18.indd 209

209

with arms up using an Alpha Cradle with/without
a wing board or equivalent custom immobilization device to allow reproducible setup during
treatment. The patient should ideally fast 2 hours
prior to the scan and both intravenous (100 mL)
and oral (240 mL) Omnipaque contrast should be
used, if possible, for the simulation scan to better
delineate the stomach, small bowel, and vasculature (41).
A four-dimensional CT should be performed
to evaluate tumor motion during the respiratory
cycle. For patients with more than 3 to 5 mm of
motion, motion management techniques should
be implemented that may include active breathing
control, respiratory gating, and end-expiration or
end-inspiration breath hold (53,55). Treatment
with expiratory breath hold has been shown to
decrease the dose to the duodenum compared
with treatment during the inspiratory phase, likely
because of inferior displacement of the diaphragm
that approximates the bowel closer to the PTV
(56). Likewise, abdominal compression is felt to be
less optimal because of possible movement of the
duodenum and stomach toward the PTV during
compression (53,55). Patients with less than 3 to
5 mm of motion can be treated using an ITV on the
basis of the tumor motion during the respiratory
cycle.

Target Delineation
Delineation of the GTV can be accomplished
using the CT simulation scan or other diagnostic imaging including MRI or PET/CT. For the
CT simulation scan, dual-phase imaging with
both arterial and portal venous phases can be
useful for accurately delineating the GTV. The
arterial phase helps determine the extent of vascular involvement, whereas the tumor is typically
best visualized in the venous phase. PET has
been used in multiple studies for treatment volume definition (28,29,36,37,41). If PET is used,
obtaining the PET/CT in the treatment position
to more accurately define the GTV is preferred
(54). For patients treated prior to resection, both
the tumor–vessel interface and regional lymph
nodes greater than 1.5 cm should be included in
the GTV when possible (53). The ITV can then
be determined based on tumor motion during the
respiratory cycle and a 0- to 5-mm uniform expansion is made to create the PTV on the basis of
institutional preference and setup (53). The PTV
can then be modified based on adjacent organs
at risk including the duodenum, stomach, and

21/08/18 2:08 PM

210

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

(A)

(B)

FIGURE 13.1 Targets and organs at risk for stereotactic body radiation therapy for treatment of pancreatic head cancer.
Axial (A) and coronal (B) views. This patient was treated using respiratory gating with fiducials that are not visible in the CT
slices shown. The targets include the GTV (teal) and PTV (red). The organs at risk include stomach (purple), liver (green),
duodenum (orange), right kidney (blue), left kidney (green), bowel (brown), and spinal cord (pink).

GTV, gross tumor volume; PTV, planning target volume.

bowel, but should always include both the GTV
and the ITV (55). The organs at risk that should
be contoured include the duodenum, stomach,
bowel, liver, spinal cord, and kidneys. An atlas
is available from the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group to standardize and to assist with contouring of these structures (57). An example of
SBRT target and organ-at-risk delineation for the
treatment of a pancreatic head lesion is shown in
Figure 13.1.

Dose Fractionation and Dose Constraints
for Treatment Planning
Both single-fraction and multifraction regimens
have been investigated and shown to be effective. On the basis of retrospective data from
Stanford, although the local control and OS rates
between the two regimens were similar, there
was significantly more GI toxicity in the single-fraction group (36). Numerous studies have
used a multifraction regimen consisting of three
to six fractions ( 31,32,34,37,39,40,45 ). The
multi-institutional phase II study by Herman
et al. used a dose of 33 Gy in five fractions
following induction gemcitabine with good local
control and acceptable toxicity (41). In the preoperative setting, dose painting has been used to
deliver a higher dose to areas at risk for a positive
margin with favorable results (45).
The dose that can be safely delivered to the
PTV is dependent on the location of the tumor.
Tumors of the pancreatic head may be limited
by the dose to the adjacent duodenum, whereas
doses to pancreatic body or tail tumors may be
limited by the small bowel or stomach tolerance.
Ideally, 95% of the PTV receives the prescribed

Heron_68566_PTR_13_201-214_08-23-18.indd 210

dose while meeting the objectives for the organs
at risk. However, dose heterogeneity may be
greater than 15% to 20% because of strict dose
constraints. Dose constraints used in the multiinstitution phase II study by Herman et al. are
included in Table 13.2 (41). Murphy et al. used
the Stanford single-fraction experience to determine dose–volume histogram end points and
maximum doses to 1 cm3 (Dmax) that were predictive of duodenal toxicity (58). A Dmax value
less than 23 Gy, V15 value less than 9.1 cm3, and
V20 value less than 3.3 cm3 were all predictive of
lower rates of duodenal toxicity. Duodenal and
bowel toxicities of concern include hemorrhage,
ulcer, stricture, and perforation.

TABLE 13.2 Dose Constraints for Pancreas Stereotactic
Body Radiation Therapy
Organ at Risk

Constraints

Proximal duodenuma

V15 <9 mL
V20 <3 mL

Bowel

V15 <9 mL
V20 <3 mL

Proximal bowela

V33 <1 mL

Stomach

V15 <9 mL
V20 <3 mL
V12 <50%

Proximal stomacha

V33 <1 mL

Liver

V12 <50%

Combined kidneys

V12 <75%

Spinal cord

V8 <1 mL

aProximal structure includes 1 cm superior and inferior to the planning
target volume.

21/08/18 2:08 PM

13: PANCREAS SBRT

Treatment Planning and Delivery
SBRT delivery can be performed with either linear accelerator-based or CyberKnife-based platforms. For treatment using linear accelerators,
either IMRT or VMAT can be used. Daily image
guidance should be used with kV or fluoroscopic
imaging, or cone-beam CT (53). The use of
high-definition multileaf collimators and flattening filter-free beams permits delivery of a highly
conformal treatment with reduced treatment time
(59). An example of an acceptable and an unacceptable treatment plan is shown in Figure 13.2.
Treatment can be delivered on consecutive days.
Physicians should consider starting patients on a
proton pump inhibitor prior to starting SBRT and
should continue for at least 6 months following
treatment. Prophylactic antiemetics should also be
considered for the patient.

TREATMENT FOLLOW-UP

211

Tumors (PERCIST). PET was superior in determining local progression with CT alone diagnosing
approximately 50% of cases of local progression.
Evaluating the treatment response to SBRT with
imaging remains an area of active investigation
and standardization is critical for comparison with
future studies.

Outcome Data
Numerous prospective and retrospective studies of
SBRT for pancreatic cancer have been published
with a range of reported outcomes. The largest prospective study to date reported a 1-year local control rate of 78% with a median OS of 13.9 months
(41). On the basis of a systematic review and pooled
analysis of 19 studies consisting of 1,009 patients
treated with SBRT for locally-advanced pancreatic
cancer, the pooled 1-year OS was 51.6% with a
median OS of 17 months (5.7–47 months; 61).
The locoregional control rate at 1 year was 72.3%.

Follow-Up Imaging

Quality of Life

Follow-up imaging with CT is limited because of
posttreatment inflammatory changes making it
difficult to differentiate between anticipated postSBRT changes and progressive disease. Toesca
et al. reported on the use of PET to evaluate local
progression following SBRT for pancreatic cancer (60). Both fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET
and a pancreatic protocol CT were obtained 3
to 6 months following SBRT and local progression was defined based on the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) and the
FDG-PET Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid

As part of the multi-institutional trial by Herman
et al., quality of life was assessed using the European Organization for Research and Treatment of
Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire and pancreatic
cancer-specific QLQ-PAN26 module pre-SBRT and
at 4 to 6 weeks and 4 months post-SBRT (62). No
changes in quality of life from pre-SBRT to either
follow-up time point were observed. Patients reported
a significant improvement in pancreatic pain at
1 month, but this returned to the pre-SBRT levels
by 2 months. Role functioning at 2 months was
noted to be significantly decreased compared with

(A)

(B)

FIGURE 13.2 Example of stereotactic body radiation therapy plans for treatment of pancreatic head cancer. This patient

was treated using respiratory gating with fiducials. The targets include the GTV (teal) and PTV (red). The organs at risk
include stomach (purple), liver (green), duodenum (orange), right kidney (blue), bowel (brown), and spinal cord (pink).
For each plan, the 3,300-cGy (yellow), 3,135-cGy (dark blue), 2,000-cGy (cyan), 1,650-cGy (light green), and 1,500-cGy
(pink) isodose lines are shown. (A) Dynamic conformal arc planning was used with 6-MV photons. This plan was not
acceptable because of stomach V15 >9 cm3. As seen, the 1,500-cGy isodose line extends far into the stomach. (B) Volumetricmodulated arc therapy planning was used with 6-MV photons. This was an acceptable plan with all dose constraints and
acceptable coverage of the target.
GTV, gross tumor volume; PTV, planning target volume.

Heron_68566_PTR_13_201-214_08-23-18.indd 211

21/08/18 2:08 PM

212

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

baseline, although it is uncertain whether this
decrease is secondary to the disease or the treatment.
For patients diagnosed with pancreatic cancer, which
remains largely an incurable disease, quality of life
assessment is an essential part of future studies.

CONCLUSIONS
Pancreatic cancer remains a deadly disease that is
resistant to currently available therapies. The use of
RT with conventional fractionation provides some
local control, but rates of local failure remain high.
SBRT is an emerging therapy for the treatment of

pancreatic cancer that allows for expedited treatment of radiation over a shorter time interval. Data
for pancreas SBRT are accumulating for the definitive treatment of locally-advanced disease as well
as for the preoperative, adjuvant, and recurrent settings. Overall, treatment outcomes with pancreas
SBRT have been favorable with acceptable rates
of toxicity. Although additional studies are needed,
pancreas SBRT appears to be a promising new therapy in the management of this lethal disease.

SUMMARY OF DOSE CONSTRAINTS
(TABLE 13.3)

TABLE 13.3 SBRT-Required OARs and Dose Constraints
Description

Planning System Name

Constraints

(iGTV + iTVI) + 3 mm

PTV1

PTV1: 25 Gy, Dmin >22.5 Gy

PTVV1 PRVGi

PTV2

PTV2: 33 Gy, Dmin >29.7 Gy

(iTVI + 3 mm) – PRVGi

PTV3

PTV3: 36 Gy, Dmin >32.4 (maximum of 40 Gy)

OAR
Duodenum

Constraints
Duodenum

V20 <20 mL
V35 <1 mL

Small bowel (other)

Bowel

V20 <20 mL
V35 <1 mL

Stomach

Stomach

V20 <20 mL
V35 <1 mL

Liver

Liver

V12 <50%

Combined kidneys

Kidneys

V12 <25%

Spinal cord

Spinal cord

V20 <1 mL

Spleen

Spleen

No constraint

OAR, organ at risk; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

REFERENCES
1. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2017. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2017;67(1):7-30. doi:10.3322/caac.21387
2. Ilic M, Ilic I. Epidemiology of pancreatic cancer. World
J Gastroenterol. 2016;22(44):9694-9705. doi:10.3748/wjg.
v22.i44.9694
3. Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Fu B, Yachida S, et al. DPC4 Gene
status of the primary carcinoma correlates with patterns
of failure in patients with pancreatic cancer. J Clin Oncol.
2009;27(11):1806-1813. doi:10.1200/JCO.2008.17.7188
4. Ryan DP, Hong TS, Bardeesy N. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
N Engl J Med. 2014;371(22):2140-2141. doi:10.1056/
NEJMc1412266
5. Conroy T, Desseigne F, Ychou M, et al. Folfirinox
versus gemcitabine for metastatic pancreatic cancer.

Heron_68566_PTR_13_201-214_08-23-18.indd 212

N Engl J Med. 2011;364(19):1817-1825. doi:10.1056/
NEJMoa1011923
6. Von Hoff DD, Ervin T, Arena FP, et al. Increased survival
in pancreatic cancer with nab-paclitaxel plus gemcitabine.
N Engl J Med. 2013;369(18):1691-1703. doi:10.1056/
NEJMoa1304369
7. Merrell KW, Haddock MG, Quevedo JF, et al. Predictors of locoregional failure and impact on overall survival
in patients with resected exocrine pancreatic cancer. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2016;94(3):561-570. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2015.11.003
8. Kalser MH, Ellenberg SS. Pancreatic cancer: adjuvant combined radiation and chemotherapy following curative resection.
Arch Surg. 1985;120(8):899-903. PubMed PMID: 4015380.
9. Klinkenbijl JH, Jeekel J, Sahmoud T, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy and 5-fluorouracil after curative resection of cancer

21/08/18 2:08 PM

13: PANCREAS SBRT
of the pancreas and periampullary region: phase III trial
of the EORTC gastrointestinal tract cancer cooperative
group. Ann Surg. 1999;230(6):776-782. PubMed PMID:
10615932.
10. Neoptolemos JP, Dunn JA, Stocken DD, et al. Adjuvant
chemoradiotherapy and chemotherapy in resectable pancreatic cancer: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2001;358(9293):1576-1585. PubMed PMID: 11716884.
11. Neoptolemos JP, Stocken DD, Friess H, et al. A randomized trial of chemoradiotherapy and chemotherapy after
resection of pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;350(12):
1200-1210. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa032295
12. Regine WF, Winter KA, Abrams R, et al. Fluorouracil-based
chemoradiation with either gemcitabine or fluorouracil chemotherapy after resection of pancreatic adenocarcinoma:
5-year analysis of the U.S. Intergroup/RTOG 9704 phase III
trial. Ann Surg Oncol. 2011;18(5):1319-1326. doi:10.1245/
s10434-011-1630-6
13. Regine WF, Winter KA, Abrams RA, et al. Fluorouracil vs
gemcitabine chemotherapy before and after fluorouracilbased chemoradiation following resection of pancreatic
adenocarcinoma: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2008;299(9):1019-1026. doi:10.1001/jama.299.9.1019
14. Hishinuma S, Ogata Y, Tomikawa M, et al. Patterns of recurrence after curative resection of pancreatic cancer, based on
autopsy findings. J Gastrointest Surg. 2006;10(4):511-518.
doi:10.1016/j.gassur.2005.09.016
15. Moertel CG, Frytak S, Hahn RG, et al. Therapy of locally
unresectable pancreatic carcinoma: a randomized comparison of high dose (6000 rads) radiation alone, moderate
dose radiation (4000 rads + 5-fluorouracil), and high dose
radiation + 5-fluorouracil: the gastrointestinal tumor study
group. Cancer. 1981;48(8):1705-1710. PubMed PMID:
7284971.
16. Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Treatment of locally
unresectable carcinoma of the pancreas: comparison of
combined-modality therapy (chemotherapy plus radiotherapy) to chemotherapy alone. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1988;
80(10):751-755. PubMed PMID: 2898536.
17. Loehrer Sr PJ, Feng Y, Cardenes H, et al. Gemcitabine alone
versus gemcitabine plus radiotherapy in patients with locally
advanced pancreatic cancer: an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group trial. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(31):4105-4112.
doi:10.1200/JCO.2011.34.8904
18. Chauffert B, Mornex F, Bonnetain F, et al. Phase III trial
comparing intensive induction chemoradiotherapy
(60 Gy, infusional 5-Fu and intermittent cisplatin) followed by maintenance gemcitabine with gemcitabine
alone for locally advanced unresectable pancreatic
cancer: definitive results of the 2000-01 FFCD/SFRO
study. Ann Oncol. 2008;19(9):1592-1599. doi:10.1093/
annonc/mdn281
19. Small Jr W, Berlin J, Freedman GM, et al. Full-dose gemcitabine with concurrent radiation therapy in patients
with nonmetastatic pancreatic cancer: a multicenter phase
II trial. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(6):942-947. doi:10.1200/
JCO.2007.13.9014
20. Ben-Josef E, Schipper M, Francis IR, et al. A phase I/II trial
of intensity modulated radiation (IMRT) dose escalation
with concurrent fixed-dose rate gemcitabine (FDR-G) in
patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;84(5):1166-1171. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2012.02.051
21. Hammel P, Huguet F, van Laethem JL, et al. Effect of
chemoradiotherapy vs chemotherapy on survival in patients
with locally advanced pancreatic cancer controlled after

Heron_68566_PTR_13_201-214_08-23-18.indd 213

213

4 months of gemcitabine with or without erlotinib: the LAP07
randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2016;315(17):1844-1853.
doi:10.1001/jama.2016.4324
22. Timmerman R, Paulus R, Galvin J, et al. Stereotactic
body radiation therapy for inoperable early stage lung
cancer. JAMA. 2010;303(11):1070-1076. doi:10.1001/
jama.2010.261
23. Videtic GM, Hu C, Singh AK, et al. A randomized phase 2
study comparing 2 stereotactic body radiation therapy
schedules for medically inoperable patients with stage
I peripheral non-small cell lung cancer: NRG Oncology
RTOG 0915 (NCCTG N0927). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2015;93(4):757-764. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.07.2260
24. Shaitelman SF, Schlembach PJ, Arzu I, et al. Acute and
short-term toxic effects of conventionally fractionated vs
hypofractionated whole-breast irradiation: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA Oncol. 2015;1(7):931-941. doi:10.1001/
jamaoncol.2015.2666
25. Koong AC, Le QT, Ho A, et al. Phase I study of stereotactic radiosurgery in patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2004;58(4):
1017-1021. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2003.11.004
26. Koong AC, Christofferson E, Le QT, et al. Phase II study
to assess the efficacy of conventionally fractionated radiotherapy followed by a stereotactic radiosurgery boost
in patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005;63(2):320-323. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2005.07.002
27. Hoyer M, Roed H, Sengelov L, et al. Phase-II study on stereotactic radiotherapy of locally advanced pancreatic carcinoma. Radiother Oncol. 2005;76(1):48-53. doi:10.1016/
j.radonc.2004.12.022
28. Schellenberg D, Goodman KA, Lee F, et al. Gemcitabine
chemotherapy and single-fraction stereotactic body
radiotherapy for locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008;72(3):678-686. doi:10.
1016/j.ijrobp.2008.01.051
29. Schellenberg D, Kim J, Christman-Skieller C, et al.
Single-fraction stereotactic body radiation therapy and
sequential gemcitabine for the treatment of locally
advanced pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2011;81(1):181-188. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.05.006
30. Mahadevan A, Jain S, Goldstein M, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy and gemcitabine for locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;78(3):
735-742. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.08.046
31. Mahadevan A, Miksad R, Goldstein M, et al. Induction
gemcitabine and stereotactic body radiotherapy for locally
advanced nonmetastatic pancreas cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;81(4):e615-e622. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2011.04.045
32. Polistina F, Costantin G, Casamassima F, et al. Unresectable
locally advanced pancreatic cancer: a multimodal treatment
using neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (gemcitabine plus
stereotactic radiosurgery) and subsequent surgical exploration. Ann Surg Oncol. 2010;17(8):2092-2101. doi:10.1245/
s10434-010-1019-y
33. Gurka MK, Collins SP, Slack R, et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy with concurrent full-dose gemcitabine for locally
advanced pancreatic cancer: a pilot trial demonstrating safety.
Radiat Oncol. 2013;8:44. doi:10.1186/1748-717X-8-44
34. Gurka MK, Kim C, He AR, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy (SBRT) combined with chemotherapy for unresected pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Am J Clin Oncol. 2014;40(2):152-157. doi:10.1097/
COC.0000000000000118

21/08/18 2:08 PM

214

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

35. Goyal K, Einstein D, Ibarra RA, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for nonresectable tumors of the pancreas. J Surg Res. 2012;174(2):319-325. doi:10.1016/
j.jss.2011.07.044
36. Pollom EL, Alagappan M, von Eyben R, et al. Single versus multifraction stereotactic body radiation therapy for
pancreatic adenocarcinoma: outcomes and toxicity. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2014;90(4):918-925. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2014.06.066
37. Moningi S, Dholakia AS, Raman SP, et al. The role of
stereotactic body radiation therapy for pancreatic cancer:
a single-institution experience. Ann Surg Oncol. 2015;
22(7):2352-2358. doi:10.1245/s10434-014-4274-5
38. Chuong MD, Springett GM, Freilich JM, et al. Stereotactic
body radiation therapy for locally advanced and borderline
resectable pancreatic cancer is effective and well tolerated. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013;86(3):516-522.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.02.022
39. Mellon EA, Hoffe SE, Springett GM, et al. Long-term outcomes of induction chemotherapy and neoadjuvant stereotactic body radiotherapy for borderline resectable and
locally advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Acta Oncol.
2015;54(7):979-985. doi:10.3109/0284186X.2015.1004367
40. Comito T, Cozzi L, Clerici E, et al. Can stereotactic body
radiation therapy be a viable and efficient therapeutic option
for unresectable locally advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma? Results of a phase 2 study. Technol Cancer Res Treat.
2017;16(3):295-301. doi:10.1177/1533034616650778
41. Herman JM, Chang DT, Goodman KA, et al. Phase 2 multiinstitutional trial evaluating gemcitabine and stereotactic
body radiotherapy for patients with locally advanced unresectable pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Cancer. 2015;121(7):
1128-1137. doi:10.1002/cncr.29161
42. Alliance A021501. Preoperative extended chemotherapy
vs. chemotherapy plus hypofractionated radiation therapy
for borderline resectable adenocarcinoma of the head of
the pancreas. March 14, 2017. Available at: https://www.
clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02839343
43. Shaib WL, Ip A, Cardona K, et al. Contemporary management of borderline resectable and locally advanced unresectable pancreatic cancer. Oncologist. 2016;21(2):178-187.
doi:10.1634/theoncologist.2015-0316
44. Rajagopalan MS, Heron DE, Wegner RE, et al. Pathologic
response with neoadjuvant chemotherapy and stereotactic
body radiotherapy for borderline resectable and locally
advanced pancreatic cancer. Radiat Oncol. 2013;8:254.
doi:10.1186/1748-717X-8-254
45. Shaib WL, Hawk N, Cassidy RJ, et al. A phase 1 study of
stereotactic body radiation therapy dose escalation for
borderline resectable pancreatic cancer after modified folfirinox (NCT01446458). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2016;96(2):296-303. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2016.05.010
46. Holyoake DL, Ward E, Grose D, et al. A phase-I trial of preoperative, margin intensive, stereotactic body radiation therapy for pancreatic cancer: the ‘SPARC’ trial protocol. BMC
Cancer. 2016;16(1):728. doi:10.1186/s12885-016-2765-4
47. University of Pittsburgh. Phase II study of neoadjuvant
chemotheraphy (gemcitabine and nab-paclitaxel vs. mFOLFIRINOX) and sterotatic body radiation therapy for borderline resectable pancreatic cancer. Available at: https://
clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02241551. Updated June
15, 2018. Accessed March 10, 1017.
48. University of Maryland. Neoadjuvant FOLFIRINOX and
stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) followed by
definitive surgery for patients with borderline resectable

Heron_68566_PTR_13_201-214_08-23-18.indd 214

pancreatic adenocarcinoma: a single-arm pilot study.
Available at: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01992705.
Accessed March 10, 2017.
49. Rwigema JC, Heron DE, Parikh SD, et al. Adjuvant stereotactic body radiotherapy for resected pancreatic adenocarcinoma with close or positive margins. J Gastrointest Cancer.
2012;43(1):70-76. doi:10.1007/s12029-010-9203-7
50. Dagoglu N, Callery M, Moser J, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) reirradiation for recurrent pancreas cancer.
J Cancer. 2016;7(3):283-288. doi:10.7150/jca.13295
51. Groot VP, van Santvoort HC, Rombouts SJ, et al. Systematic review on the treatment of isolated local recurrence
of pancreatic cancer after surgery: re-resection, chemoradiotherapy and SBRT. HPB (Oxford). 2017;19(2):83-92.
doi:10.1016/j.hpb.2016.11.001
52. Wild AT, Hiniker SM, Chang DT, et al. Re-irradiation with
stereotactic body radiation therapy as a novel treatment
option for isolated local recurrence of pancreatic cancer after
multimodality therapy: experience from two institutions.
J Gastrointest Oncol. 2013;4(4):343-351. doi:10.3978/
j.issn.2078-6891.2013.044
53. Moningi S, Marciscano AE, Rosati LM, et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy in pancreatic cancer: the new
frontier. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2014;14(12):
1461-1475. doi:10.1586/14737140.2014.952286
54. Hajj C, Goodman KA. Pancreatic cancer and SBRT:
a new potential option? Rep Pract Oncol Radiother.
2015;20(5):377-384. doi:10.1016/j.rpor.2015.05.008
55. Hong JC, Czito BG, Willett CG, et al. A current perspective
on stereotactic body radiation therapy for pancreatic cancer.
Onco Targets Ther. 2016;9:6733-6739. doi:10.2147/OTT.
S99826
56. Taniguchi CM, Murphy JD, Eclov N, et al. Dosimetric
analysis of organs at risk during expiratory gating in
stereotactic body radiation therapy for pancreatic cancer.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013;85(4):1090-1095.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2012.07.2366
57. Jabbour SK, Hashem SA, Bosch W, et al. Upper abdominal
normal organ contouring guidelines and atlas: a Radiation
Therapy Oncology Group consensus. Pract Radiat Oncol.
2014;4(2):82-89. doi:10.1016/j.prro.2013.06.004
58. Murphy JD, Christman-Skieller C, Kim J, et al. A dosimetric model of duodenal toxicity after stereotactic
body radiotherapy for pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;78(5):1420-1426. doi:10.1016/j.
ijrobp.2009.09.075
59. Scorsetti M, Alongi F, Castiglioni S, et al. Feasibility and
early clinical assessment of flattening filter free (FFF) based
stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) treatments. Radiat
Oncol. 2011;6:113. doi:10.1186/1748-717X-6-113
60. Toesca DA, Pollom EL, Poullos PD, et al. Assessing local
progression after stereotactic body radiation therapy for
unresectable pancreatic adenocarcinoma: CT versus PET.
Pract Radiat Oncol. 2017;7(2):120-125. doi:10.1016/
j.prro.2016.09.002
61. Petrelli F, Comito T, Ghidini A, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for locally advanced pancreatic cancer:
a systematic review and pooled analysis of 19 trials. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2017;97(2):313-322. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2016.10.030
62. Rao AD, Sugar EA, Chang DT, et al. Patient-reported
outcomes of a multicenter phase 2 study investigating
gemcitabine and stereotactic body radiation therapy in
locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Pract Radiat Oncol.
2016;6(6):417-424. doi:10.1016/j.prro.2016.05.005

21/08/18 2:08 PM

C H A P T E R

14

Adrenal SBRT
Priscilla K. Stumpf and Karyn A. Goodman

The role of radiation therapy (RT) in the treatment
of adrenal tumors has been limited until recent
years and, historically, RT for adrenal tumors has
been limited to palliation for pain (1–3). However, with the advent of stereotactic body radiation
therapy (SBRT; also known as stereotactic ablative radiation therapy [SABR]), which allows for
highly conformal, high-dose radiation treatment
delivered in a limited number of fractions, the role
of radiation in the treatment of adrenal tumors is
expanding (4,5). This chapter reviews the emerging literature on SBRT for primary adrenocortical
carcinomas (ACCs) and metastatic lesions in the
adrenal glands.

only approximately 10% of ACC cases in the
United States having received RT as part of
their management (6,8,9). Unfortunately, up
to 85% of patients develop disease recurrence
even after complete (R0) surgical resection (10).
When used, RT is typically delivered in conventional fractionation at 1.8 to 2 Gy per fraction
to the postoperative adrenal bed or an unresectable adrenal tumor (11). One study by Desai
et al. described a single case of SBRT with
CyberKnife® to a primary ACC tumor delivering
20 Gy over five fractions (12). This patient failed
locally 4 months after SBRT and died 11 months
after SBRT.

INDICATIONS FOR ADRENAL
STEREOTACTIC BODY
RADIATION THERAPY

Secondary Adrenal Tumors—Adrenal
Metastases

Primary Adrenal Tumors—Adrenocortical
Carcinoma
ACC is a rare malignancy with only 9 to 46 cases
reported per year between 1973 and 2000, according to the National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database (6). The mainstay of curative-intent therapy
for ACC is complete tumor resection and the goal
of adjuvant therapy has been to decrease disease
recurrence through suppressing adrenal cortical
hormone production with the drug, mitotane (7).
RT, whether adjuvant or definitive, is rarely
used, with large database studies (National Cancer
Database [NCDB], and SEER databases) citing

More commonly, malignant tumors of the adrenal gland represent metastases from another primary site. One autopsy study of 1,000 patients
with metastatic carcinoma of multiple primary
sites revealed that the adrenal gland had metastatic involvement by the primary cancer in 27%
of patients (13). This study found that 54%, 36%,
24%, and 21% of breast, lung, renal, and gastric
cancer, respectively, had adrenal metastases. Surgery with an adrenalectomy is usually the first-line
approach for patients with adrenal metastases,
particularly in the setting of oligometastatic disease (defined as having one to five metastases).
A pooled analysis by Tanvetyanon et al. evaluated the role of adrenalectomy in patients with
non–small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with adrenal
215

Heron_68566_PTR_14_215-226_08-23-18.indd 215

21/08/18 2:08 PM

216

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

metastases (14). The analysis included 10 publications with 114 patients, 42% of whom had synchronous (disease-free interval [DFI] 6 months)
metastases and 58% had metachronous (DFI
>6 months) disease. Patients with metachronous
disease as compared with those with synchronous
disease had a greater median overall survival (OS;
31 months vs. 12 months, respectively; p = .02)
after adrenalectomy. The 1- and 2-year survival
rates were 80% and 52% for metachronous
disease and 45% and 30% for synchronous disease, respectively. Approximately one-quarter of
all resected patients with both metachronous and
synchronous lesions remained alive at 5 years.
Although surgical resection remains the accepted
gold standard for patients with adrenal metastases, a
select number of patients are not good surgical candidates on the basis of medical comorbidities, difficult anatomy, local tumor invasion, and personal
preference. Although there are no randomized controlled trials comparing the efficacy of adrenalectomy
with SBRT for adrenal metastases, recent findings
that evaluate the use of ablative local RT have been
promising. Typically the use of SBRT has been confined to patients with oligometastatic disease who
are not amenable to surgical resection in an effort to
improve progression-free survival (PFS) (5).

SELECTION CRITERIA FOR
ADRENAL STEREOTACTIC BODY
RADIATION THERAPY
The published studies evaluating adrenal SBRT
are summarized in Table 14.1 (4,15–24). Patient
selection for SBRT was based on a variety of factors. Patients were required to have biopsy-proven
diagnosis of malignancy with or without specific
biopsy-proven adrenal metastasis (15,23). If the
adrenal metastasis was unable to be biopsied for
confirmation, patients could be included if PET
scan revealed evidence of metastases (15,23).
Many of the studies based eligibility on limited
number of metastases, often requiring an oligometastatic state, and control of systemic disease by
either local or systemic therapies (4,15,16,21,22).
However, if adrenal metastases were symptomatic,
these patients were also eligible (4,15,19,21). Most
studies emphasized inclusion of patients discussed
in a multidisciplinary setting who were thought to be
poor surgical candidates or who may have refused
surgery (16,18,20,21). Patients had to have a good
performance status, Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group (ECOG) score of 0 to 2 (16,23) or 0 to

Heron_68566_PTR_14_215-226_08-23-18.indd 216

1 (21), or a Karnofsky Performance Status (KPS)
of 70% or greater (20). In these published experiences, patients were excluded if they had uncontrolled, unaddressed systemic disease (15) and if
life expectancy was less than 3 to 6 months (20,23).
On the basis of their review of the literature,
demonstrating encouraging 2-year local control
rates, Ippolito et al. emphasize that patients selected
for SBRT should have a better prognosis, similar
to patients who would be considered for surgery.
Selection would include patients with limited
metastases (less than or equal to five lesions, disease confined to less than or equal to two organs)
and a DFI of greater than 6 months (5).
As SBRT delivers very high-dose radiation, individual patient anatomy must also be considered.
Depending on tumor size and nearby organs at risk
(OARs), some patients may not be ideal candidates
for SBRT. Dose constraints to OARs are discussed
later in this chapter.

OUTCOMES USING STEREOTACTIC
BODY RADIATION THERAPY FOR
ADRENAL METASTASES
Reported outcomes in patients undergoing SBRT
for adrenal metastases reveal promising survival
results (Table 14.1). Oshiro et al. reported 1-year
OS of 83%, and 2- and 5-year OS of 56% each
for patients with metachronous adrenal metastases (21). This is comparable to patients undergoing adrenalectomy with 1- and 2-year survival
rates of 80% and 52%, respectively (14). Similar findings are reported by Guiou et al. with an
improved survival in patients with metachronous
disease (18). OS rates ranged from 78% to 90%
at 1 year and are comparable to the outcomes after
adrenal metastasectomy reported in retrospective
series (20,22). Prospective studies comparing the
efficacy and toxicity of adrenal SBRT with those
of adrenal metastasectomy could provide essential data to assist in selecting the optimal modality on the basis of individual patient and disease
characteristics.

IMAGING CHARACTERISTICS
OF ADRENAL LESIONS
It is important to note the unique imaging characteristics of an adrenal tumor not only for treatment
planning but also for accurate assessment of metastatic disease. Nonfunctioning adenomas are the
most common adrenal lesion, although metastases

21/08/18 2:08 PM

Heron_68566_PTR_14_215-226_08-23-18.indd 217

TABLE 14.1 Summary of Published Studies Evaluating Outcomes of Adrenal SBRT

Author (Citation)

No. of Patients

Ahmed (P) (15)

13

Barney (P) (16)

No. of
Lesions

Median
Total Dose
(Gy)

No. of
Fractions

Local Control

Overall Survival

Volumes

13

Lung, kidney,
skin, other

GTV = CTV
PTV = ITV + 5 mm

45

5

12.3 months—100%

12 months—62.9%

6

6

GI, lung,
kidney, other

GTV = CTV
PTV = ITV + 5 mm

45

5

6 months—98%
12 months—87%

6 months—90%
12 months—62%

Casamassima
(R) (17)

48

48

Lung, colon,
melanoma,
other

GTV = CTV
PTV = ITV + 3 mm

36

3

12 months—90%
24 months— 90%

12 months—39.7%
24 months—14.5%

Chawla (R) (4)

30

35

Lung, liver,
breast, other

GTV = CTV
PTV = CTV +
7–10 mm

40

10

6 months—91%
12 months—55%
24 months—27%

12 months—44%
24 months—25%

Guiou (R) (18)

9

10

Lung

NR

24.9 (mean)

5

12 months—44%
24 months—44%

12 months—52%
24 months—13%

Holy (R) (19)

18

18

Lung

CTV = GTV + 2 mm
PTV = CTV +
5–10 mm

40

5

Median PFS—4.2
months

Median—21 months

Katoh (P) (20)

9

10

Lung,
prostate,
kidney, liver

CTV = GTV + 3
mm
PTV = CTV + 5 mm

48

8

12 months—100%

12 months—78%

Oshiro (R) (21)

11 (eight
underwent
conventional
fractionation)

19

Lung

CTV = GTV
PTV = CTV +
5–10 mm

45

10

NR

12 months—55.6%
24 months—33.4%
60 months—22.3%

Rudra (P) (22)

10

13

Lung, kidney

ITV
PTV = ITV +
5–10 mm

36

3

12 months—73%

12 months—90%

Scorsetti (R) (23)

34

36

Lung, melanoma, other

CTV = GTV + 3 mm
PTV = CTV + 5 mm

32

4

12 months—66%
24 months—32%

24 months—53%

Torok (R) (24)

7

9

Lung, liver

GTV = CTV
PTV = ITV

16 (for five
lesions)
27 (for four
lesions)

16 Gy delivered
in one fraction
27 Gy delivered
in three fractions

12 months—63%

Median—8 months

CTV, clinical target volume; GI, gastrointestinal; GTV, gross tumor volume; ITV, internal target volume; NR, not reported; P, prospective; PFS, progression-free survival; PTV, planning target volume; R, retrospective; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

14: ADRENAL SBRT

Primary Site

217

21/08/18 2:08 PM

218

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

FIGURE 14.2 Axial PET-CT demonstrating right-sided
adrenal tumor with FDG avidity.

FDG, fluorodeoxyglucose.

FIGURE 14.1 Axial, contrast-enhanced CT showing a
right-sided adrenal tumor.

are the most common malignancy of the adrenal
gland (25), and it is thus imperative to accurately
discern metastases from benign adenomas. On
an unenhanced CT scan, a value of equal to or
lesser than 10 Hounsfield units (HU) is indicative of a benign lesion with 71% sensitivity and
98% specificity (25). Figure 14.1 displays a right
adrenal metastasis. Washout on a contrasted CT
scan can also be used to differentiate between
benign adenoma and metastatic disease. An absolute washout of 60% or higher is 86% to 88%
sensitive and 92% to 96% specific for an adrenal adenoma (25). Adrenal metastases often also
present as large (>4–6 cm) masses of the adrenal
gland with interval change in size, irregular shape,
necrosis, and invasion of nearby structures. The
likelihood of such a lesion to represent metastatic
disease increases greatly when a patient has a
known primary cancer (26). PET-CT can also be used
to assess 18-F fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) avidity
suggestive of adrenal malignancy (27) (Figure 14.2).
ACC is more easily distinguished from benign
disease because these tumors are typically large at
the time of initial imaging, often ranging from 4
to 25 cm (28). Common imaging characteristics
of ACC include irregular tumor margins, central
intratumoral necrosis or hemorrhage, heterogeneous enhancement, invasion into adjacent structures, venous extension (renal vein or inferior vena
cava), and calcification (29). On MRI T1-weighted
images, ACC is typically iso- to hypointense as compared with the liver (28). MRI is more useful than
CT in determining invasion into adjacent structures

Heron_68566_PTR_14_215-226_08-23-18.indd 218

and vasculature involvement (28). At the time of
radiation planning, use of any available diagnostic
imaging, including PET-CT, contrast-enhanced CT,
and/or MRI, is important for accurate tumor
assessment and contour delineation.

STEREOTACTIC BODY RADIATION
THERAPY PLANNING AND
DELIVERY CONSIDERATION
Motion Management
Patient immobilization is a critical aspect of SBRT
planning and delivery and institution-specific
devices should be implemented at the time of CT
simulation. Abdominal organ motion must be considered when designing SBRT for adrenal lesions.
Adrenal motion is primarily in the superior to inferior (SI) direction with usually less than 2 mm of
motion in the anterior to posterior or transverse
directions (30,31). Wang et al. specifically evaluated the motion of adrenal gland tumors using
fiducials that had been placed for CyberKnife treatment. Fiducials had the greatest motion distance
in SI direction with a range of 5 to 12 mm (32).
Furthermore, the study found that motion distance was independent of age, height, weight,
and tumor size. The authors report that because
of the presence of the liver, right-sided adrenal
tumors have smaller motion amplitude in the SI
direction. There are several mechanisms that can
be applied to reduce tumor motion in the planning
of SBRT, specifically motion related to respiration. Methods to account for respiratory motion
include the use of motion-encompassing imaging

21/08/18 2:08 PM

14: ADRENAL SBRT

(i.e., four-dimensional CT [4DCT], slow CT, inhalation and exhalation breath-hold CT), respiratory
gating, breath-hold techniques, forced shallow
breathing (FSB) with abdominal compression, and
real-time tumor tracking (33). Typically, the use of
abdominal compression is implemented if tumor
motion/diaphragmatic excursion is found to be
5 mm or more at the time of simulation. Use of
these methods is often institutionally determined,
but tumor motion should ultimately be accounted
for in contour delineation and motion should be
managed with patient coaching techniques, patient
devices, and/or real-time tumor tracking. If the
tumor motion is relatively minimal, an internal
target volume (ITV) can also be determined based
on the 4DCT at simulation. This would encompass
the target at its maximal dimensions throughout
the breathing cycle. However, when choosing margin expansions necessary secondary to motion in
SBRT planning, a treating physician should consider
motion artifact in the simulation CT, respiratory
cycle variations, and patient-specific tumor motion
(33). An ITV was used in five of the 11 studies
displayed in Table 14.1. The use of lorazepam to
reduce liver motion has also been evaluated in a
randomized controlled trial (34), which demonstrated that lorazepam at the time of simulation
and treatment could further reduce tumor motion.
Fiducial markers can help to facilitate daily setup
and can be used for intrafraction motion assessment
to verify appropriate timing of delivery of RT when
using respiratory gating. Although fiducial marker
placement is not mandatory and routine use of fiducials is dependent on the ability to have interventional radiologists place them in a timely fashion,
they can aid in the accuracy of SBRT delivery.

Target Delineation
To contour the target volume, available diagnostic
imaging including PET-CT, CT, and/or MRI should
be fused with the CT acquired at the time of simulation. The gross tumor volume (GTV) should
be delineated on cross-sectional images from the
planning CT scans acquired at the time of simulation fused with diagnostic CTs. In many of the
studies, the clinical target volume (CTV) was often
equal to the GTV with no additional margin (4,15–
17,21,24). In those that expanded the GTV to a
CTV, a range of 2 to 3 mm was used. Finally, a planning target volume (PTV) is generated to account
for daily setup error, breath-hold reproducibility,
and internal motion (if an ITV is not defined; 33).

Heron_68566_PTR_14_215-226_08-23-18.indd 219

219

In prior adrenal SBRT studies, a margin of 0 to
10 mm was applied as reported in Table 14.1. This
margin should be determined institutionally as
setup reproducibility is dependent on departmental
positioning procedures, immobilization, frequency
of portal imaging, and presence or absence of
fiducial markers (33).
It is important to also contour OARs as it is imperative to constrain the dose to these critical structures.
The critical organs that should be contoured include
the spinal cord, kidneys, liver, duodenum, small
and large bowel, and stomach. Consensus guidelines put forth by the Radiation Therapy Oncology
Group (RTOG) exist for contouring upper abdominal organs and are available online to assist in delineating upper abdominal structures (35). Figure 14.3
displays an axial slice from the RTOG contouring
atlas. Table 14.2 displays the contouring guidelines
for abdominal organs with definitions from the
aforementioned RTOG atlas as well as a current
open clinical trial: “Phase 1 Study of Stereotactic
Body Radiotherapy (SBRT) for the Treatment of
Multiple Metastases” (NRG-BR001 Protocol; 36).

Dose Constraints to Critical Structures
The normal critical structures at risk include the
spinal cord, kidneys, liver, duodenum, small and
large bowel, and stomach. The dose constraints
used in the published adrenal SBRT studies are
listed in Table 14.3. Common constraints used
in these studies for a five-fraction regimen to the
bowel (stomach, duodenum, and small and large
intestines) are as follows: maximum point dose less
than 42 Gy; V38 Gy less than or equal to 5 mL;
V32.5 Gy less than or equal to 15 mL; and V20
Gy less than or equal to 30 mL (15,16). Per the
NRG-BR001 Protocol, dose constraints to OARs
are displayed in Table 14.4 for both three- and
five-fraction SBRT (36).

Dose Fractionation for
Treatment Planning
The studies listed in Table 14.1 have used a wide
range of total doses (median dose range of
16–48 Gy) over a range of 1 to 10 fractions. The
current clinical trial NRG-BR001 uses a prescription dose of 45 Gy delivered in three fractions with
a decreased dose of 42 Gy in three fractions if
dose-limiting toxicities are reported. In the single
institutional, retrospective review of CyberKnife
for adrenal tumors by Desai et al., biological

21/08/18 2:08 PM

220

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

FIGURE 14.3 Axial contrast-enhanced CT depicting normal upper abdominal structures (35).
Source: Jabbour SK, Hashem SA , Bosch W, et al. Upper abdominal normal organ contouring guidelines and atlas: a Radiation Therapy
Oncology Group consensus. Pract Radiat Oncol. 2014; 4(2): 82–89. doi:10.1016/j.prro.2013.06.004

TABLE 14.2 Contouring Guidelines for Abdominal Organs as per the RTOG Consensus Panel and NRG Oncology
Organ

Contouring Guidelines

Liver (35)

Gallbladder should be excluded
IVC should be excluded when discrete from liver
PV should be included in liver contour when caudate lobe is seen to left of PV

Pancreas (35)

Sits at level of L1 to L3
Pancreatic head sits to right of SMA
Uncinate process, extension of head of pancreas, is posterior to SMV that abuts aorta
posteriorly
Pancreatic body is between celiac trunk and SMA where it lies anterior to aorta
Pancreatic tail is to the left of the SMA and SMV

Stomach (35)

Includes the following: cardia (begins at GEJ), fundus (most cephalad, abuts left
hemidiaphragm, left and superior to cardia), body (central, largest portion), antrum
(gateway to the pylorus)
Oral contrast or water recommended for optimal delineation of gastric wall

Duodenum (35)

First portion: Begins after pylorus, retroperitoneal after first ~5 cm where it is suspended by
hepatoduodenal ligament
Second (descending) portion: Starts at superior duodenal flexure, attached to head of pancreas,
~7.5 cm in length, located to right of IVC at levels L1 to L3
Third (transverse) portion: Crosses in front of aorta and IVC and is posterior to SMA and SMV,
about 10 cm, marks end of C-loop of duodenum
Fourth (ascending) portion: Travels superiorly until it is adjacent to inferior pancreatic body,
~2.5 cm long, lies anteriorly to the IMV until IMV moves medially at the transition to the
jejunum
(continued)

Heron_68566_PTR_14_215-226_08-23-18.indd 220

21/08/18 2:08 PM

14: ADRENAL SBRT

221

TABLE 14.2 (continued)
Organ

Contouring Guidelines

Spinal cord (36)

The spinal cord will be contoured based on the bony limits of the spinal canal ending
at L2
The spinal cord should be contoured starting at least 10 cm above the superior extent
of the PTV and continuing on every CT slice to at least 10 below the inferior extent of
the PTV

Lung (36)

Both right and left lungs contoured as one structure
Contouring should be carried out using pulmonary windows
All inflated and collapsed lung should be contoured

Kidney (36)

Both right and left kidneys, excluding renal pelvis/collecting system, should be contoured in
their entirety (the renal cortex)

Bowel (small and large)
(36)

From the ileocecal area to include the ascending, transverse, descending, and sigmoid colon as
one structure

IVC, inferior vena cava; PV, portal vein; SMA, superior mesenteric artery; SMV, superior mesenteric vein; GEJ, gastro-esophageal junction;
PTV, planning target volume.

TABLE 14.3 Dose Constraints Used in the Published Adrenal SBRT Experiences
Author (Citation)

Organ

Dose Constraint

Ahmed (15)

Bowel (stomach, duodenum, small and large
intestines)

For five fractions:
Maximum point dose <42 Gy
V38 Gy ≤5 mL
V32.5 Gy ≤15 mL
V20 Gy ≤30 mL

Barney (16)

Hollow viscous organs

For three fractions:
Maximum dose ≤37 Gy
V30 Gy ≤5 mL
V24 Gy ≤15 mL
V15 Gy ≤30 mL

Casamassima (17)

Kidney, ipsilateral
Duodenum/small bowel
Stomach
Liver

For three fractions:
V15 Gy <35%
V27 Gy <2%
V25 Gy <2%
D700 cm3 (healthy tissue)
<15 Gy

Chawla (4)

DVH data reported, but
no planning constraints
given

Guiou (18)

NR

NR

Holy (19)

NR

NR

Katoh (20)

Stomach and duodenum
Kidney, ipsilateral
(assuming contralateral had
sufficient enhancement on
CT and
normal Cr)

For eight fractions:
V35 Gy <1 mL
V20 Gy <50%

Oshiro (21)

NR

NR

Rudra (22)

NR

NR

Scorsetti (23)

Spinal cord, kidneys, liver

“As low as possible”

For five fractions:
Maximum dose ≤42 Gy
V38 Gy ≤5 mL
V32.5 Gy ≤15 mL
V20 Gy ≤30 mL

Cr, creatinine; DVH, dose–volume histogram; NR, not reported; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_14_215-226_08-23-18.indd 221

21/08/18 2:08 PM

222

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

TABLE 14.4 Dose Constraints for Organs at Risk as per
the NRG-BR001 Protocol
Organ

Dose Constraint

Spinal cord

V22.5 Gy <0.03 cm3

Three fractions

V13 Gy <1.2 cm3
Stomach

V30 Gy <0.03 cm3
V22.5 Gy <10 cm3

Duodenuma

V24 Gy <0.03 cm3
V15 Gy <10 cm3

Bowela

V34.5 Gy <0.03 cm3
V24 Gy <20 cm3

Kidney, ipsilateral

V12.3 Gy <130 cm3

Kidney, total

V15 Gy <200 cm3

Renal hilum/
vascular trunk

V19.5 Gy < 15 cm3

Liver

V17.1 Gy < 700 cm3

Spinal cord

V28 Gy <0.03 cm3

Five fractions

V22 Gy <0.35 cm3
V15.6 Gy <1.2 cm3
Stomach

V35 Gy <0.5 cm3
V26.5 Gy <5 cm3

Duodenuma

V30 Gy <0.5 cm3
V18.3 Gy <5 cm3

Bowela

V40 Gy <0.03 cm3
V28.5 Gy <20 cm3

Kidney, ipsilateral

NR

Kidney, total

V18 Gy <200 cm3

Renal hilum/
vascular trunk

V23 Gy <15 cm3

Liver

V21 Gy <700 cm3

aAvoid circumferential radiation.
NR, not reported.

equivalent dose (BED) was found to be the most
important predictor for local control (12). The
authors report that the duration of adrenal tumor
control correlated with calculated mean BED
of 76 Gy for local failures versus 96.76 Gy for
those who achieved local control. Higher BED
correlating with improved local control has been

Heron_68566_PTR_14_215-226_08-23-18.indd 222

corroborated in other trials as well (16). Specifically,
a BED of more than or equal to 100 Gy significantly
improves local control in hypofractionated RT in
patients treated with SBRT for Stage I NSCLC
(37,38). In the largest retrospective single-institution
reported study of SBRT for adrenal metastases
including 48 patients published by Casamassima
et al., the majority of patients received a dose of
36 Gy delivered in three fractions prescribed to
the 70% isodose with 17.14 Gy per fraction at the
isocenter (17). The actuarial local control rate was
90% at 1 and 2 years. As reported in their manuscript, the maximum BED10 (biological effective
dose for / = 10 Gy) value in 36 Gy in three fractions was 137.3 Gy. There were no reported cases
of acute gastrointestinal (GI), hepatic, or renal
toxicity. There was one reported case of adrenal
insufficiency. When deciding upon prescribed dose,
the critical structures nearby should be considered to mitigate toxicity. Certainly, hollow viscous
organs such as bowel pose challenges in safe dose
escalation to the adrenal gland.

Treatment Planning
Planning can be delivered via different platforms.
Linear-accelerated-based treatment planning is
common and is discussed here. Planning techniques can include three-dimensional conformal
radiation therapy (3DCRT)–SBRT or intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT)–SBRT
approach. Typically, 7 to 13 static radiation fields
are used with equal weighting. The prescription
isodose line covering 95% of the PTV is generally
80% to 90% (range of 60%–90%), whereas the
maximum dose is 100% (36). This will result in a
“hotspot” within the PTV that is greater than the
prescription dose. This “hotspot” should be placed
within the tumor itself away from OARs (36).
Dynamic conformal arcs can also be used to deliver
SBRT. Scorsetti et al. used five to seven noncoplanar arcs of 30° (23). Tissue heterogeneity corrections should be used. Patients are usually treated
every other day for three or five fractions (18,36),
although treatment has been delivered on consecutive days (16). Image-guided radiation therapy (IGRT) is essential in the delivery of SBRT.
Daily imaging should be used to ensure proper
positioning and treatment delivery. This can be
done using two-dimensional kV imaging to evaluate fiducial marker positions or with a threedimensional cone-beam CT (CBCT). Acquired
pretreatment images should be reviewed by a
radiation oncology physician prior to treatment

21/08/18 2:08 PM

14: ADRENAL SBRT

223

delivery. As an example, Figure 14.4 displays a
volumetric-modulated arc therapy (VMAT) plan
treating a right adrenal metastasis to a dose of
27 Gy in three fractions.

PATIENT FOLLOW-UP
Follow-Up Imaging Protocol
Patients should be followed up for both treatment response and toxicity assessment after a
course of SBRT. Holy et al. evaluated patients
6 weeks after completion of SBRT and every
3 months thereafter (19). Alternatively, Rudra
et al. evaluated patients 2 to 4 weeks after completion of therapy, then monthly for two additional visits, and then every 3 months until disease
progression or death (22). Scorsetti et al. evaluated patients initially every 3 to 4 months with
CT scans and clinical exams for the first year,
and then every 6 months for years 2 and 3 (23).
In the current NRG trial, patients are seen in follow-up initially 35 to 45 days after completion
of SBRT with a physical exam and then every
3 months with physical exam and diagnostic
imaging (at the discretion of the treating radiation oncologist) for a total of 2 years. Tumor
response is commonly evaluated using the
Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
(RECIST) on a contrast-enhanced abdominal CT
and/or PET scan (4,17–19,21–23).

Acute and Long-Term Toxicity
SBRT for tumors of the adrenal gland has proven
to be well tolerated. The most common acute
side effects include nausea, vomiting (controlled
with antiemetics), and fatigue, all scored as less
than grade 3 (4,18,19,22). In one study, gastric
ulcers were noted on endoscopy in one patient
2 weeks after delivery of SBRT and gastric and
duodenal ulcers in another patient were found
4 weeks after completion of therapy (19). A
BED of 72 Gy was applied in both cases. These
were effectively treated with oral proton pump
inhibitor medications. A grade 2 duodenal ulcer
was found in one patient treated to 30 Gy in
three fractions with a maximum duodenal dose
of 30 Gy (21). This was successfully treated with
a histamine-2 receptor antagonist. Late toxicities
in reported studies have also been rare. No
late toxicities were noted in the studies by
Casamassima et al., Chawla et al., Guiou et al.,
and Scorsetti et al. (4,17,18,23). In the study by
Ahmed et al. (n = 13), late toxicities included

Heron_68566_PTR_14_215-226_08-23-18.indd 223

FIGURE 14.4 Stereotactic body radiation therapy plan
for a right adrenal metastasis from an esophageal primary:
VMAT plan using 10-MV photons treating a right adrenal
metastasis to a dose of 27 Gy with 100% dose to 95% of the
PTV with a maximum hot spot of 115% delivered in three
fractions. The dose constraints to OARs were as follows:
spinal cord, V8 Gy <1 cm3; liver, D50% <12 Gy, and V15 Gy
<700 cm3; stomach, small bowel, and duodenum, V27 Gy
<1 cm3, V20 Gy <3 cm3, and V15 Gy <9 cm3; large bowel,
V27 Gy <5 cm3, V20 Gy <10 cm3, and V15 Gy <15 cm3;
kidneys, each V15 Gy <35%; and heart, V24 Gy <15 cm3.
OAR, organ at risk; PTV, planning target volume; VMAT,
volumetric-modulated arc therapy.

21/08/18 2:08 PM

224

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

grade 2 fatigue (n = 1), grade 2 abdominal
pain (n = 1), grade 2 nausea (n = 1), and grade
1 nausea (n = 1) (15). Rudra et al. evaluated
10 patients undergoing SBRT and reported one
late grade 2 adrenal insufficiency approximately
2.5 years after completion of therapy (22). It was
noted that this patient was receiving cortisone
injections for back pain, but this was scored as
an SBRT-related toxicity. Casamassima et al. also
reported one case of adrenal insufficiency (17).
In the recent guidelines issued by the Multinational Association of Supportive Care in
Cancer (MASCC) and the European Society for
Medical Oncology (ESMO), radiation treatment
to the upper abdomen poses a moderate emetic
risk and a recommendation was made for the
use of prophylactic 5-HT3-receptor antagonist
medications (39). Another acute or subacute
toxicity includes GI ulceration (typically stomach
or small bowel). Thus, some practitioners consider prophylactic treatment with a proton pump
inhibitor or histamine-2 receptor antagonist to
reduce this occurrence.

SUMMARY OF DOSE CONSTRAINTS
(TABLE 14.5)

CONCLUSIONS

REFERENCES

The use of SBRT, though infrequent, is an effective and safe treatment option for tumors of
the adrenal gland when delivered appropriately.
Available data report excellent local control and
minimal toxicity. SBRT is a good alternative for
patients who are considered poor surgical candidates or who decline surgical adrenalectomy
for adrenal metastases. Nonetheless, SBRT is a
highly technical treatment modality and should
be planned and delivered by experienced radiation oncologists, physicists, dosimetrists, and
therapists. Patient immobilization, respiratory/
motion management, image guidance, and careful dosimetry are imperative for safe delivery of
SBRT. There are still limited data on the use of
SBRT in the setting of primary ACC and SBRT
may not be appropriate in most cases given the
large size of these tumors and the fact that RT for
ACC is primarily in the adjuvant setting. SBRT
should continue to be explored and used in the
treatment of patients with adrenal metastases,
and further investigations should be performed to
evaluate combining SBRT with novel approaches
such as immunotherapy to further improve local
control and potentially even impact on systemic
control in patients with adrenal metastases.

1. Soffen EM, Solin LJ, Rubenstein JH, et al. Palliative radiotherapy for symptomatic adrenal metastases. Cancer. 1990;65(6):
1318-1320. PubMed PMID: 2155051.
2. Short S, Chaturvedi A, Leslie MD. Palliation of symptomatic
adrenal gland metastases by radiotherapy. Clin Oncol (R Coll
Radiol). 1996;8(6):387-389. PubMed PMID: 8973857.
3. Zeng ZC, Tang ZY, Fan J, et al. Radiation therapy for adrenal
gland metastases from hepatocellular carcinoma. Jpn J Clin
Oncol. 2005;35(2):61-67. doi:10.1093/jjco/hyi020
4. Chawla S, Chen Y, Katz AW, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for treatment of adrenal metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2009;75(1):71-75. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.10.079
5. Ippolito E, D’Angelillo RM, Fiore M, et al. SBRT: A viable
option for treating adrenal gland metastases. Rep Pract
Oncol Radiother. 2015;20(6):484-490. doi:10.1016/j.rpor.
2015.05.009
6. Kebebew E, Reiff E, Duh QY, et al. Extent of disease at presentation and outcome for adrenocortical carcinoma: have
we made progress? World J Surg. 2006;30(5):872-878.
doi:10.1007/s00268-005-0329-x
7. Else T, Kim AC, Sabolch A, et al. Adrenocortical carcinoma.
Endocr Rev. 2014;35(2):282-326. doi:10.1210/er.2013-1029
8. Bilimoria KY, Shen WT, Elaraj D, et al. Adrenocortical carcinoma in the United States: treatment utilization and prognostic factors. Cancer. 2008;113(11):3130-3136. doi:10.1002/
cncr.23886
9. Paton BL, Novitsky YW, Zerey M, et al. Outcomes of
adrenal cortical carcinoma in the United States. Surgery.
2006;140(6):914-920. doi:10.1016/j.surg.2006.07.035
10. Polat B, Fassnacht M, Pfreundner L, et al. Radiotherapy in
adrenocortical carcinoma. Cancer. 2009;115(13):2816-2823.
doi:10.1002/cncr.24331

Heron_68566_PTR_14_215-226_08-23-18.indd 224

TABLE 14.5 Dose Constraints for Adrenal Tumors
Using SBRT
Adrenal

42–45 Gy in Three
Fractions

Critical Structures

Suggested Dose Limits

Stomach
Duodenum
Bowel

Dmax <4 Gy; V38 <5 mL,
V32.5 <15 mL, V20 <30
mL

Spinal cord (canal)

Dmax <15 Gy (three
fractions)

Liver

V17.1 Gy ≤700 mL

Kidney (bilateral)

V15 Gy <200 mL

Kidney (ipsilateral)

V12.3 Gy <130 mL

Kidney (ipsilateral)

V12.3 Gy <130 mL

SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

21/08/18 2:08 PM

14: ADRENAL SBRT
11. Sabolch A, Feng M, Griffith K, et al. Adjuvant and definitive radiotherapy for adrenocortical carcinoma. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;80(5):1477-1484. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2010.04.030
12. Desai A, Rai H, Haas J, et al. A retrospective review of
cyberKnife stereotactic body radiotherapy for adrenal
tumors (primary and metastatic): Winthrop University hospital experience. Front Oncol. 2015;5:185. doi:10.3389/
fonc.2015.00185
13. Abrams HL, Spiro R, Goldstein N. Metastases in carcinoma;
analysis of 1000 autopsied cases. Cancer. 1950;3(1):74-85.
PubMed PMID: 15405683.
14. Tanvetyanon T, Robinson LA, Schell MJ, et al. Outcomes
of adrenalectomy for isolated synchronous versus metachronous adrenal metastases in non-small-cell lung cancer: a systematic review and pooled analysis. J Clin Oncol.
2008;26(7):1142-1147. doi:10.1200/JCO.2007.14.2091
15. Ahmed KA, Barney BM, Macdonald OK, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy in the treatment of adrenal metastases. Am J Clin Oncol. 2013;36(5):509-513. doi:10.1097/
COC.0b013e3182569189
16. Barney BM, Olivier KR, Macdonald OK, et al. Clinical
outcomes and dosimetric considerations using stereotactic body radiotherapy for abdominopelvic tumors.
Am J Clin Oncol. 2012;35(6):537-542. doi:10.1097/
COC.0b013e31821f876a
17. Casamassima F, Livi L, Masciullo S, et al. Stereotactic radiotherapy for adrenal gland metastases: University of Florence
experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;82(2):
919-923. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.11.060
18. Guiou M, Mayr NA, Kim EY, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy for adrenal metastases from lung cancer. J Radiat Oncol. 2012;1(2):155-163. doi:10.1007/
s13566-012-0059-2
19. Holy R, Piroth M, Pinkawa M, et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) for treatment of adrenal gland metastases from non-small cell lung cancer. Strahlenther Onkol.
2011;187(4):245-251. doi:10.1007/s00066-011-2192-z
20. Katoh N, Onimaru R, Sakuhara Y, et al. Real-time tumortracking radiotherapy for adrenal tumors. Radiother Oncol.
2008;87(3):418-424. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2008.03.013
21. Oshiro Y, Takeda Y, Hirano S, et al. Role of radiotherapy for
local control of asymptomatic adrenal metastasis from lung
cancer. Am J Clin Oncol. 2011;34(3):249-253. doi:10.1097/
COC.0b013e3181dbb727
22. Rudra S, Malik R, Ranck MC, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for curative treatment of adrenal metastases. Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2013;12(3):217-224.
doi:10.7785/tcrt.2012.500320
23. Scorsetti M, Alongi F, Filippi AR, et al. Long-term local
control achieved after hypofractionated stereotactic body
radiotherapy for adrenal gland metastases: a retrospective
analysis of 34 patients. Acta Oncol. 2012;51(5):618-623.
doi:10.3109/0284186X.2011.652738
24. Torok J, Wegner RE, Burton SA, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for adrenal metastases: a retrospective
review of a noninvasive therapeutic strategy. Future Oncol.
2011;7(1):145-151. doi:10.2217/fon.10.165

Heron_68566_PTR_14_215-226_08-23-18.indd 225

225

25. Gunderson LL, Tepper JE. Clinical radiation oncology.
4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016.
26. Sancho JJ, Triponez F, Montet X, et al. Surgical management of adrenal metastases. Langenbecks Arch Surg.
2012;397(2):179-194. doi:10.1007/s00423-011-0889-1
27. Allolio B, Fassnacht M. Clinical review: adrenocortical carcinoma: clinical update. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2006;91(6):2027-2037. doi:10.1210/jc.2005-2639
28. Herr K, Muglia VF, Koff WJ, et al. Imaging of the adrenal gland lesions. Radiol Bras. 2014;47(4):228-239.
doi:10.1590/0100-3984.2013.1762
29. Bharwani N, Rockall AG, Sahdev A, et al. Adrenocortical
carcinoma: the range of appearances on CT and MRI. AJR
Am J Roentgenol. 2011;196(6):W706-W714. doi:10.2214/
AJR.10.5540
30. Davies SC, Hill AL, Holmes RB, et al. Ultrasound
quantitation of respiratory organ motion in the upper
abdomen. Br J Radiol. 1994;67(803):1096-1102. doi:10.1259/
0007-1285-67-803-1096
31. Korin HW, Ehman RL, Riederer SJ, et al. Respiratory kinematics of the upper abdominal organs: a quantitative study.
Magn Reson Med. 1992;23(1):172-178. PubMed PMID:
1531152.
32. Wang J, Li F, Dong Y, et al. Clinical study on the influence
of motion and other factors on stereotactic radiotherapy in
the treatment of adrenal gland tumor. Onco Targets Ther.
2016;9:4295-4299. doi:10.2147/OTT.S107106
33. Keall PJ, Mageras GS, Balter JM, et al. The management of
respiratory motion in radiation oncology report of AAPM
Task Group 76. Med Phys. 2006;33(10):3874-3900.
doi:10.1118/1.2349696
34. Tsang DS, Voncken FE, Tse RV, et al. A randomized controlled trial of lorazepam to reduce liver motion in patients
receiving upper abdominal radiation therapy. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2013;87(5):881-887. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2013.08.024
35. Jabbour SK, Hashem SA, Bosch W, et al. Upper abdominal
normal organ contouring guidelines and atlas: a Radiation
Therapy Oncology Group consensus. Pract Radiat Oncol.
2014;4(2):82-89. doi:10.1016/j.prro.2013.06.004
36. NRG Oncology. NRG-BR001: A phase I study of stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for the treatment of multiple
metastases. www.newjerseyck.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/
07/BR001-SBRT-Multiple-mets.pdf
37. Onishi H, Shirato H, Nagata Y, et al. Hypofractionated stereotactic radiotherapy (HypoFXSRT) for stage I non-small
cell lung cancer: updated results of 257 patients in a Japanese
multi-institutional study. J Thorac Oncol. 2007;2(7 suppl 3):
S94–S100. doi:10.1097/JTO.0b013e318074de34
38. Onishi H, Shirato H, Nagata Y, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy (SBRT) for operable stage I non-small-cell lung
cancer: can SBRT be comparable to surgery? Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;81(5):1352-1358. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2009.07.1751
39. Ruhlmann CH, Jahn F, Jordan K, et al. 2016 updated MASCC/
ESMO consensus recommendations: prevention of radiotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Support Care Cancer.
2017;25(1):309-316. doi:10.1007/s00520-016-3407-8

21/08/18 2:08 PM

Heron_68566_PTR_14_215-226_08-23-18.indd 226

21/08/18 2:08 PM

C H A P T E R

15

Liver SBRT
Yushen Qian, Joseph P. Weiner, Everett J. Moding, Nataliya Kovalchuk, Albert C. Koong,
Theodore S. Hong, and Daniel T. Chang

Radiation therapy (RT) continues to grow as an
important modality for the treatment of liver
lesions. Historically, RT has not been used as a
definitive therapy because of concern of liver tolerance, limited technology to deliver ablative doses
of radiation, lack of clinical data, and availability
of other liver-directed therapies. Advancements
in the past two decades have led to expansion
of RT for liver tumors in many forms including
conventional fractionated external beam radiation
therapy (EBRT), stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT), also known as stereotactic ablative
radiation therapy (SABR), charged particle therapy,
brachytherapy, and transarterial radioembolization techniques. Accumulated knowledge in the
setting of conventionally fractionated EBRT has
established that higher doses lead to better local
control (1–3), paving the way for the emergence of
liver SBRT. The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the development of SBRT and its role in the
management of liver tumors. We review patient
selection, simulation, treatment delivery, posttreatment surveillance, and treatment outcomes.
An important point worth noting, however, is that
although SBRT in the United States is restricted to
ablative doses of radiation delivered in five fractions or less to comply with medical billing reimbursement codes, hypofractionated courses of RT
using greater than five fractions have achieved
similarly high rates of local control (4). For the
purposes of this chapter, the term “SBRT” refers
to any hypofractionated radiation schedule that
can achieve tumor ablation.

HISTORY OF LIVER-DIRECTED
RADIATION THERAPY
EBRT was restricted for palliative intent treatments in the past primarily because of concerns of
radiation-associated liver disease (RILD), a phenomenon first described in 1965 in a cohort of
13 patients who underwent whole-liver irradiation (5). The histopathological correlation is known
as veno-occlusive disease (VOD), manifesting microscopically as occlusion of the central veins, sinusoidal congestion, and centrilobular hepatocyte
loss (6). Clinically, the classic signs of RILD include
an acute triad of hepatomegaly, ascites, and elevation in alkaline phosphatase (ALP) followed by
the development of anicteric ascites approximately
2 weeks to 4 months after hepatic irradiation (7).
Although the majority of patients recover completely in 3 to 5 months, a minority of patients will
experience progressive liver fibrosis and failure,
with the possibility of fulminant liver failure (8,9).
Subsequent studies have demonstrated a volume effect on the likelihood of developing RILD.
Recognizing that partial liver volumes could tolerate much higher doses of radiation, investigators
described the risk of developing RILD using a normal tissue complication probability (NTCP) model
as a function of mean dose to the liver (7,10). As
technological advances paved the way for delivery
of more focused and precise RT, specifically with
advances in imaging techniques, the advent of
three-dimensional radiation planning, respiratory
motion management, and image-guided RT, there
227

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 227

23/08/18 4:35 PM

228

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

has been renewed interest in modern liver-directed
EBRT with results demonstrating potential for
improved outcomes through further intensification
of local therapy.
Because of the promising results of fractionated
conformal EBRT, investigators pursued a strategy
of further dose escalation that was enabled by the
development of SBRT. SBRT for the treatment
of intrahepatic malignancies was first reported in
1995 by Blomgren et al. at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm (11), in which the stereotactic
radiosurgery (SRS) experience for treating brain
tumors was adapted to treat extracranial targets in
the liver, lung, and retroperitoneum.

Why SBRT?
SBRT allows for the delivery of potentially ablative doses of radiation with rapid dose falloff at the
periphery of the target. Through precisely targeting
tumors and minimizing dose to normal liver, SBRT
has shown excellent local control rates without
higher rates of RILD (4,12–24). There has since
been accumulating clinical experience with SBRT
for definitive management of primary lung (25,26),
pancreatic (27,28), liver (16,29), bile duct (30),
kidney (31), and prostate cancers (32,33), as well
as for aggressive local treatment of metastatic
tumors to the liver (34) and lung (35).

INDICATIONS
SBRT to the liver is indicated for a variety of clinical
conditions. The most common primary liver tumor
is hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (36). Patients
treated with SBRT for HCC often have an underlying background of cirrhosis, which can be an independent cause of major morbidity and mortality.
These patients may already have compromised liver
function prior to any therapy. Historically, surgical
resection has been the primary curative modality
for patients with HCC; however, most patients are
ineligible for surgery because of extent of disease
or concern for hepatic decompensation, especially
in cases with advanced cirrhosis. Alternative treatments include liver transplantation, radiofrequency
ablation (RFA), microwave ablation, transarterial
radioembolization, and transarterial chemoembolization (TACE), the individual details of which
are outside of the scope of this chapter. SBRT represents a noninvasive locally ablative treatment for
localized HCC unsuitable for surgery. In addition,
because up to 30% of patients with HCC awaiting liver transplantation may be removed from the

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 228

transplant list because of progressive disease (37),
SBRT can also serve as a bridge to liver transplantation for patients who are not amenable to other
liver-directed therapies (38).
After HCC, intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma
(ICC) represents the second most common type
of primary liver tumor (39). The treatment paradigm for ICC is similar to that of HCC, as surgery
is considered to be the primary curative modality.
Unfortunately, many patients are either medically
unfit for surgery or present with unresectable or
metastatic disease, and the prognosis for unresectable ICC is dismal, with less than 5% of
patients surviving over 5 years (40). Clinical studies in the setting of conventional EBRT (41–43)
have demonstrated a clinical dose–response relationship, which has motivated investigations into
dose escalation to improve disease control and
survival. SBRT represents the current frontier of
dose-escalated RT for unresectable ICC.
The liver is a common site of metastatic spread
for many tumors in the gastrointestinal system,
particularly colorectal cancer (CRC). Standard
treatment for metastatic CRC involving the liver
is surgical resection for patients with oligometastases limited to the liver, along with combination
systemic chemotherapy (44). Unfortunately, only
approximately 20% of patients present with resectable hepatic metastases (45), and the remainder of
patients are unresectable because of the presence
of diffuse burden of disease in the liver, unfavorable anatomic tumor location, and/or medical
comorbidities (46). SBRT will likely play a larger
role in patients with oligometastatic disease given
improvements in various systemic therapies for a
variety of histologies that justify locally aggressive
treatment. It may also be combined with other
established liver-directed therapies to optimize
control and toxicity.
SRS is a well-established treatment for intracranial arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) (47), and
there is emerging evidence of its utility for spinal
AVMs (48,49). However, there is limited evidence
on the use of RT for management of hepatic AVMs.
Hsu et al. reported on the efficacy of 3D-conformal
RT for arteriovenous shunting in patients with
HCC (50). The investigators concluded that RT
may be an appropriate and safe option to obliterate
the shunt and may also allow patients with underlying HCC to receive future chemoembolization,
which is traditionally contraindicated in the setting
of an arteriovenous shunt. To our knowledge, there
are no reports in the literature on SBRT for hepatic
AVMs.

23/08/18 4:35 PM

15: LIVER SBRT

Preclinical data have suggested that RT may
act synergistically with immunotherapy to stimulate antitumor immune responses (51). The optimal dose and fractionation for triggering immune
responses remain unclear (52), but there is excitement about combining SBRT and immunotherapy in many tumor types (53). Given that HCC is
an inflammation-induced cancer associated with
hepatitis B and C infection and other causes of
chronic inflammation, immunotherapies may be
particularly effective in treating HCC alone or
in combination with SBRT (54). For example, a
preclinical model of HCC in mice has suggested that
concurrent treatment with an anti-PD-1 antibody
can augment the effect of SBRT (55). MD Anderson
Cancer Center is currently enrolling patients on a
phase I/phase II clinical trial combining tremelimumab, a monoclonal antibody against cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4), with
TACE, RFA, and SBRT for patients with HCC or
biliary tract carcinomas (NCT01853618), and
multiple clinical trials are investigating immunotherapy as a monotherapy for HCC.
In the setting of liver metastasis, combining
SBRT with immunotherapy is particularly attractive. There have been several clinical case reports
of patients treated with RT in combination with
immune checkpoint inhibitors leading to an abscopal effect, or tumor regression outside of the radiation field (56–58). Many tumors with propensity to

229

metastasize to the liver, including lung cancer (59)
and a subset of colon cancers (60), have shown
excellent responses to immunotherapies in clinical
trials. Thus, combining liver SBRT with immunotherapy in hopes of triggering systemic cancer
immune responses represents a promising clinical
approach for metastatic tumors that is under investigation in several clinical trials.

PATIENT SELECTION
Patient selection is a key component of the decision
process when choosing among the many available
local treatment options. In general, multidisciplinary tumor board discussion is recommended to
determine the optimal treatment for each individual
patient (61). The ideal SBRT candidates are patients
with small, peripheral tumors located away from the
bowel, chest wall, or central liver. These patients
should have a limited number of lesions (one to
three), and have underlying Child–Pugh (CP) class
A (CP A) liver function (Table 15.1). In practice,
because other established liver-directed therapies
including surgical resection play important roles in
treating liver tumors, many patients may not present
with ideal lesions. As such, it is important to involve
a multidisciplinary management team to individualize the best treatment approach for each case.
It is also important to know the limitations of
other therapies. For instance, RFA is not appropriate

TABLE 15.1 Patient Selection Factors for Liver SBRT
Selection Factor

Ideal Parameters for Liver SBRT

Exclusion Criteria Parameters

Patient immobilization

Able to tolerate immobilization

Unable to tolerate immobilization

Imaging

Tumor clearly defined on triphasic enhanced
CT or MRI (HCC) or contrast-enhanced CT or
MRI or PET (metastases or CC)

Eligibility for other therapies

Ineligible for resection or other local
therapies because of technical considerations or concerns of efficacy and/or toxicity

Liver function

Child–Pugh class A

Child–Pugh class C

Healthy liver volume

Ability to meet dose constraints

<700 cm3 remaining healthy liver volume

Tumor location

>1 cm from critical OARs, such as bowel,
diaphragm, chest wall, or central liver

<5 mm from critical OARs

Great vessel involvement

May be involved

Number of lesions

1–3 lesions

Five or more intrahepatic lesions

Burden of extrahepatic disease

None

Uncontrolled or significant extrahepatic
burden

CC, cholangiocarcinoma; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; OAR, organ at risk; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 229

23/08/18 4:35 PM

230

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

for tumors next to large vessels because of the
heat-sink effect, near bowel because of concern of
bowel damage, or near the diaphragm because of
difficulty in accessing the tumor (62,63). In addition, local control for tumors greater than 2 cm
with RFA is significantly worse than for tumors
less than 2 cm (64–68). TACE is not suitable
for tumors with portal venous tumor thrombus
because of ischemic concerns, and it is not considered to be ablative, with recent data showing that
local control with TACE is inferior to that with
SBRT (69). Liver transplant for HCC is limited by
the supply of liver donors, and surgical resection is
limited by the ability to achieve a negative margin
and the ability to leave a viable liver remnant.
More importantly, however, is a better understanding of organ tolerance and how to safely
deliver ablative doses to determine the role of
SBRT, particularly for tumors that are not suitable
for surgical and interventional approaches. Planned
optimization with inverse planning allows the ability to conform the dose away from critical adjacent
structures to reduce toxicity. In addition, because
the prescription dose and target coverage can be
adjusted to meet dose constraints, the treatment
is not given in the same “all-or-none” manner that
limits other local therapies, thus further expanding the range of clinical scenarios for which SBRT
may be used. Therefore, a universal maximum with
regards to tumor size or number of targets does
not exist. SBRT is limited only by the ability to
meet tissue constraints, which is based primarily
on a combination of tumor size, number of lesions,
location, amount of normal liver parenchyma, and
underlying liver function.
Exclusion criteria vary between protocols, but,
in general, patients with multiple (5) intrahepatic
or significant uncontrolled extrahepatic burden of
disease, poor underlying liver function (CP class C)
or healthy liver volume (<700 mL), very large
tumors (>6 cm), and tumors in close proximity
(<5 mm) to organs at risk (OARs) are poor candidates for SBRT (Table 15.1). It should be noted
that age and histology of disease do not serve as
inclusion or exclusion criteria. To optimize the
benefit of SBRT, ideal patients should have limited
active extrahepatic disease.

IMAGING
High-quality imaging to delineate target lesions
is a crucial first step in safely implementing
SBRT. For HCC, arterial enhancement with

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 230

delayed washout is the hallmark radiographic
appearance. Therefore, patients should undergo
a triphasic contrast-enhanced (hepatic arterial,
portal venous, and delayed phases) CT scan or
multiphase dynamic MRI of the liver (Figures 15.1
and 15.2). HCC will appear hyperintense on
the arterial phase while hypodense on the
portal venous and delayed phases, as contrast
“washes out” from the tumor (70). Triphasic contrast-enhanced CT scans are conducted
with 1.25-mm slice thickness, as the thinner
slice thickness provides greater volumetric resolution of the anatomy. In addition, MRI may
provide improved intrahepatic soft tissue resolution (Figure 15.2F), and this complementary
information may be especially useful for target delineation, especially with tumors that are
difficult to visualize on CT, such as ICC. 18Ffluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) PET may provide
additional information in localizing the existing
metabolically active tumor as well as detecting
occult or new tumors that have developed in the
interim between diagnostic imaging and treatment planning (71,72).

(A)

(B)

(C)
FIGURE 15.1 Diagnostic triphasic contrast-enhanced liver

CT of a patient with hepatocellular carcinoma. (A) Tumor
enhances on arterial phase because of influx of contrast
secondary to tumor hypervascularity (white arrow), with
subsequent hypodense appearance because of rapid
washout of contrast from tumor on portal venous phase
(B), and delayed phase (C). There is presence of portal vein
invasion (black arrow).

23/08/18 4:35 PM

15: LIVER SBRT

(A)

(D)

(B)

(E)

(C)

(F)

FIGURE 15.2 Target delineation using multiple imaging

modalities. (A–C) Serial axial CT images showing contoured
target volumes and associated organs at risk. Diagnostic
imaging that was fused to the treatment planning scan and
used for target delineation includes (D) arterial phase and
(E) portal venous phase of triphasic contrast-enhanced CT,
as well as (F) MRI for improved soft tissue resolution. GTV,
cyan;PTV, red; chest wall, magenta; healthy liver volume,
green; portal vein, blue; central hepatobiliary tract, brown;
spinal cord, yellow.

GTV, gross tumor volume; PTV, planning target volume.

SIMULATION, MOTION
MANAGEMENT, AND
TARGET DELINEATION
Hepatocellular Carcinoma
Patients are generally simulated in the head-firstsupine position with arms extended above their
heads. At our institution, fiducial markers are typically implanted prior to simulation, unless other
landmarks or surrogates can be used for tumor tracking, such as lipiodol from prior TACE procedures,
indwelling catheters or stents, or the diaphragm for
tumors near the dome of the liver. Multiple types of
fiducials exist, with selection influenced by needle
caliber and length, as well as anatomy and characteristics of target lesion (73,74). Marsico et al.
assessed the therapeutic usability of gold-notched
flexible anchor wire (0.28 mm × 10 mm [contained
in 25-gauge needle]) and gold cylindrical grain (1
mm × 4 mm [contained in 17-gauge needle]) in

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 231

231

radiosurgery for liver tumors, and determined that
the grain fiducial markers resulted in better CT
visualization and less incidence of minor late complications compared with the anchor markers (75).
As stated earlier, arterial imaging is important;
thus, patients undergo both an early arterial-phase
CT scan acquired at end-expiration breath-hold
and a venous-phase CT scan also acquired at end
expiration. Slice thickness is generally 1.25 mm.
Following these scans, a four-dimensional (4D) CT
scan is obtained to capture respiratory motion as
well as to serve as a delayed-phase scan.
Delineation of the gross tumor volume (GTV)
should be done with the aid of any and all diagnostic scans including CT and MRI. The target volume
includes the radiographically apparent arterially
enhancing and/or washed-out tumor seen on the arterial and venous phases, respectively, including any
arterially enhancing vascular tumor thrombus. Bland
vascular thrombi will show no change in enhancement
pattern between phases (76) and should be excluded.
Additional margin for clinical target volume (CTV) to
encompass microscopic tumor extension is not routinely done. The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group
(RTOG) has published consensus guidelines on HCC
contouring (77). OARs include normal liver parenchyma, spinal cord, heart, chest wall, esophagus,
kidneys, stomach, small and large bowel, and central hepatobiliary tract (cHBT), defined by a 15-mm
expansion of the portal vein from the splenic confluence to the first bifurcation of left and right portal
veins (78,79). Guidelines for dose constraints to these
OARs are reviewed in the section “Dose Constraints.”
Creation of an internal target volume (ITV) with
the assistance of a 4D CT scan to account for respiration will depend on the degree of tumor motion
and the method of respiratory motion management.
Respiratory-gated treatments centered at end exhalation or breath-hold techniques may require little
to no adjustment for the ITV. However, if patients
are treated free-breathing, consideration should
be given to creating an ITV or using a final planning target volume (PTV) margin that accounts for
the degree of tumor excursion. PTV expansion is
set by individual institutional practice depending
on the frequency and type of on-board imaging,
respiratory motion management strategy, and the
presence of fiducial markers. Our practice is to use
respiratory gating in the presence of fiducials, and
typically a 3-mm expansion of the GTV is sufficient. If patients are free-breathing with abdominal
compression and without fiducials, typical PTV
margins may range from 5 to 10 mm (Figure 15.2).

23/08/18 4:35 PM

232

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

Liver Metastases and Intrahepatic
Cholangiocarcinoma
Principles of simulation and treatment planning
for metastatic disease and ICC are similar to those
for HCC. Any diagnostic CT and MRI scans should
be used in conjunction with all treatment-planning
scans for target delineation. However, with the
exception of patients with metastatic neuroendocrine tumors or other tumors that demonstrate
arterial enhancement, an arterial-phase CT scan is
not routinely performed in our institutional practice. In addition, a PET scan may be useful to further identify the extent of disease and aid in target
delineation (80).

DOSE PRESCRIPTION
AND FRACTIONATION
Various dose prescription and fractionation schedules have been reported for SBRT for primary liver
malignances, and no consensus guidelines exist
for selecting an optimal dose. Ablative doses can
be achieved using a variety of hypofractionated
schedules ranging from one to 15 fractions. The
prescription dose is often limited by the volume of
normal liver, underlying liver function, and adjacent normal tissue constraints. Four published
prospective studies have investigated SBRT for
HCC, with dose prescriptions ranging from 36 to
60 Gy in three to six fractions (13–16). Investigators from Indiana University and the University of
Colorado conducted a phase I dose escalation study,
successfully treating HCC to 48 Gy in three fractions for patients with CP A, but determined that
40 Gy in five fractions was the maximally tolerated
dose for patients with CP class B (CP B) (13). The
currently open NRG Oncology (consortium made
up of the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and
Bowel Project [NSABP], RTOG, and the Gynecologic Oncology Group [GOG]) 1112 trial adapts
the prescription dose, which ranges from 27.5 to
50 Gy, in five fractions on the basis of the dose to
the normal liver (81). At our institution, the prescription liver SBRT for patients with CP A cirrhosis and small peripheral primary tumors is 45 Gy
in three fractions if dose constraints are met. For
lesions near bowel or central liver or for larger
lesions, we typically use a five-fraction regimen
ranging from 30 to 50 Gy. For patients with CP B
liver function, a five-fraction regimen ranging from
25 to 40 Gy is used. Investigators at Massachusetts
General Hospital and MD Anderson conducted a

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 232

phase II trial of hypofractionated ablative proton
RT for primary liver tumors, using a 15-fraction
regimen to 67.5 GyE for small peripheral tumors
or 58.05 GyE for central tumors (18).
Principles of dose prescription and fractionation of SBRT are similar for metastatic tumors
although, in general, higher biologically effective
doses (BEDs) have been used primarily because
of the absence of underlying cirrhosis leading to
increased liver tolerance. Among other factors, key
considerations include tumor histology, number of
lesions, and the size of lesions. Data suggest that
radioresistant histologies such as melanoma and
renal cell carcinoma require doses of 48 to 49 Gy
in three fractions (82). Similarly, for colorectal
metastases, there is emerging evidence that dose
escalation may be appropriate in the lung SBRT
setting (83), and data also suggest that a dose of
48 Gy in three fractions may be needed to optimize local control for colorectal liver metastases
(84). Other factors include the number and size
of lesions and their location. Therefore, selection
of final prescription dose and fractionation must
strike a balance between maximizing efficacy and
sparing adjacent critical structures. Our practice is
to use a dose of 45 to 54 Gy in three fractions for
peripheral tumors limited in size and number and
away from sensitive organs, with higher range doses
particularly used for metastases from colorectal
carcinoma, renal cell carcinoma, or melanoma. For
larger tumors more centrally located or near the
bowel, esophagus, stomach, or heart, a dose of 40
to 50 Gy in five fractions is typically used. Surgical placement of biological mesh spacers composed
of acellular human dermis has also been shown to
sufficiently displace bowel away from tumors to
allow for the safe delivery of RT (85).

DOSE CONSTRAINTS
The primary OARs with liver SBRT include the
uninvolved liver, heart, chest wall, ribs, kidneys,
stomach, duodenum, bowel, spinal cord, and
cHBT. For the liver, classic RILD is a syndrome
of an acute triad of hepatomegaly, ascites, and elevated ALP followed by the development of anicteric
ascites approximately 2 weeks to 4 months after
hepatic irradiation described with conventional
fractionation (7) but has rarely been reported in
SBRT studies. Nonclassic RILD has emerged as a
more commonly seen toxicity, described as a fivefold or higher increase in transaminase values (10),
a decrease in liver function loosely defined as a

23/08/18 4:35 PM

15: LIVER SBRT

2-point or higher increase in CP score, reactivation of hepatitis, or any other toxicity not included
in the classic RILD syndrome (86). Because nonclassic RILD encompasses a wide range of etiologies and symptoms and has only been recently
recognized, appropriate dose constraints as a preventative measure are poorly understood.
The University of Colorado first used the
approach of sparing a critical volume of normal
liver by ensuring that at least 700 mL of normal
liver was the minimum volume that must receive
a total dose less than 15 Gy in a phase I trial of
SBRT for liver metastases showing essentially no
cases of liver toxicity (87,88). Since then, several
SBRT investigators have adopted the critical volume model as their constraint with few toxicity
events as long as constraints were met (24,89–91).
Investigators have similarly used a critical volume
approach for patients with HCC with a similar constraint of limiting 700 mL of liver receiving greater
than 15 Gy. Son et al. proposed sparing 800 mL
of liver from receiving greater than 18 Gy in three
fractions to reduce hepatic toxicity in patients with
CP-Class A cirrhosis (92). Investigators from Princess Margaret used NTCP modeling to adapt the
dose of radiation on the basis of predicted risk of
liver toxicity and found that the mean liver dose in
patients with grade 5 toxicity was higher than in
those who did not (median 18.1 Gy vs. 15.4 Gy,
p = .02) (16,12). The NRG 1112 trial allows dose
adaption on the basis of the mean liver dose, which
is limited to 13 to 17 Gy.
Central liver toxicity is an increasingly recognized
late effect of SBRT for liver tumors. Osmundson
et al. first proposed delineation of the cHBT by using
a 1.5-cm expansion of the portal vein. Retrospectively
analyzing 96 patients treated with SBRT at Stanford
University, investigators found a significant association of cHBT and BED after converting dose fractionation schemes using the standard linear quadratic
model (/ = 10) (78). These findings were further
validated in an expanded analysis in which investigators showed that central liver toxicity and dose to
cHBT were significantly associated with primary liver
tumors (HCC and ICC) but not with metastases. In
addition, a more detailed analysis of dose–response
led to the proposed constraints to the cHBT of V40
less than 37 mL and V30 less than 45 mL (79).
The stomach, duodenum, and remainder of the
bowel represent other critical OARs to which serious long-term toxicity such as ulceration and perforation may be possible if careful attention is not given
during treatment planning. Dose constraints to these

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 233

233

organs include Dmax less than 40 Gy, V25 less than
9 mL, V30 less than 5 mL, and V35 less than 1 mL. To
minimize the risk of late cardiotoxicity, the heart constraints used are Dmean less than 12 Gy and V15 less
than 10%. To minimize the risk of kidney failure, the
kidney dose should be kidney V5 less than 50%. To
minimize the risk of chest wall pain and rib fracture,
the chest wall dose is limited to V30 less than 30 mL,
and ribs D2mL less than 27 Gy. The aforementioned
dose constraints and other organs are summarized in
Table 15.2. Pollom et al. have recently conducted a
review of these dose constraints (93).

TREATMENT PLANNING
Our current institutional practice is to plan cases
with liver SBRT delivered on gantry-based linear
accelerators with volumetric-modulated arc therapy
(VMAT) using one partial or full arc with 10 MV
multileaf collimator (MLC)–shaped flattening filterfree (FFF) beam. FFF beam allows for creation of
ablative heterogeneous dose distribution within
the target and sharp dose falloff from target to
surrounding normal tissue. In addition, the high
dose rate of FFF beams makes the SBRT treatment
delivery very efficient. Small peripheral tumors
away from sensitive critical structures could potentially be treated with multibeam three-dimensional
conformal plans, although inverse planning is generally needed to achieve the high degree of conformality necessary to safely deliver ablative doses.
Dose calculation is performed using convolution/
superposition Analytical Anisotropic Algorithm
(AAA), Eclipse™ (Varian Medical Systems, Palo
Alto, California) in the absence of large low-density
heterogeneities, or the more precise Acuros XB
algorithm, Eclipse, which uses linear Boltzmann
transport equations (LBTEs) and more accurately
models the electron scatter and lateral scatter disequilibrium near air/bone/tissue interfaces (94).
Treatment planning with CyberKnife® (Accuray,
Inc., Sunnyvale, California) also involves inverse
planning using pencil beam arrangements to conform to the target. The beams can be shaped by
collimators ranging from 5 to 60 mm in diameter,
Iris collimator (a 12-sided regular polygon, which
can automatically adjust the aperture size), or
InCise™ MLC (with maximum field size of
10 cm × 12 cm at 80-cm source-to-axis distance).
As with inverse planning on gantry-based linear
accelerators, planning for CyberKnife is an iterative optimization process based on meeting a list of
set priorities of target coverage, conformality, and

23/08/18 4:35 PM

234

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

TABLE 15.2 Common Institutional Dose Constraints Used for Liver Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy
Organ at Risk

Dose Constraint

Liver—noncirrhotic

≥700 cm3 of uninvolved liver <15 Gy (three fractions)
≥700 cm3 of uninvolved liver <21 Gy (five fractions)

Liver—cirrhotic

Child–Pugh class A
≥700 cm3 of uninvolved liver <15 Gy (in three or five fractions)
Mean liver dose <15 Gy (in three or five fractions)
Child–Pugh class B
≥700 cm3 of uninvolved liver <15 Gy (five fractions)
≥500 cm3 of uninvolved liver <7 Gy (five fractions)
Mean liver dose <10 Gy (in five fractions)

Central hepatobiliary tree

V40 <37 cm3 and V30 <45 cm3 (five fractions)

Stomach, duodenum, bowel

Dmax <40 Gy, V25 <9 cm3, V30 <5 cm3, V35 <1 cm3 (five fractions)
V30 <1 cm3, V24.5 <2 cm3 (three fractions)

Heart

Dmean <12 Gy, V15 <10%

Kidney

V5 <50%

Chest wall

V30 <30 cm3 (recommended)

Ribs

D2mL <27 Gy (recommended

Spinal cord

Dmax <20 Gy (three fractions)
Dmax <15 Gy (three fractions)

Dmax, maximum dose; Dmean, mean dose; Dn mL, dose received by n mL of tissue; Vn, volume of tissue receiving n Gray.

sparing of surrounding normal tissues. Dose calculation can be performed via either simple ray-tracing
pathlength-correction algorithm or the more
accurate but calculation-intensive Monte Carlo
algorithm that relies on particle interaction probabilities and subsequent dose depositions derived
from clinically measured dosimetric parameters.
The use of the ray-tracing algorithm is quite sufficient in mostly homogenous treatment areas, but if
the tumor is near the diaphragm, dose calculation
with ray tracing is less accurate because of the lack
of corrections for changes in electron transport and
lateral scatter disequilibrium that might develop
in the presence of varying density heterogeneities
(95). Hence, liver SBRT plans with treatment targets close to the liver dome should be ideally calculated via the Monte Carlo algorithm.
Effective plan evaluation should be consistent
and follow a reproducible algorithm set by the individual practitioner (96). Communication between
physician and dosimetry staff is essential because
of the iterative nature of plan improvement. The
goals of treatment planning include a prescription
dose tightly conforming to the target volume, an
ablative and nonuniform dose distribution within
the PTV with highest doses within the GTV, a rapid

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 234

dose falloff in all directions outside the target volume, high dose gradients between adjacent normal
tissue and the target, and the highest possible dose
reduction to OARs (97).
Essential to treatment planning is meticulous
evaluation of the dose–volume histogram and
isodose levels paying specific attention to target
coverage, dose to OARs, dose homogeneity, and
dose falloff gradients (Figures 15.3 and 15.4).
Typically, the goal is to have at least 95% of the
target volume covered by 100% of the prescribed
dose. Given rapid dose falloff outside of target
volume, global maximum doses of 110% to 130%
of prescription dose are acceptable but should
be located within the target volume, preferably
within the GTV. Prescription doses may be limited
by normal tissue constraints, in which case the
maximum prescription dose that allows meeting
these constraints is usually chosen. An alternative
approach is to maintain the desired prescription
dose but place higher priority on meeting OAR
constraints and thereby reduce target coverage to
less than 95%. There are no data to clearly support either one approach over the other, but practitioners should be mindful of the minimum PTV
and GTV dose.

23/08/18 4:35 PM

15: LIVER SBRT

235

(A)

(B)
FIGURE 15.3 Evaluation of a gantry-based SBRT plan for a 70-year-old woman with small-cell lung cancer treated to a
single metastatic site in the liver. (A) Axial images of dose distribution and (B) dose–volume histogram for uninvolved
liver. Mean uninvolved liver dose was 7.3 Gy; 904 cm3 (≥700 cm3) of uninvolved liver received less than 15 Gy, and
749 cm3 (≥500 cm3) of uninvolved liver received less than 7 Gy. The patient was treated with three fractions of 15 Gy for a
total dose of 45 Gy.
SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

FIGURE 15.4 Axial images displaying isodose levels for a 62-year-old woman with metastatic sigmoid carcinoma treated with SBRT for two metastatic lesions in her liver. She was treated with three fractions of 15 Gy daily
for a total dose of 45 Gy. Isodose lines spatially represent dose distributions as a percentage of prescription dose.
In this figure, isodose lines shown include red (100%), green (80%), yellow (60%), purple (40%), blue (25%),
and dark blue (10%). Red color wash is a contour of the planning target volume.
SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 235

23/08/18 4:35 PM

236

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

FIGURE 15.5 Gantry-based SBRT treatment of HCC. (A) Axial, (B) coronal, and (C) sagittal images of dose distribution and

(D) three-dimensional surface rendering of a SBRT plan delivered via a gantry-based system. The patient is a 63-year-old man
with a history of hepatitis C, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma after transarterial chemoembolization. The patient was
treated to a dose of 45 Gy in five fractions.

HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

TREATMENT DELIVERY
In this section, we outline two methods of treatment delivery: gantry-based (i.e., Varian, Electa,
Siemens) and robotic-based (i.e., CyberKnife) linear accelerator platforms. Although each offers its
own dosimetric advantages (98), data about headto-head efficacy and toxicity with respect to treatment of the liver are lacking. Furthermore, both
platforms have different methods to account for
tumor intrafractional motion to allow a reduction
in treated volumes. These methods include gating
(99), tracking (100), and fixation (101). Gantrybased systems use phase or amplitude gating via
commercially available motion monitoring devices
such as Real-Time Position Management™ (RPM)
system (Varian Medical Systems), Response™ gating control (Elekta AB, Stockholm, Sweden), or
ANZAI gating system (ANZAI Medical Co., Ltd.,
Tokyo, Japan) and/or inhibition such as abdominal
compression or breath hold. In contrast to gating
and breath-holding techniques on gantry-based
delivery platforms that deliver radiation during
a portion of the tumor motion, the robotic arm–
based platform such as CyberKnife (Accuray, Inc.)
is the only system capable of respiratory tracking
(Synchrony™) that moves the beam to follow the
motion of the tumor, thus maintaining constant
beam’s-eye view of the tumor throughout the respiratory cycle and delivery of radiation throughout.

Gantry-Based Delivery
Primary components of gantry-based delivery systems include a multienergy S-band linear accelerator with gantry, table, and collimator rotating
around the isocenter, with kV and MV on-board

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 236

imaging systems for image guidance. Treatment
can be delivered using VMAT or multiple isocentric
coplanar or noncoplanar static beam arrangements
(102) (Figure 15.5). The exact method of target
verification and respiratory motion management
is institution-dependent. At Stanford, the institutional practice is to first verify alignment of bony
anatomy and the fiducial markers using orthogonal kV and fluoroscopic imaging. Amplitude respiratory gating at end exhalation is used, with the
amplitude and gating window manually set on the
basis of the position of the fiducial markers relative to their position on the digitally reconstructed
radiograph (DRR) such that the “beam-on” occurs
when the fiducials move inside the projected fiducial contour on fluoroscopy (Figure 15.6). Beamlevel kV imaging is taken prior to each “beam-on”
cycle to verify the positioning of tumor markers
during the treatment delivery (Figure 15.7).

Robotic Arm–Based Delivery
Primary components of robotic arm–based delivery system include a 6-MV compact X-band linear accelerator attached to a robotic articulating
manipulator, with two stereoscopic x-ray sources
for image guidance. Such systems do not rely on a
coordinate-based isocenter to deliver treatment, but
instead deliver a large number of noncoplanar beams
from nodes and angles automatically selected from
the predefined path (Figures 15.8 and 15.9). Image
guidance is based on implanted fiducial markers
through the use of orthogonal x-ray images every 10
to 30 seconds. The Synchrony (Accuray, Inc.) tracking system accounts for respiratory motion by tracking the predicted position of the fiducial markers
on the basis of the correlation model built from

23/08/18 4:35 PM

15: LIVER SBRT

237

(A)

(B)

(C)
FIGURE 15.8 Three-dimensional rendering of 167 non–
isocenter-based treatment beams used to treat a patient
with metastatic disease to the liver.

FIGURE 15.6 Motion management during liver SBRT
treatment. (A) Anterior–posterior digitally reconstructed
radiograph demonstrating radiopaque fiducials optimally within the treatment position at end expiration (green
circles). Fiducials serve as a surrogate for breathing and
thus move during a patient’s respiratory cycle. (B) Fiducial positioning during “beam-on” with yellow circles and
(C) fiducial positioning during “beam-off” with green circles.
SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

FIGURE 15.9 Robotic arm–based treatment of metastatic

(A)

(C)

disease. Axial, sagittal, and coronal dose distribution for a
patient treated with SBRT via a robotic arm–based system.
The patient is an 81-year-old man with a history of metastatic colon cancer treated with a single fraction of 25 Gy
using 167 total nonzero beams prescribed to the 79% isodose line.
SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

(B)

(D)

FIGURE 15.7 Respiratory-gated VMAT treatment. Beam-

level kV imaging is taken prior to each “beam-on” cycle
to verify fiducial positioning during the treatment arc.
(A–D) Screenshots of beam-level imaging at different
gantry angles along the VMAT gated arc path.

VMAT, volumetric-modulated arc therapy.

several sets of orthogonal x-rays that are then associated with the position of infrared light-emitting
diodes on the chest wall. This predictive model
is continuously updated with a new pair of x-rays
taken every 90 seconds during the treatment
delivery process. The patient breathes freely during

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 237

the treatment delivery, and the robotic arm moves
the gantry to follow the tumor motion predicted by
the correlation model that is constantly automatically updated with no user intervention required.

RESPONSE ASSESSMENT
AND SURVEILLANCE
Current guidelines with respect to the optimal
response assessment and surveillance of patients
with HCC treated with SBRT are lacking. In fact,
such data are limited even for patients who have
undergone other, longer established locoregional
therapies such as surgical resection. Given that
both surgery and SBRT represent a locoregional

23/08/18 4:35 PM

238

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

modality, extrapolation from the recommendations
from the surgical population is reasonable.
As such, current expert consensus panels recommend ongoing posttreatment surveillance (103).
Imaging should consist of high-quality, triphasic,
contrast-enhanced CT or MR-based imaging with the
first assessment as early as 4 weeks following locoregional therapy to establish a new baseline (104)
(Figure 15.10). However, the initial post-SBRT
imaging can be obtained at 3 months to allow resolution of radiation inflammation. Thereafter, repeat
imaging is recommended every 3 to 6 months for the
initial 2 years after treatment. This duration of interval surveillance is based on observational data, which
were used to estimate the anticipated growth rates
of HCC (105,106). After the first 2 years, imaging
can be obtained every 6 to 12 months or a liver
ultrasound every 6 months may be recommended
per the accepted 2010 American Association for the
Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) guideline on HCC
surveillance (107). If initially elevated, laboratory
testing with serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) levels
should be obtained every 3 months for the first
2 years, and then every 6 to 12 months thereafter.
In the event of suspicious imaging or laboratory
findings, additional workup should be initiated per
the algorithm for de novo disease.

(A)

(B)

(C)
FIGURE 15.10 Serial follow-up imaging of a liver lesion

treated with SBRT. The patient was a 70-year-old female with
a 1.3-cm lesion of metastatic small-cell lung cancer to segment eight of the liver treated with SBRT to 45 Gy in three
fractions. (A) Axial CT at treatment planning, (B) axial CT at
3 months post-SBRT showing partial response, and (C) axial
CT at 9 months post-SBRT showing complete response.

SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 238

As a general rule in HCC, the lack of contrast
uptake on CT or MRI signals a favorable treatment effect to tumor ablation (108). The desired
outcome on follow-up imaging after SBRT is to
produce a nonenhancing ablated zone encompassing the entire tumor. However, persistent contrast
uptake and arterial vascular enhancement within
the tumor followed by contrast washout in the
delayed phase may not necessarily represent treatment failure. Any areas of apparent persistent
enhancement should be serially monitored, as a
delayed tumor response has been documented for
HCC treated via SBRT (108–110).
In general, for primary and metastatic liver tumors,
definitions of stable disease, partial response, or
complete response use Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) on the basis of
extent of local control, the methodology of response
assessment used in NRG 1112. One such study on
277 tumors showed that radiographic complete
response rates at 3, 6, and 12 months posttreatment
were 24%, 67%, and 71%, respectively, with a
small fraction of tumors showing response
greater than 2 years posttreatment (111). Modified RECIST have been proposed to account for
evaluating treated lesions that do not necessarily
change in size (112). Thus, the determination
of disease status is based on the response of the
viable enhancing portion of the target lesion, and
the definition of local control can be considered
the absence of progressive disease of enhancing
viable tumor.
Follow-up imaging can be challenging to read
as regions of nontumorous hepatic parenchyma
treated with SBRT will have evidence of arterial hypervascularity in up to 50% of patients at
6 months posttreatment (113), which can serve as
a potential source for false-positive recurrences.
The key difference between nontumorous enhancement and viable tumor is that normal liver parenchyma after SBRT will have persistent contrast
enhancement in the delayed phase, whereas tumor
will undergo delayed washout.
Finally, it is also important to keep in mind that
patients with HCC may have underlying liver disease that itself can cause significant morbidity and
mortality. Such patients must have the appropriate surveillance under a multidisciplinary team for
progression of liver dysfunction and esophageal
varices in addition to their standard post-SBRT
assessments.
For metastatic lesions, single-venous phasecontrast CT is sufficient for surveillance imaging on
a similar schedule. Caution should be used to avoid

23/08/18 4:35 PM

15: LIVER SBRT

(A)

(B)

239

(C)

FIGURE 15.11 Imaging of benign liver changes following SBRT demonstrating liver parenchymal changes that may

mimic tumor progression. (A) SBRT plan showing isodose distribution, (B) CT 3 months after SBRT showing area of
hypodensity that approximates the 40% prescription isodose line, and (C) CT 7 months after SBRT showing resolution of
the hypodensity changes seen earlier.
CT, computed tomography; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

confusing the hypodense appearance of the adjacent
liver parenchyma within the radiation penumbra
with progression of the target lesion (Figure 15.11).
In addition, PET imaging may also be useful to
determine residual active disease for lesions that are
initially FDG-avid. It is important to know that metabolic response may be delayed for several months,
with one study showing that the time for maximum
standardized uptake value (SUVmax) to reduce by
half was 3.8 months with median SUVmax of 2.6 at
7 months (82).

OUTCOMES
There are several retrospective and prospective
studies that detail patient outcomes following
liver SBRT for unresectable HCC, ICC, and liver
metastases from other primary sites (Table 15.3).
However, little data are available directly comparing SBRT with other local treatment modalities
for unresectable disease such as RFA or TACE. It
should be noted that patients with liver metastases often have better liver function than patients
with HCC, and the radiosensitivity of these tumors
may be different. Many early studies pooled results
from patients with HCC, liver metastases, and even
ICC, making it difficult to compare across studies
and treatment approaches.

Hepatocellular Carcinoma
Multiple retrospective studies have demonstrated
excellent local control of HCC with variable overall
survival (OS) after SBRT, depending mostly on the
comorbidities of the treatment population (114).
Reported local control has ranged from as low at
51% at 3 years for larger tumors treated with a
median of 45 Gy in three to five fractions (115) to
as high as 91% at 3 years with 35 to 40 Gy in five
fractions for smaller tumors (116).

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 239

Four published prospective studies have investigated SBRT for HCC. Cárdenes et al. performed a
phase I dose escalation trial using 36 to 48 Gy in
three fractions for CP A and 40 Gy in five fractions
for CP B patients with primary HCC and reported
100% local control at a median follow-up of
24 months with 2-year survival of 60% (13).
In an update of their combined phase I/phase II
trial, the authors reported a 2-year local control
of 90% and OS of 67% with the majority of the
patients receiving 48 Gy in three fractions for CP
A and 40 Gy in five fractions for CP B (14). Bujold
et al. treated patients with HCC using 24 to 53 Gy
in six fractions and reported 1-year local control of
87% with complete response in 11% of patients
(16). Median survival was 17.0 months. Kang
et al. treated patients with inoperable HCC with
incomplete response to TACE with 42 to 60 Gy
in three fractions (15). Of these patients, 38.3%
had a complete response and 38.3% had a partial
response. Two-year local control was 94.6% with
68.7% OS.
Previous studies have shown that percutaneous
ablation outperforms transarterial chemoablation,
particularly for smaller HCC tumors (117,118).
Prospective studies evaluating percutaneous ablation with RFA, percutaneous ethanol injection,
percutaneous acetic acid injection, or microwave
ablation have reported local control rates of 47%
to 88.6% with 3-year OS of 33% to 77.8% (65).
Although many patients with HCC included on
SBRT trials to date either have received other
treatments earlier or are unsuitable for typical local
therapies, the current data suggest that SBRT compares favorably with other local treatment options
in terms of local control and OS.
Wahl et al. retrospectively compared SBRT with
RFA for inoperable HCC (29). Despite patients
treated with SBRT having worse liver function prior
to treatment, they reported 2-year freedom from

23/08/18 4:35 PM

240

Study

Histology

Patients

Tumors

Mean/Median
Tumor Volume
(cm3)

Tse et al. (12)

HCC, CC

41

41

173

24–54 Gy in six
fractions

17.6

12% liver

65% (1 year)

51% (1 year)

Cárdenes
et al. (13)

HCC

17

25

34

36–48 Gy in three
to five fractions

24

23.5% liver

100% (2 year)

60% (2 year)

Andolino
et al. (14)

HCC

60

71

29

24–48 Gy in three
to five fractions

27

0%

90% (2 year)

67% (2 year)

Kang et al.
(15)

HCC

47

56

14.9

42–60 Gy in three
fractions

17

6.4% GI

94.6% (2 year)

68.7% (2 year)

Bujold et al.
(16)

HCC

102

>162

117

24–54 Gy in six
fractions

31.4

30% liver,
chest wall

74% (2 year)

34% (2 year)

Bush et al.
(17)

HCC

33

>51

17.2

70.2 GyE in 15
fractions (protons)

28

N/A

88% (2 year)

59% (2 year)

Hong et al.
(18)

HCC, CC

92

108

97

67.5 GyE in 15
fractions (protons)

19.5

1% liver, GI

94.4% (2 year)

63.2% HCC, 46.5%
CC (2 year)

Herfarth et al.
(19)

CRC, BC, CC,
HCC, OC

37

60

10

14–26 Gy in one
fraction

15.1

0%

68% (18 month)

25 months (median)

Hoyer et al.
(20)

CRC

64

141

22.4

45 Gy in three
fractions

51.6

16.3% chest
wall, GI

86% (2 year)

13% (5 year)

Lee et al. (4)

CRC, BC, OC

68

143

75.2

27.7–60 Gy in six
fractions

10.8

9% liver, GI

71% (1 year)

47% (18 month)

Rusthoven
et al. (21)

CRC, LC, BC,
HCC, OC

47

63

14.9

36–60 Gy in three
fractions

16

2% chest wall

92% (2 year)

30% (2 year)

van der Pool
et al. (22)

CRC

20

31

6.4

37.5–45 Gy in
three fractions

26

10% liver

74% (2 year)

83% (2 year)

Goodman
et al. (23)

CRC, CC,
HCC, BC, OC

26

40

32.6

18–30 Gy in one
fraction

17

0%

77% (1 year)

50.4% (2 year)

Scorsetti et al.
(89)

CRC, BC, OC

61

76

18.6

52.5–75 Gy in
three fractions

12

1.6% chest
wall

90.6% (22 month)

83.5% (1 year)

Dose

Median
Follow-Up
(Months)

Grade ≥3
Toxicity

Local
Control

Overall Survival

BC, breast cancer, CC; cholangiocarcinoma; CRC, colorectal cancer; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; LC, lung cancer; N/A, not available; OC, other cancers.

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 240

TABLE 15.3 Outcomes of Select Prospective Studies of Liver Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy and Hypofractionated Particle Therapy

23/08/18 4:35 PM

15: LIVER SBRT

local progression of 80.2% for RFA and 83.8% for
SBRT and OS of 53% for RFA and 46% for SBRT.
Importantly, for tumors of 2 cm or more, SBRT
had significantly improved freedom from local
progression compared with RFA, suggesting that
SBRT is more effective for larger tumors. However, this study used the original RECIST, which
may not account for tumor necrosis and may affect
the assessment of local progression (119). Overall, these data support the use of SBRT as primary
treatment for inoperable HCC, and further randomized clinical trials will be needed to establish
the first-line local therapy for inoperable HCC.
Data are emerging comparing SBRT with TACE.
Sapir et al. retrospectively compared outcomes
of patients treated at the University of Michigan
with SBRT (125 patients with 173 lesions) and
TACE (84 patients with 114 lesions). The local
control for SBRT versus TACE was 96.5% versus
47% at 1 year and 91% versus 23% at 2 years
(p < .001). Patients treated with SBRT also had
higher rates of freedom from hepatic progression
at 1 year (56.5% vs. 36%) and 2 years (27% vs.
11%) compared with patients treated with TACE
(p < .001) (69). In a prospective randomized trial,
investigators at Loma Linda University compared
proton RT (70.2 Gy in 15 fractions) with TACE
(17). Although only 69 patients were randomized,
the 2-year local control was 88% for RT and 45%
for TACE (p = .06), and the 2-year progression-free
survival was 48% for RT and 31% for TACE (p = .06).
SBRT can also be used to “bridge” patients to
liver transplantation, as up to 30% of patients
awaiting transplantation are removed from the
list because of progressive disease (38). O’Connor
et al. reported on the long-term outcomes of SBRT
as a bridge to orthotopic liver transplantation in
patients with HCC. With a median SBRT dose of
51 Gy (range 33–54 Gy) in three fractions, both
the 5-year overall and disease-free survival rates
were 100%. Explant pathology revealed a complete response rate in 27% of patients, with the
remaining patients having tumors that decreased or
remained stable in size (120). Barry et al. retrospectively reviewed outcomes in 400 patients with HCC
receiving SBRT as a bridge for liver transplant.
With a median SBRT dose of 36 Gy in six fractions,
5-year overall and disease-free survival in patients
who went on to have transplant were 76% and
79%, respectively (38). There was no increase in
operative morbidity during the time of transplant,
and the authors concluded that SBRT can be a safe
and effective bridge therapy to liver transplant.

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 241

241

Investigators at Massachusetts General Hospital and MD Anderson reported results of phase
II prospective study of 92 patients (83 analyzable
patients) with HCC (n = 44) or ICC (n = 39) treated
with proton RT (58.05 GyE for central tumors
within 2 cm of the porta hepatis or 67.5 GyE for
peripheral tumors >2 cm from the porta hepatis),
with a median dose delivered of 58 Gy. The median
tumor size was 5 cm for HCC and 6 cm for ICC,
and approximately 29% of patients had tumor vascular thrombus. Despite the locally advanced disease of these patients, the 2-year local control was
94.8% for HCC and 94.1% for ICC (18).
The selection of protons versus photons remains
a subject of controversy given the excellent local
control seen with both proton- and photon-based
therapy for HCC. The proton series show impressive OS and it remains unclear if this is because
of patient selection or improved hepatic function
because of a yet unclarified dose–volume relationship with increasing CP score. A randomized trial
is planned directly comparing protons with photons for HCC (NRG GI-003).

Intrahepatic Cholangiocarcinoma
Liver SBRT is indicated for the management of
unresectable ICC. The available evidence is limited
primarily to single-institution retrospective studies. The Mayo Clinic reported on 10 patients with
unresectable or recurrent advanced cholangiocarcinoma who underwent SBRT to a median dose of
55 Gy in three or five fractions. One-year freedom
from distant progression and OS were 31% and
73%, respectively, with one case of grade 3 biliary
stenosis and one case of grade 5 liver failure
(121). O’Connor et al. reported the Baylor University experience of 12 patients with unresectable HCC treated with SBRT to a median dose of
24 Gy in three fractions, and found 75% rate of
local control with 25% complete response rate for
patients with follow-up imaging, with 25% rate
of acute toxicity (all grade 1) (40). Sandler et al.
reported the University of California–Los Angeles
(UCLA) experience of 25 patients with unresectable extrahepatic disease and six patients with ICC
who underwent SBRT to a median dose of 40 Gy
in five fractions. Median time to progression and
OS were 16.8 and 31.3 months, respectively, at
the cost of 77% grades 1 to 2 toxicity and 16%
grade 3 or higher toxicity. Four patients actually
received SBRT as bridge therapy and eventually
underwent liver transplantation (122). Overall, the
evidence suggests that SBRT may be a promising

23/08/18 4:35 PM

242

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

option for properly selected patients with unresectable or recurrent cholangiocarcinoma, either
definitively for local control or as a bridge to liver
transplantation.
As mentioned earlier, a prospective trial of proton RT to a median dose of 58 GyE resulted in a
2-year local control of 94.1% (18). Investigators
at MD Anderson reported results of dose-escalated
EBRT for unresectable ICC in 79 patients (123).
The median tumor size was 7.9 cm (range: 2.2–17).
Using a median dose of 58.05 Gy (range: 35–100)
in three to 30 fractions and a median BED of
80.5 Gy (range: 43.75–180 Gy), the investigators found 3-year local control of 78% for BED
more than 80.5 Gy compared with 45% for BED
of 80.5 Gy or less (p = .04). In addition, 3-year
OS was improved with higher BED compared with
that with lower BED (73% vs. 38%, p = .017).
On the basis of these results, a randomized trial
has been initiated to evaluate whether the effect on
local control seen with high-dose RT translates into
improvements in OS. In NRG GI-001, patients are
randomized following chemotherapy to high-dose
15-fraction RT versus observation (124).

Liver Metastases
To date, no randomized phase III data have been
published on SBRT for liver metastases, but there
are several retrospective and prospective clinical studies. Most studies have combined multiple
different tumor histologies, with colon cancer,
lung cancer, and breast cancer being the most frequently represented. Studies to date have generally limited treatment to patients with five or fewer
liver metastases. In prospective studies, reported
local control has ranged from 68% at 18 months
with 14 to 26 Gy in one fraction (19) to 92% at
2 years with 36 to 60 Gy in three fractions (21).
Tumor size appears to be an important factor.
Rusthoven et al. reported 2-year local control of
100% for tumors 3 cm or less compared with that
of 77% for tumors greater than 3 cm (21). Similarly,
Lee et al. found that local control was improved
with smaller volume tumors less than 75.2 mL and
higher delivered dose on univariate analysis (4). In
contrast, Scorsetti et al. did not find any difference in
local control rates for using the cutoff established by
Rusthoven et al. when using 75 Gy in three fractions
(89). There is data suggesting that local control is
worse for colorectal metastases (125,126).
In prospective trials, OS varied from 67%
at 1 year following 45 Gy in three fractions for
CRC metastases (20) to 83.5% at 1 year following

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 242

75 Gy in three fractions for mixed histologies (89).
Scorsetti et al. did not find any association between
primary tumor site or prior treatments and OS
(89). Hoyer et al. found improved OS in patients
with metachronous metastases or largest metastasis less than 35 mm (20). Rusthoven et al. reported
worse median survival for tumors from the lung,
ovaries, and noncolorectal gastrointestinal sites
(12 months) versus breast, colorectal, renal,
carcinoid, gastrointestinal stromal tumors, and
sarcomas (32 months) (21). Similar to HCC, there
are more data available for percutaneous ablation
of liver metastases with OS up to 33% at 5 years
in select patients following RFA (127). Long-term
follow-up after SBRT and prospective randomized
trials will be necessary to determine the optimal
first-line nonsurgical approach.

QUALITY OF LIFE
Few studies have focused specifically on the effect of
liver SBRT on quality of life for patients. Given the
poor long-term outcome in the majority of patients
with HCC and liver metastases, quality of life is
critically important when evaluating treatment
options. A recent value of information analysis suggested that additional studies evaluating quality of
life after liver-directed therapies would provide the
best information for guiding treatment decisions in
patients with liver tumors (128). Because RT is a
noninvasive procedure, its inherent advantage is to
reduce acute morbidity and mortality. For example,
a prospective randomized trial of proton RT versus
TACE with 69 patients with HCC revealed that proton RT had significantly fewer hospitalization days
within 1 month of treatment compared with TACE
(24 days vs. 166 days, p < .001) (17).
In patients with HCC, liver metastases, or ICC,
Klein et al. found that liver SBRT did not affect overall quality of life on the basis of both general and
liver-specific quality of life questionnaires (129).
Appetite loss and fatigue significantly worsened
1 month after treatment, but recovered by
3 months. Higher baseline quality of life scores
were associated with improved survival. Méndez
Romero et al. reported similar results with mean
quality of life scores trending toward improvement
compared with baseline after treatment (130).
These results are promising and suggest that SBRT
is well tolerated and may delay deterioration of
quality of life secondary to liver tumor progression. Additional studies are needed to establish the
baseline quality of life in these patients and more

23/08/18 4:35 PM

15: LIVER SBRT

importantly to compare with other established
therapies that may be associated with more invasiveness and thus more morbidity.

SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
For liver metastases, most studies have demonstrated 1% to 10% grade 3 or higher toxicity
associated with SBRT (131). Although transient
elevations in hepatic transaminases are common
following SBRT, most prospective studies have
reported no or rare incidence of radiation-induced
liver disease (RILD) (4,21,89). The highest rate
of grade 3 liver toxicity was reported by van der
Pool et al. whose study found that two of their
20 patients developed grade 3 liver toxicity with
liver enzyme elevation following three fractions of
12.5 to 15 Gy per fraction (22). However, in prospective studies, the rate of RILD appears to be
less than 1% following SBRT for liver metastases.
Given the frequency of preexisting liver disease
in patients with HCC, it is difficult to distinguish
RILD from worsening of previous liver disease
unrelated to SBRT. However, worse baseline liver
function appears to predispose to liver toxicity. In
the Cárdenes et al. phase I dose escalation study for
primary HCC, two CP B patients developed grade
3 hepatic toxicity after 42 Gy in three fractions,
and their protocol was amended to 40 Gy in five
fractions for CP B patients with only one additional
patient developing progressive liver failure (13).
Andolino et al. reported that 20% of patients
developed progression of their CP class after SBRT
within 3 months of treatment, and two of the
56 patients who completed treatment died from progressive liver failure within 3.5 and 4 months (14).
There was no association between toxicity and the
dose delivered to normal liver. Although Bujold
et al. reported no classic RILD in their patients,
they observed a decline in CP class in 29% of
patients at 3 months and in 6% at 12 months that
was not related to progression of their HCC (16).
The most common extrahepatic complications result from lesions close to the bowel and
chest wall. Kang et al. reported that two of their
47 patients with inoperable HCC developed gastric
ulcer perforation (15). On retrospective review of
their data, they identified that three of five patients
with preexisting gastroduodenal ulcers developed
severe GI toxicities after SBRT, suggesting that
preexisting ulcers are a significant risk factor for GI
toxicity. They suggested that esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) could be beneficial to determine

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 243

243

the presence of ulcers if tumors are located near the
stomach or duodenum. Lee et al. reported grade 2
nontraumatic rib fractures in two patients treated
for liver metastases after SBRT associated with a
maximum dose to 0.5 mL of rib of 51.8 and 66.2
Gy in six fractions (4). Rusthoven et al. reported
that a patient treated with 60 Gy in three fractions
for an inferior-lateral right lobe carcinoid metastases developed grade 3 soft tissue breakdown
requiring surgical debridement (21). On review
of the patient’s plan, this area had received 48 Gy.
These toxicities emphasize the importance of careful planning and patient selection to limit dose to
surrounding structures.
Other considerations in dose prescription and
fractionation include exacerbated toxicity in the
setting prior to local therapies in the same area,
particularly transarterial radioembolization, where
data suggest increased risk of severe liver toxicity when embolization and EBRT are combined
(132). In addition, there is emerging evidence
that combining hypofractionation with targeted
agents against vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) may be associated with unexpected and
severe gastrointestinal toxicity (133), and thus
caution should be applied in this setting until further understanding of this interaction is available.
Physicians should also be aware of chemotherapy-associated liver injury, particularly in patients
who undergo extensive chemotherapy for colorectal liver metastases. The chemotherapy regimen
determines the pattern of hepatic parenchymal
injury—oxaliplatin-based regimens are associated
with grade 2 or higher sinusoidal injury and irinotecan-based regimens are associated with steatohepatitis (134). Such injuries may carry implications in
the functional reserve of remaining liver in patients
who undergo SBRT to focal lesions, although data
are currently lacking.

CONCLUSIONS
SBRT has become an increasingly adopted modality
for treatment of patients with primary and secondary liver tumors. The highly conformal and precise
nature of SBRT allows for safe dose escalation
leading to improved outcomes without increased
rates of serious toxicities such as radiationinduced liver disease. Finally, combining SBRT
with other locoregional and systemic treatment
modalities may lead to further improvements in
disease outcomes, and these approaches are under
active investigation.

23/08/18 4:35 PM

244

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

SUMMARY OF DOSE CONSTRAINTS
(TABLE 15.4)
TABLE 15.4 Dose Constraints for Liver Primaries and
Metastases Using SBRT
Liver Metastases or
Hepatocellular Carcinoma

60–75 Gy in Four to Five
Fractions

Critical Structures

Suggested Dose Limits

Liver

≥700 mL <21 Gy
(five fractions) ≥700 mL
<15 Gy (three fractions)

Mean liver dose

≤15.4 Gy

Stomach
Duodenum
Bowel

Dmax <40 Gy
V25 <9 mL
V30 <5 mL
V35 <1 mL

Kidney

V5 <50 Gy

Kidney (ipsilateral)

V12.3Gy <130 mL

Chest wall

V30 <30 mL
D2 mL <27 Gy

Heart

Dmean <12 Gy
V15 <10%

Spinal cord

Dmax <15 Gy (three
fractions)

SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

REFERENCES
1. Mornex F, Girard N, Beziat C, et al. Feasibility and efficacy
of high-dose three-dimensional-conformal radiotherapy in
cirrhotic patients with small-size hepatocellular carcinoma
non-eligible for curative therapies: mature results of the French
Phase II RTF-1 trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2006;
66(4):1152-1158. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2006.06.015
2. Seong J, Lee IJ, Shim SJ, et al. A multicenter retrospective
cohort study of practice patterns and clinical outcome on
radiotherapy for hepatocellular carcinoma in Korea. Liver
Int. 2009;29(2):147-152. doi:10.1111/j.1478-3231.2008.
01873.x
3. Liang SX, Zhu XD, Lu HJ, et al. Hypofractionated threedimensional conformal radiation therapy for primary liver carcinoma. Cancer. 2005;103(10):2181-2188. doi:10.1002/cncr.21012
4. Lee MT, Kim JJ, Dinniwell R, et al. Phase I study of individualized
stereotactic body radiotherapy of liver metastases. J Clin Oncol.
2009;27(10):1585-1591. doi:10.1200/JCO.2008.20.0600
5. Ingold JA, Reed GB, Kaplan HS, et al. Radiation hepatitis.
Am J Roentgenol Radium Ther Nucl Med. 1965;93:200-208.
PubMed PMID: 14243011.
6. Meyer J. Stereotactic radiation therapy for hepatic malignancies. Minerva Gastroenterol Dietol. 2016;62(4):305-315.
PubMed PMID: 27681222.
7. Lawrence TS, Robertson JM, Anscher MS, et al. Hepatic toxicity resulting from cancer treatment. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 1995;31(5):1237-1248. doi:10.1016/0360-3016(94)
00418-K

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 244

8. Czito BG, Meyer JJ, Willett CG. Overview of gastrointestinal toxicity of radiation therapy: upto date [Internet]. 2018. Available at:
https://www-uptodate-com.laneproxy.stanford.edu/contents/
overview-of-gastrointestinal-toxicity-of-radiation-therapy
9. Huang Y, Chen SW, Fan CC, et al. Clinical parameters for
predicting radiation-induced liver disease after intrahepatic
reirradiation for hepatocellular carcinoma. Radiat Oncol.
2016;11:89. doi:10.1186/s13014-016-0663-1
10. Cheng JC, Wu JK, Huang CM, et al. Radiation-induced
liver disease after three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy for patients with hepatocellular carcinoma: dosimetric
analysis and implication. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2002;
54(1):156-162. PubMed PMID: 12182986.
11. Blomgren H, Lax I, Näslund I, et al. Stereotactic high dose
fraction radiation therapy of extracranial tumors using an
accelerator: clinical experience of the first thirty-one patients.
Acta Oncol. 1995;34(6):861-870. PubMed PMID: 7576756.
12. Tse RV, Hawkins M, Lockwood G, et al. Phase I study of
individualized stereotactic body radiotherapy for hepatocellular carcinoma and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. J Clin
Oncol. 2008;26(4):657-664. doi:10.1200/JCO.2007.14.3529
13. Cárdenes HR, Price TR, Perkins SM, et al. Phase I feasibility
trial of stereotactic body radiation therapy for primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Transl Oncol. 2010;12(3):218-225.
doi:10.1007/s12094-010-0492-x
14. Andolino DL, Johnson CS, Maluccio M, et al. Stereotactic
body radiotherapy for primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;81(4):e447-e453. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2011.04.011
15. Kang JK, Kim MS, Cho CK, et al. Stereotactic body radiation
therapy for inoperable hepatocellular carcinoma as a local
salvage treatment after incomplete transarterial chemoembolization. Cancer. 2012;118(21):5424-5431. doi:10.1002/cncr.27533
16. Bujold A, Massey CA, Kim JJ, et al. Sequential phase I and
II trials of stereotactic body radiotherapy for locally advanced
hepatocellular carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(13):1631-1639.
doi:10.1200/JCO.2012.44.1659
17. Bush DA, Smith JC, Slater JD, et al. Randomized clinical
trial comparing proton beam radiation therapy with transarterial chemoembolization for hepatocellular carcinoma:
results of an interim analysis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2016;95(1):477-482. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2016.02.027
18. Hong TS, Wo JY, Yeap BY, et al. Multi-institutional phase II
study of high-dose hypofractionated proton beam therapy
in patients with localized, unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. J Clin Oncol.
2016;34(5):460-468. doi:10.1200/JCO.2015.64.2710
19. Herfarth KK, Debus J, Wannenmacher M. Stereotactic
radiation therapy of liver metastases: update of the initial
phase-I/II trial. Front Radiat Ther Oncol. 2004;38:100-105.
PubMed PMID: 15458194.
20. Hoyer M, Roed H, Traberg Hansen A, et al. Phase II study
on stereotactic body radiotherapy of colorectal metastases. Acta Oncol. 2006;45(7):823-830. doi:10.1080/
02841860600904854
21. Rusthoven KE, Kavanagh BD, Cardenes H, et al. Multiinstitutional phase I/II trial of stereotactic body radiation
therapy for liver metastases. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(10):
1572-1578. doi:10.1200/JCO.2008.19.6329
22. van der Pool AE , Méndez Romero A, Wunderink W, et al.
Stereotactic body radiation therapy for colorectal liver metastases. Br J Surg. 2010;97(3):377-382. doi:10.1002/bjs.6895
23. Goodman KA, Wiegner EA, Maturen KE, et al. Doseescalation study of single-fraction stereotactic body radiotherapy for liver malignancies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2010;78(2):486-493. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.08.020

23/08/18 4:35 PM

15: LIVER SBRT
24. Scorsetti M, Comito T, Tozzi A, et al. Final results of a phase II
trial for stereotactic body radiation therapy for patients with
inoperable liver metastases from colorectal cancer. J Cancer
Res Clin Oncol. 2015;141(3):543-553. doi:10.1007/s00432014-1833-x
25. Timmerman R, Paulus R, Galvin J, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for inoperable early stage lung cancer. JAMA.
2010;303(11):1070-1076. doi:10.1001/jama.2010.261
26. Chang JY, Senan S, Paul MA, et al. Stereotactic ablative
radiotherapy versus lobectomy for operable stage I non-smallcell lung cancer: a pooled analysis of two randomised trials.
Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(6):630-637. doi:10.1016/S1470-2045
(15)70168-3
27. Pollom EL, Alagappan M, von Eyben R, et al. Single- versus
multifraction stereotactic body radiation therapy for pancreatic adenocarcinoma: outcomes and toxicity. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2014;90(4):918-925. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2014.06.066
28. Trakul N, Koong AC, Chang DT. Stereotactic body radiotherapy in the treatment of pancreatic cancer. Semin Radiat Oncol.
2014;24(2):140-147. doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.2013.11.008
29. Wahl DR, Stenmark MH, Tao Y, et al. Outcomes after stereotactic body radiotherapy or radiofrequency ablation for
hepatocellular carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(5):452-459.
doi:10.1200/JCO.2015.61.4925
30. Mahadevan A, Dagoglu N, Mancias J, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy (SBRT) for intrahepatic and hilar cholangiocarcinoma. J Cancer. 2015;6(11):1099-1104. doi:10.7150/
jca.13032
31. Ponsky L, Lo SS, Zhang Y, et al. Phase I dose-escalation
study of stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for poor
surgical candidates with localized renal cell carcinoma.
Radiother. 2015;117(1):183-187. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2015.
08.030
32. King CR, Freeman D, Kaplan I, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy for localized prostate cancer: pooled analysis
from a multi-institutional consortium of prospective phase II
trials. Radiother Oncol. 2013;109(2):217-221. doi:10.1016/
j.radonc.2013.08.030
33. RTOG. Clinical trials: study number 0938 [Internet].
[cited December 2, 2016]. Available at: https://www.rtog.
org/ClinicalTrials/ProtocolTable/StudyDetails.aspx?
study=0938
34. Kress MS, Collins BT, Collins SP, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for liver metastases from colorectal cancer:
analysis of safety, feasibility, and early outcomes. Front Oncol.
2012;2:8. doi:10.3389/fonc.2012.00008
35. Baumann BC, Nagda SN, Kolker JD, et al. Efficacy and safety
of stereotactic body radiation therapy for the treatment of
pulmonary metastases from sarcoma: a potential alternative
to resection. J Surg Oncol. 2016;114(1):65-69. doi:10.1002/
jso.24268
36. Altekruse SF, McGlynn KA, Reichman ME. Hepatocellular carcinoma incidence, mortality, and survival trends
in the United States from 1975 to 2005. J Clin Oncol.
2009;27(9):1485-1491. doi:10.1200/JCO.2008.20.7753
37. Llovet JM, Fuster J, Bruix J. Intention-to-treat analysis of surgical treatment for early hepatocellular carcinoma: resection
versus transplantation. Hepatology. 1999;30(6):1434-1440.
doi:10.1002/hep.510300629
38. Barry AS, Sapisochin G, Russo M, et al. The use of stereotactic body radiotherapy as a bridge to liver transplantation for
hepatocellular carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(suppl 4):418.
doi:10.1200/jco.2016.34.4_suppl.418
39. Shaib YH, Davila JA, McGlynn K, et al. Rising incidence
of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma in the United States: a

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 245

245

true increase? J Hepatol. 2004;40(3):472-477. doi:10.1016/
j.jhep.2003.11.030
40. O’Connor J, Goldstein R. Stereotactic body radiation therapy
in the treatment of unresectable intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(suppl 4):335. doi:10.1200/
jco.2011.29.4_suppl.335. Available at: http://meetinglibrary.
asco.org/content/71545-103
41. Crane CH, Macdonald KO, Vauthey JN, et al. Limitations of
conventional doses of chemoradiation for unresectable biliary
cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2002;53(4):969-974.
PubMed PMID: 12095564.
42. Alden ME, Mohiuddin M. The impact of radiation dose in
combined external beam and intraluminal Ir-192 brachytherapy for bile duct cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
1994;28(4):945-951. PubMed PMID: 8138448.
43. Deodato F, Clemente G, Mattiucci GC, et al. Chemoradiation and brachytherapy in biliary tract carcinoma: long-term
results. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2006;64(2):483-488.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2005.07.977
44. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clinical
practice guidelines in oncology [Internet]. [cited December
14, 2016]. Available at: https://www.nccn.org/professionals/
physician_gls/f_guidelines.asp
45. Folprecht G, Grothey A, Alberts S, et al. Neoadjuvant treatment of unresectable colorectal liver metastases: correlation
between tumour response and resection rates. Ann Oncol.
2005;16(8):1311-1319. doi:10.1093/annonc/mdi246
46. Takeda A, Sanuki N, Kunieda E. Role of stereotactic body
radiotherapy for oligometastasis from colorectal cancer. World
J Gastroenterol. 2014;20(15):4220-4229. doi:10.3748/wjg.
v20.i15.4220
47. van Beijnum J, van der Worp HB , Buis DR, et al. Treatment of brain arteriovenous malformations: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. JAMA. 2011;306(18):2011-2019.
doi:10.1001/jama.2011.1632
48. Park HK, Chang JC. Review of stereotactic radiosurgery for
intramedullary spinal lesions. Korean J Spine. 2013;10(1):
1-6. doi:10.14245/kjs.2013.10.1.1
49. Sinclair J, Chang SD, Gibbs IC, et al. Multisession cyberknife
radiosurgery for intramedullary spinal cord arteriovenous
malformations.
Neurosurgery.
2006;58(6):1081-1089.
doi:10.1227/01.NEU.0000215891.25153.BA
50. Hsu HC, Chen TY, Chiu KW, et al. Three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy for the treatment of arteriovenous shunting in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Br J Radiol.
2007;80(949):38-42. doi:10.1259/bjr/55395102
51. Twyman-Saint Victor C, Rech AJ, Maity A, et al. Radiation and
dual checkpoint blockade activate non-redundant immune
mechanisms in cancer. Nature. 2015;520(7547):373-377.
doi:10.1038/nature14292
52. Gandhi SJ, Minn AJ, Vonderheide RH, et al. Awakening
the immune system with radiation: optimal dose and fractionation. Cancer Lett. 2015;368(2):185-190. doi:10.1016/
j.canlet.2015.03.024
53. Popp I, Grosu AL, Niedermann G, et al. Immune modulation by hypofractionated stereotactic radiation therapy: therapeutic implications. Radiother Oncol. 2016;120(2):185-194.
doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2016.07.013
54. Greten TF, Duffy AG, Korangy F. Hepatocellular carcinoma from an immunologic perspective. Clin Cancer Res.
2013;19(24):6678-6685. doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1721
55. Friedman D, Baird JR, Young KH, et al. Programmed
cell death-1 blockade enhances response to stereotactic
radiation in an orthotopic murine model of hepatocellular
carcinoma. Hepatol Res. 2017;47(7):702-714. doi:10.1111/
hepr.12789

23/08/18 4:35 PM

246

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

56. Hiniker SM, Chen DS, Knox SJ. Abscopal effect in a patient
with melanoma. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(21):2035-2036,
author reply. doi:10.1056/NEJMc1203984
57. Postow MA, Callahan MK, Barker CA, et al. Immunologic
correlates of the abscopal effect in a patient with melanoma. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(10):925-931. doi:10.1056/
NEJMoa1112824
58. Golden EB, Demaria S, Schiff PB, et al. An abscopal response
to radiation and ipilimumab in a patient with metastatic
non-small cell lung cancer. Cancer Immunol Res. 2013;1(6):
365-372. doi:10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-13-0115
59. Reck M, Rodríguez-Abreu D, Robinson AG, et al. Pembrolizumab versus chemotherapy for PD-L1-positive non-smallcell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(19):1823-1833.
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1606774
60. Le DT, Uram JN, Wang H, et al. PD-1 Blockade in
tumors with mismatch-repair deficiency. N Engl J Med.
2015;372(26):2509-2520. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1500596
61. Soares KC, Cosgrove DC, Herman JM, et al. Multidisciplinary clinic in the management of hepatocellular carcinoma. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014;21(4):1059-1061. doi:10.1245/
s10434-013-3419-2
62. Bilchik AJ, Wood TF, Allegra DP. Radiofrequency ablation of
unresectable hepatic malignancies: lessons learned. Oncologist. 2001;6(1):24-33. PubMed PMID: 11161226.
63. Künzli BM, Abitabile P, Maurer CA. Radiofrequency ablation
of liver tumors: actual limitations and potential solutions in
the future. World J Hepatol. 2011;3(1):8-14. doi:10.4254/
wjh.v3.i1.8
64. Wong SL, Mangu PB, Choti MA, et al. American Society of
Clinical Oncology 2009 clinical evidence review on radiofrequency ablation of hepatic metastases from colorectal
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(3):493-508. doi:10.1200/
JCO.2009.23.4450
65. Garrean S, Hering J, Saied A, et al. Radiofrequency ablation
of primary and metastatic liver tumors: a critical review of
the literature. Am J Surg. 2008;195(4):508-520. doi:10.1016/
j.amjsurg.2007.06.024
66. Pompili M, Mirante VG, Rondinara G, et al. Percutaneous
ablation procedures in cirrhotic patients with hepatocellular
carcinoma submitted to liver transplantation: assessment of
efficacy at explant analysis and of safety for tumor recurrence.
Liver Transpl Surg. 2005;11(9):1117-1126. doi:10.1002/
lt.20469
67. Mazzaferro V, Battiston C, Perrone S, et al. Radiofrequency
ablation of small hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhotic
patients awaiting liver transplantation: a prospective study.
Ann Surg. 2004;240(5):900-909. PubMed PMID: 15492574.
68. Chen MS, Li JQ, Zheng Y, et al. A prospective randomized trial comparing percutaneous local ablative therapy
and partial hepatectomy for small hepatocellular carcinoma. Ann Surg. 2006;243(3):321-328. doi:10.1097/01.sla.
0000201480.65519.b8
69. Sapir E, Tao Y, Parikh ND, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) as an alternative to transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(suppl):4087. Available at: http://
meetinglibrary.asco.org/content/170524-176. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2017.09.001
70. McEvoy SH, McCarthy CJ, Lavelle LP, et al. Hepatocellular
carcinoma: illustrated guide to systematic radiologic diagnosis and staging according to guidelines of the American
Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. Radiographics.
2013;33(6):1653-1668. doi:10.1148/rg.336125104
71. Wolfort RM, Papillion PW, Turnage RH, et al. Role of
FDG-PET in the evaluation and staging of hepatocellular

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 246

carcinoma with comparison of tumor size, AFP level, and
histologic grade. Int Surg. 2010;95(1):67-75. PubMed PMID:
20480845.
72. Sacks A, Peller PJ, Surasi DS, et al. Value of PET/CT in the
management of primary hepatobiliary tumors, part 2. AJR
Am J Roentgenol. 2011;197(2):W260-W265. doi:10.2214/
AJR.11.6995
73. Koong AC, Christofferson E, Le QT, et al. Phase II study
to assess the efficacy of conventionally fractionated radiotherapy followed by a stereotactic radiosurgery boost in
patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005;63(2):320-323. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2005.07.002
74. Peiffert D, Baumann AS, Marchesi V. Treatment of hepatic
metastases of colorectal cancer by robotic stereotactic radiation (Cyberknife®). J Visc Surg. 2014;151(suppl 1):S45-S49.
doi:10.1016/j.jviscsurg.2014.01.003
75. Marsico M, Gabbani T, Livi L, et al. Therapeutic usability
of two different fiducial gold markers for robotic stereotactic radiosurgery of liver malignancies: a pilot study. World J
Hepatol. 2016;8(17):731-738. doi: 10.4254/wjh.v8.i17.731
76. Lee JKT. Computed Body Tomography with MRI Correlation.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006:1904.
77. Hong TS, Bosch WR, Krishnan S, et al. Interobserver
variability in target definition for hepatocellular carcinoma
with and without portal vein thrombus: radiation therapy
oncology group consensus guidelines. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys. 2014;89(4):804-813. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2014.
03.041
78. Osmundson EC, Wu Y, Luxton G, et al. Predictors of toxicity associated with stereotactic body radiation therapy to
the central hepatobiliary tract. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2015;91(5):986-994. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2014.11.028
79. Toesca DA, Osmundson EC, Eyben RV, et al. Central liver
toxicity after SBRT: an expanded analysis and predictive
nomogram. Radiother Oncol. 2017;122(1):130–136. doi:10.
1016/j.radonc.2016.10.024
80. De Wever W, Vankan Y, Stroobants S, et al. Detection
of extrapulmonary lesions with integrated PET/CT in the
staging of lung cancer. Eur Respir J. 2007;29(5):995-1002.
doi:10.1183/09031936.00119106
81. RTOG. Clinical trials: study number 1112 [Internet]. [cited
December 14, 2016]. Available at: https://www.rtog.org/
ClinicalTrials/ProtocolTable/StudyDetails.aspx?study=1112
82. Stinauer MA, Kavanagh BD, Schefter TE, et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy for melanoma and renal cell
carcinoma: impact of single fraction equivalent dose on
local control. Radiat Oncol. 2011;6:34. doi:10.1186/1748717X-6-34
83. Binkley MS, Trakul N, Jacobs LR, et al. Colorectal histology
is associated with an increased risk of local failure in lung
metastases treated with stereotactic ablative radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015;92(5):1044-1052.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.04.004
84. Chang DT, Swaminath A, Kozak M, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy for colorectal liver metastases: a pooled analysis.
Cancer. 2011;117(17):4060-4069. doi:10.1002/cncr.25997
85. Yoon SS, Aloia TA, Haynes AB, et al. Surgical placement
of biologic mesh spacers to displace bowel away from unresectable liver tumors followed by delivery of dose-intense
radiation therapy. Pract Radiat Oncol. 2014;4(3):167-173.
doi:10.1016/j.prro.2013.07.007
86. Klein J, Dawson LA. Hepatocellular carcinoma radiation
therapy: review of evidence and future opportunities. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013;87(1):22-32. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2012.08.043

23/08/18 4:35 PM

15: LIVER SBRT
87. Kavanagh BD, Schefter TE, Cardenes HR, et al. Interim analysis of a prospective phase I/II trial of SBRT for liver metastases. Acta Oncol. 2006;45(7):848-855. doi:10.1080/
02841860600904870
88. Schefter TE, Kavanagh BD, Timmerman RD, et al. A phase
I trial of stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) for
liver metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005;62(5):
1371-1378. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2005.01.002
89. Scorsetti M, Arcangeli S, Tozzi A, et al. Is stereotactic body
radiation therapy an attractive option for unresectable liver
metastases? A preliminary report from a phase 2 trial. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013;86(2):336-342. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2012.12.021
90. Rule W, Timmerman R, Tong L, et al. Phase I dose-escalation
study of stereotactic body radiotherapy in patients with
hepatic metastases. Ann Surg Oncol. 2011;18(4):1081-1087.
doi:10.1245/s10434-010-1405-5
91. Méndez Romero A, Wunderink W, Hussain SM, et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy for primary and metastatic
liver tumors: a single institution phase i-ii study. Acta Oncol.
2006;45(7):831-837. doi:10.1080/02841860600897934
92. Son SH, Choi BO, Ryu MR, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for patients with unresectable primary hepatocellular carcinoma: dose-volumetric parameters predicting the
hepatic complication. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;
78(4):1073-1080. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.09.009
93. Pollom EL, Chin AL, Diehn M, et al. Normal tissue constraints
for abdominal and thoracic SBRT. Semin Radiat Oncol.
2017;27(3):197-208. doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.2017.02.001
94. Ojala J. The accuracy of the Acuros XB algorithm in external beam radiotherapy: a comprehensive review. Int J Cancer
Ther Oncol. October 24, 2014;2(4). Available at: http://
ijcto.org/index.php/IJCTO/article/view/0204.17
95. Ma CM, Li JS, Deng J, et al. Implementation of Monte Carlo
Dose calculation for CyberKnife treatment planning. J Phys
Conf Ser. 2008;102(1):12016. doi:10.1088/1742-6596/102/
1/012016
96. Videtic G, Woody N. Handbook of Treatment Planning in
Radiation Oncology. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Demos Medical Publishing; 2015.
97. Papiez L, Timmerman R, DesRosiers C, et al. Extracranial
stereotactic radioablation: physical principles. Acta Oncol.
2003;42(8):882-894. PubMed PMID: 14968949.
98. Paik EK, Kim MS, Choi CW, et al. Dosimetric comparison of
volumetric modulated arc therapy with robotic stereotactic
radiation therapy in hepatocellular carcinoma. Radiat Oncol
J. 2015;33(3):233-241. doi:10.3857/roj.2015.33.3.233
99. Hara R, Itami J, Aruga T, et al. Development of stereotactic
irradiation system of body tumors under respiratory gating.
Nihon Igaku Hoshasen Gakkai Zasshi. 2002;62(4):156-160.
PubMed PMID: 12043219.
100. Murphy MJ, Chang SD, Gibbs IC, et al. Patterns of patient
movement during frameless image-guided radiosurgery. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2003;55(5):1400-1408. PubMed
PMID: 12654453.
101. Lohr F, Debus J, Frank C, et al. Noninvasive patient fixation for extracranial stereotactic radiotherapy. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 1999;45(2):521-527. PubMed PMID:
10487580.
102. Folkert MR, Timmerman RD. Stereotactic ablative body
radiosurgery (SABR) or stereotactic body radiation
therapy (SBRT). Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2017;109:3-14.
doi:10.1016/j.addr.2016.11.005
103. NCCN Guidelines. Hepatobiliary cancers. V2.2016 [Internet].
Available at: https://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_
gls/pdf/hepatobiliary.pdf

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 247

247

104. European Association for The Study of The Liver, European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer.
EASL-EORTC clinical practice guidelines: management of
hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol. 2012;56(4):908-943.
doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2011.12.001
105. Ebara M, Ohto M, Shinagawa T, et al. Natural history of
minute hepatocellular carcinoma smaller than three centimeters complicating cirrhosis: a study in 22 patients. Gastroenterology. 1986;90(2):289-298. PubMed PMID: 2416627.
106. Sheu JC, Sung JL, Chen DS, et al. Growth rate of asymptomatic hepatocellular carcinoma and its clinical implications. Gastroenterology. 1985;89(2):259-266. PubMed
PMID: 2408960.
107. Bruix J, Sherman M. Management of hepatocellular carcinoma: an update. Hepatology. 2011;53(3):1020-1022.
doi:10.1002/hep.24199
108. Price TR, Perkins SM, Sandrasegaran K, et al. Evaluation
of response after stereotactic body radiotherapy for hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer. 2012;118(12):3191-3198. doi:10
.1002/cncr.26404
109. Forner A, Ayuso C, Varela M, et al. Evaluation of tumor
response after locoregional therapies in hepatocellular carcinoma: are response evaluation criteria in solid tumors
reliable? Cancer. 2009;115(3):616-623. doi:10.1002/cncr.
24050
110. Llovet JM, Di Bisceglie AM, Bruix J, et al. Design and endpoints of clinical trials in hepatocellular carcinoma. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2008;100(10):698-711. doi:10.1093/jnci/djn134
111. Sanuki N, Takeda A, Mizuno T, et al. Tumor response
on CT following hypofractionated stereotactic ablative
body radiotherapy for small hypervascular hepatocellular carcinoma with cirrhosis. AJR Am J Roentgenol.
2013;201(6):W812-W820. doi:10.2214/AJR.12.10169
112. Lencioni R, Llovet JM. Modified RECIST (mRECIST)
assessment for hepatocellular carcinoma. Semin Liver Dis.
2010;30(1):52-60. doi:10.1055/s-0030-1247132
113. Park MJ, Kim SY, Yoon SM, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy-induced arterial hypervascularity of nontumorous hepatic parenchyma in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma: potential pitfalls in tumor response
evaluation on multiphase computed tomography. PloS
One. 2014;9(2):e90327. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0090327
114. Sanuki N, Takeda A, Kunieda E. Role of stereotactic body
radiation therapy for hepatocellular carcinoma. World J
Gastroenterol. 2014;20(12):3100-3111. doi:10.3748/wjg.
v20.i12.3100
115. Bae SH, Kim MS, Cho CK, et al. Feasibility and efficacy of
stereotactic ablative radiotherapy for Barcelona Clinic Liver
Cancer-C stage hepatocellular carcinoma. J Korean Med Sci.
2013;28(2):213-219. doi:10.3346/jkms.2013.28.2.213
116. Sanuki N, Takeda A, Oku Y, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy for small hepatocellular carcinoma: a retrospective outcome analysis in 185 patients. Acta Oncol.
2014;53(3):399-404. doi:10.3109/0284186X.2013.820342
117. Kim JW, Kim JH, Sung KB, et al. Transarterial chemoembolization vs. radiofrequency ablation for the treatment
of single hepatocellular carcinoma 2 cm or smaller. Am
J Gastroenterol. 2014;109(8):1234-1240. doi:10.1038/
ajg.2014.152
118. Hsu CY, Huang YH, Chiou YY, et al. Comparison of radiofrequency ablation and transarterial chemoembolization for
hepatocellular carcinoma within the Milan criteria: a propensity score analysis. Liver Transpl. 2011;17(5):556-566.
doi:10.1002/lt.22273
119. Yang JF, Lo CH, Huang WY. Is stereotactic body radiotherapy better than radiofrequency ablation for the treatment of

23/08/18 4:35 PM

248

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

hepatocellular carcinoma? J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(23):2797.
doi:10.1200/JCO.2016.66.4458
120. O’Connor JK, Trotter J, Davis GL, et al. Long-term outcomes of stereotactic body radiation therapy in the treatment of hepatocellular cancer as a bridge to transplantation.
Liver Transpl. 2012;18(8):949-954. doi:10.1002/lt.23439
121. Barney BM, Olivier KR, Miller RC, et al. Clinical outcomes
and toxicity using stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for
advanced cholangiocarcinoma. Radiat Oncol. 2012;7:67.
doi:10.1186/1748-717X-7-67
122. Sandler KA, Veruttipong D, Agopian VG, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for locally advanced extrahepatic and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. Adv Radiat
Oncol. October 28, 2016;1(4):237-243. doi:10.1016/j.adro.
2016.10.00
123. Tao R, Krishnan S, Bhosale PR, et al. Ablative radiotherapy doses lead to a substantial prolongation of survival
in patients with inoperable intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma: a retrospective dose response analysis. J Clin Oncol.
2016;34(3):219-226. doi:10.1200/JCO.2015.61.3778
124. NRG Oncology. Clinical Trials. Study number GI001 [Internet].
[cited January 12, 2017]. Available at: https://www.rtog.org/
ClinicalTrials/ProtocolTable/StudyDetails.aspx?study=1320
125. Andratschke N, Alheid H, Allgäuer M, et al. The SBRT
database initiative of the German Society for Radiation
Oncology (DEGRO): patterns of care and outcome analysis
of stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for liver oligometastases in 474 patients with 623 metastases. BMC Cancer.
2018;18(1):283. doi:10.1186/s12885-018-4191-2
126. Hong TS, Wo JY, Borger DR, et al. Phase II study of protonbased stereotactic body radiation therapy for liver metastases: importance of tumor genotype. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2017;109(9). doi:10.1093/jnci/djx031

Heron_68566_PTR_15_227-248_08-23-18.indd 248

127. Gillams AR, Lees WR. Five-year survival in 309 patients
with colorectal liver metastases treated with radiofrequency
ablation. Eur Radiol. 2009;19(5):1206-1213. doi:10.1007/
s00330-008-1258-5
128. Pollom EL, Lee KY, Durkee BY. Cost-effectiveness of
stereotactic body radiation therapy versus radiofrequency
ablation for hepatocellular carcinoma: a markov modeling study. Radiology. 2017;282(2):460-468. doi:10.1148/
radiol.2016161509
129. Klein J, Dawson LA, Jiang H, et al. Prospective longitudinal
assessment of quality of life for liver cancer patients treated
with stereotactic body radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2015;93(1):16-25. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.04.016
130. Méndez Romero A, Wunderink W, van Os RM, et al. Quality
of life after stereotactic body radiation therapy for primary
and metastatic liver tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2008;70(5):1447-1452. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.08.058
131. Scorsetti M, Clerici E, Comito T. Stereotactic body radiation therapy for liver metastases. J Gastrointest Oncol.
2014;5(3):190-197. doi:10.3978/j.issn.2078-6891.2014.039
132. Lam MG, Abdelmaksoud MH, Chang DT, et al. Safety of 90Y
radioembolization in patients who have undergone previous
external beam radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2013;87(2):323-329. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.05.041
133. Pollom EL, Deng L, Pai RK, et al. Gastrointestinal toxicities
with combined antiangiogenic and stereotactic body radiation
therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015;92(3):568-576.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.02.016
134. Robinson SM, Wilson CH, Burt AD, et al. Chemotherapyassociated liver injury in patients with colorectal liver
metastases: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann
Surg Oncol. 2012;19(13):4287-4299. doi:10.1245/s10434012-2438-8

23/08/18 4:35 PM

C H A P T E R

16

Prostate SBRT
Beant S. Gill, Dwight E. Heron, Sean P. Collins, and Alan J. Katz

Prostate cancer remains the second most common
malignancy in men worldwide, with rising incidence
particularly in developed countries (1). Rates of overall death have, however, been declining on average
3.5% per year since 2004 in the United States, which
may reflect the introduction of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) screening and therapy advancements (2).
Radiation therapy (RT) provides a critical curative
means to treat localized prostate cancer. Rapid technological advancements during the past two decades
including three-dimensional planning and dose escalation via conformal techniques with daily image
guidance can also be attributed to these mortality
reductions by way of improved progression-free survival (3–6). Similarly, with the advent of more conformal intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT),
dose escalation can provide higher rates of disease
cure while reducing the risk of long-term toxicity (7).
In an increasingly cost-conscious environment
and with techniques now enabling better sparing
of nearby critical organs, focus has shifted to provide more convenient and potentially cost-effective
therapeutic measures. Included in these RT
advancements is the concept of moderate hypofractionation, traditionally using doses ranging from
2.5 to 3 Gy per day as opposed to 1.8 to 2 Gy used
in conventional RT regimens. This was initially
explored with the hypothesis of improved disease
outcomes on the basis of radiobiological modeling.
Within the linear-quadratic model, the alpha–beta
(␣/␤) ratio represents the dose threshold where
cell kill is equally provided by the linear and quadratic components. Slowly proliferating cells, most
commonly late-responding normal tissue, would be

expected to have a low ␣/␤ ratio, whereas rapidly
proliferating cells such as most cancer cell lines
would have the opposite. Modeling from the application of clinical data in fact suggested the contrary for prostate adenocarcinoma, where the ␣/␤
is closer to 1.2 to 1.5 Gy (8–10). In an attempt
to capitalize on this ratio relative to rectal tissue,
trials assessing moderate hypofractionation have
been conducted, with results suggesting similar
curative rates in exchange for equal or slightly
increased late toxicity (11–14).
Supporters of hypofractionation argue that establishing superiority may require even higher doses per
fraction (ⱖ5 Gy), which would also capitalize on the
ability to reduce treatment costs and enhance patient
convenience with fewer treatment visits. Stereotactic
body radiation therapy (SBRT) allows for this unique
opportunity by way of further refined conformity,
introducing the concept of extreme hypofractionation. Considered a more novel treatment approach,
mounting data suggest that with meticulous planning
and implementation, SBRT as a means for extreme
hypofractionation is more than an experimental
option, providing excellent outcomes in appropriately
selected patients and opening the door to broader
application in the treatment of prostate cancer.

INDICATIONS FOR PROSTATE SBRT
Primary Treatment
Prostate cancer management is driven by patient
life expectancy, patient preference, and disease risk
stratification, the latter related to initial PSA at the
249

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 249

23/08/18 4:41 PM

250

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

time of diagnosis, tumor staging, and Gleason score.
Monotherapy, mainly by way of prostatectomy or
RT, has been well established for low-risk prostate
cancer (T1a–T2a, Gleason score ⱕ6, and initial PSA
⬍10) with curative rates exceeding 90% (15,16).
With high survival rates and the costs, both financial and in the form of toxicities, active surveillance
using a strict protocol for intervention has been
explored with favorable rates in prospective, observational studies for low-risk patients (17,18). In the
landmark ProtecT (Prostate Testing for Cancer and
Treatment) trial in which patients with mostly lowrisk disease were randomized to active surveillance to
active treatment, no difference in overall survival or
cancer-specific survival was seen at 10 years between
the two groups, arguing for active surveillance to be
a first-line recommendation for low-risk prostate
cancer (16). Yet on these trials assessing active
surveillance, 45% to 59% of men either developed
disease progression or opted to proceed with treatment, the latter attributable to psychological stress
of diagnosis without active management (16–18).
For patients who opt to proceed with active treatment, external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) is a
proven, minimally invasive option delivered to doses
of 75.6 to 79.2 Gy over 42 to 44 daily fractions (19).
In addition to the socioeconomic demands of daily
treatment for 2 months, financial concerns have
been raised with direct Medicare costs in the modern era of $18,000 to $31,574 (20,21). Capitalizing
on the presumed radiobiological benefit of extreme
hypofractionation, SBRT provides an appealing
method to improve patient convenience through
fewer visits and reduce direct medical costs. Medicare reimbursement rates for a course of SBRT are
notably lower, estimated at $14,315 to $20,899
(22,23). These estimates exclude resource demand
reduction and indirect patient costs such as required
housing, travel, and reduced work hours associated
with daily conventional RT. Even so, two studies
have now shown cost-effectiveness of SBRT over
IMRT, maintaining superiority even if slight decrements are seen in efficacy and/or toxicity (22,23).
Technical feasibility of SBRT for prostate cancer
was shown in the early 2000s using a CyberKnife®
treatment platform (Accuray Inc., Sunnyvale, CA)
(24). In this dosimetric feasibility study, plans generated with CyberKnife, compared with step-andshoot IMRT, had improved sparing of bladder and
rectum while providing comparable prostate coverage. Propelled by technical feasibility data and the
wave of interest in hypofractionation as a whole,
multiple retrospective and phases I and II single-arm
prospective studies have been reported with variable

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 250

platforms, showing favorable early outcomes and
acceptable rates of toxicity (Table 16.1) (25–41). A
vast majority of patients in these reported studies
have low- or favorable intermediate-risk disease.
First prospectively reported data from the phases I
and II SHARP (Stereotactic Hypofractionated Accelerated Radiation to the Prostate) studies evaluated
40 patients treated to 33.5 Gy in 5 fractions to the
prostate via noncoplanar beams and a linear accelerator-based SBRT technique (37). Four-year biochemical progression-free survival (bPFS) was 90%
by modern definition with no grade 3 or greater
toxicities reported in the acute nor late setting. In
more recent years, a number of other prospective studies have corroborated these findings. King
et al. provided a pooled analysis of patients prospectively treated in multiple institutional phase II
studies, including a landmark 1,100 patients (25).
With almost all receiving 35 to 36.25 Gy in five
fractions (89%) using a CyberKnife treatment platform, the 5-year bPFS rates were 95.2%, 84.1%,
and 81.2% for low-, intermediate-, and high-risk
patients, respectively. Recent release of a multiinstitutional prospective study using CyberKnife
confirmed a similar rate of 5-year bPFS of 97.1%,
with high rates or both low-risk (97.3%) and favorable intermediate-risk (97.1%) patients and 1.6% rate
of grade 3 toxicities (40). For comparison, the 5-year
biochemical recurrence rates on Radiation Therapy
Oncology Group (RTOG) 0415 were 6.3% to 8.1%
between conventional and moderate hypofractionation (14). Although 21% of patients were treated
with 3D conformal therapy as opposed to IMRT,
late severe (grade ⱖ3) gastrointestinal (GI) and
genitourinary (GU) toxicities rates on RTOG 0415
were 2.6% to 4.1% and 2.3% to 3.5%, respectively.
Report of the Registry for Prostate Cancer Radiosurgery (RPCR), including a robust 1,743 patients,
identified only 1 case of grade 3 urinary toxicity (42).
The overwhelming preponderance of data now
for SBRT has led to a revision in national guidelines
and organizational recommendations. In 2013, the
American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO)
provided a Model Policy supporting the use of SBRT
for “select patients with low- to intermediate-risk
disease” (43). National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines have been more cautious to adopt
this option routinely with current guidelines expressing interest in long-term follow-up but allowing
SBRT as “an alternative to conventionally fractionated regimens at clinics with appropriate technology, physics, and clinical expertise” (44). Growing
support has nevertheless led to the ongoing phase II
NRG/RTOG 0938, which randomizes low-risk

23/08/18 4:41 PM

16: PROSTATE SBRT

251

TABLE 16.1 Studies Using Primary SBRT for Prostate Cancer
Study

Design

n

Risk Group(s)

Total Dose
(Gy)/Fractions

bPFS (%)

Grade ≥3
Late Toxicity

Aluwini 2013 (26)

Prospective

50

Low-intermediate

38/4

2y 100.0%

GI 0%
GU 6%

Bolzicco 2013 (27)

Prospective

100

Low-high

35/5

3y 94.4%

GI 0%
GU 1%

Chen 2013 (28)

Retrospective

100

Low-high

35–36.25/5

2y 99.0%

GI 0%
GU 1%

Freeman 2011 (29)

Prospective

41

Low

35–36.25/5

5y 92.7%

GI 0%
GU 2.5%

Gill 2015 (30)

Prospective

42

Low-intermediate

36.25/5

1.5y 97.1%

GI 0%
GU 0%

Hannan 2016 (31)

Prospective

91

Low-intermediate

45–50/5

5y 98.6%

GI 7%
GU 5.5%

Jabbari 2012 (32)

Prospective

20

Low-intermediate

38/4

1.5y 100.0%

GI 0%
GU 5.3%

Kang 2011 (33)

Retrospective

44

Low-high

32–36/4

5y 90.8–100.0%

GI 0%
GU 0%

Katz 2014 (81)

Prospective/
retrospective

15/462

Low-intermediate

35–36.25/5

7y 89.6/95.6%

GI 0%
GU 2%

King 2012 (35)

Prospective

67

Low

36.25/5

4y 94.0%

GI 0%
GU 3.5%

Loblaw 2013 (36)

Prospective

84

Low

35/5

5y 98.0%

GI 1%
GU 1%

Madsen 2007 (37)

Prospective

40

Low

33.5/5

4y 90.0%

GI 0%
GU 0%

Mantz 2014 (38)

Prospective

102

Low-intermediate

40/5

5y 100.0%

GI 0%
GU 0%

McBride 2012 (39)

Prospective

45

Low

36.25–37.5/5

3y 97.7%

GI 4.4%
GU 2.2%

Meier 2016 (40)

Prospective

309

Low-intermediate

40/5

5y 97.1%

GI 0%
GU 1.6%

Oliai 2013 (41)

Retrospective

70

Low-high

35–37.5/5

3y 77.1–100%

GI 0%
GU 3%

bPFS, biochemical progression-free survival; GI, gastrointestinal; GU, genitourinary; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

patients (Gleason ⱕ6, clinical stage T1–2a, and PSA
⬍10) to extreme hypofractionation (36.25 Gy in
5 fractions) or moderate hypofractionation (51.6 Gy
in 12 fractions), stratified by treatment platform.
In all, this would suggest that SBRT is a reasonable option in experienced centers and particularly
on a clinical protocol or registry until long-term
(10-year) data are finally reached.
Primary treatment of intermediate- and high-risk
disease with prostate SBRT remains more controversial as existing data largely contain low-risk patients.
The failure thus far to prove a survival benefit
to prophylactic whole pelvic RT has buoyed support
for localized SBRT, often encompassing the seminal

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 251

vesicles and prostate with or without androgen
deprivation therapy (ADT) (45,46). An evolving definition of “intermediate-risk disease” has also established a favorable intermediate-risk cohort, defined
as having Gleason 3 + 4 disease with less than 50%
cores positive and only one adverse risk factor
(T2b–c, Gleason 3 + 4 disease, or PSA 10–20)
(44). Among intermediate-risk patients, favorable
intermediate-risk patients have low rates of biochemical relapse, distant metastases, and prostate
cancer–specific mortality (47). Such patients may be
best suited being treated with monotherapy akin to
low-risk prostate cancer and thus may be excellent
candidates for primary SBRT.

23/08/18 4:41 PM

252

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

In their analysis, King et al. reported on 334 patients
(30%) with intermediate-risk disease treated with
primary CyberKnife SBRT, of whom 15% received
ADT (25). The 5-year bPFS rate was 84.1% in the
entire cohort. No difference was seen in outcomes
with or without ADT, although there was a nonsignificant numerical benefit (5-year bPFS, 79.7% vs.
97.2%, p = .17). Meier et al. included more favorable intermediate-risk patients (T1c–2b with either
Gleason 7 and PSA ⬍10 or Gleason 6 and PSA
10–20), revealing a high 5-year bPFS rate of 97.1%
in this group (40). Katz et al. published on 153
intermediate-risk patients, most (69%) with favorable intermediate-risk disease (48). The 8-year bPFS
rate was 84.3% in all intermediate-risk patients. As
suspected, favorable intermediate-risk patients had
a noticeably higher rate of bPFS (93.2% vs. 68.2%,
p < .0001). Again, no significant benefit was seen
with the addition of ADT. These findings would support primary SBRT for favorable intermediate-risk
patients with outcomes similar to modern results for
low-risk disease treated with conventionally fractionated RT. The persistent lack of benefit for ADT seen in
these studies suggests that further dose escalation via
extreme hypofractionation may diminish any advantage.
In contrast, high-risk patients have been shown
to benefit from RT dose escalation, conventionally up to doses of 79.2 to 86.4 Gy, at the cost of
increased bowel toxicities (3–5,49). Coupled with
no proven benefit to pelvic field RT, primary SBRT
with or without ADT may be a reasonable consideration for organ-confined disease, although there
are limited supporting data at present. As a benchmark, modern rates of bPFS for high-risk patients
treated with ADT and dose-escalated EBRT
range from 67.9 to 88.0 Gy (49–51). High-risk
patients treated with or without ADT represented
125 patients (11%) of those reported by King
et al. (25). The 5-year bPFS for these patients was
81.2%, despite only 38% receiving ADT. Katz et al.
reviewed 38 patients with high-risk disease, showing similar 8-year bPFS rates with primary SBRT
for organ-confined disease (8-year rate, 65.0%)
(48). A larger proportion received ADT (55%)
compared with the series by King et al., despite
an overall lower bPFS rate. With emerging benefits of docetaxel and long-term ADT, both of these
may play a role with primary SBRT, although they
have largely not yet been examined in prospective
fashion with mature results (50,52,53). As such,
until complete maturation of SBRT results and
final determination of the role of pelvic RT and/or
ADT, treatment of unfavorable intermediate-risk or

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 252

high-risk disease should be judiciously considered
for organ-confined disease with vigilant follow-up.

SBRT Boost
Dose escalation through conventionally fractionated
RT has been established as a method to improve bPFS
in intermediate- and high-risk patients (3–6). Further
dose escalation was initially explored via brachytherapy, providing a highly conformal method of boost.
The first trial comparing a brachytherapy boost with
EBRT alone in mostly (53%) high-risk patients, while
showing a relapse-free survival benefit, was criticized
for applicability because of the low cumulative dose
on the external beam only arm (54). In contrast, the
ASCENDE-RT (Androgen Suppression Combined
with Elective Nodal and Dose Escalated Radiation
Therapy) trial published this year provides a more
appropriate randomized comparison of dose-escalated
EBRT (78 Gy at 2 Gy per fraction) to 46 Gy EBRT
with a low-dose-rate (LDR) brachytherapy boost, all
receiving 12 months of ADT. Among these intermediate- and high-risk groups, addition of a brachytherapy boost led to further improvement in 7-year bPFS
(75% vs. 86%, p = .004), albeit at the cost of
increased late grade 3 urinary toxicities (5% vs. 19%,
p ⬍ .0001) (55,56). These data have reinvigorated
the role of further dose escalation for unfavorable
intermediate- and high-risk prostate cancer patients.
Few studies have examined a similar approach as
done with brachytherapy, introducing a SBRT boost
following EBRT for intermediate- and/or high-risk
patients (Table 16.2) (34,57–60). The predominant
benefit to SBRT boost over brachytherapy would be
avoidance of an invasive surgical procedure, particularly in an aging population. In addition, the increase
in late GU toxicities with brachytherapy boost, mainly
representing urethral stricture, challenges the potential bPFS benefit. Lower localized hot spots and lesser
dose heterogeneity using SBRT may provide a suitable
balance between dose escalation and toxicities (61).
Existing literature supports a boost dose of 19
to 21 Gy in two to three fractions following EBRT,
providing favorable early rates of bPFS (34,57–60).
Among 97 patients treated with either primary SBRT
or SBRT boost after EBRT for unfavorable intermediate- or high-risk disease, Katz et al. showed no
difference in bPFS between the two treatment
groups nor with the addition of ADT (34). With the
limitation of this being in a relatively small group
of patients, these results would add to skepticism
about the role of pelvic RT or ADT in the setting of
extreme dose escalation. Interestingly, the published

23/08/18 4:41 PM

16: PROSTATE SBRT

253

TABLE 16.2 Retrospective Studies Using SBRT Boost Following External Beam Radiation Therapy
Study

n

Risk Group(s)

SBRT Total
Dose/Fractions

EBRT Total
Dose (Gy)

ADT
Use (%)

bPFS (%)

Grade ≥3
Late Toxicity

Anwar 2016 (56)

48

Intermediate-high

19–21 Gy/2

45–50

87.5

4y 90.0%

GI 0%
GU 2%

Katz 2014 (34)

45

Intermediate-high

19–21 Gy/3

45

62.2

5y 68.0%

GI 0%
GU 2.3%

Mercado 2016 (57)/
Paydar 2017 (58)

108

Low-high

19.5 Gy/3

45–50.4

63.0

3y 89.8–100% GI 1%
GU 6%

Kim 2017 (59)

39

Intermediate-high

21 Gy/3

45

0.0

5y 94.7%

GI 0%
GU 0%

ADT, androgen deprivation therapy; bPFS, biochemical progression-free survival; EBRT, external beam radiation therapy; GI, gastrointestinal;
GU, genitourinary; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

retrospective results for SBRT boost suggest lower
rates of severe late toxicity (grade ⱖ3, 0%–7%)
compared with those seen in the ASCENDE-RT trial
(54). Nonetheless, with a paucity of data, patients
managed with this approach should be followed
prospectively on a clinical protocol.

Local Salvage Following Radiation Therapy
Despite improvements in treatment delivery and
feasibility of dose escalation with or without ADT,
a proportion of patients treated with conventional
RT will still experience biochemical failure, most
commonly those with intermediate- and high-risk
disease. Roughly two-thirds have been shown to
have biopsy-proven local recurrence in the setting
of biochemical failure (62). In the smaller subset
with isolated local recurrence, salvage therapy can
be particularly challenging. Local therapy options
ranging from radical prostatectomy, cryotherapy,
brachytherapy, and SBRT have been explored with
variable rates of success and toxicities.
Salvage radical prostatectomy has long been
reported with the strongest data arising from a multiinstitutional retrospective cohort (63). A majority
(68%) were treated earlier with EBRT with or without brachytherapy. Following salvage prostatectomy,
completed at a median of 41 months from RT, the
5-year bPFS was a modest 48%. Preoperative PSA
and biopsy Gleason score were independent predictors of bPFS with the most favorable outcomes
among those with Gleason ⱕ7 prostate cancer at the
time of recurrence and PSA ⱕ4. Appropriate identification of this cohort is critical as 30-day complication
rates can reach 51% with long-term risks of rectal
injury and anastomotic stricture (64). Alternatively,
relatively small, single-institution series have reported
on the use of salvage LDR or high dose rate (HDR)

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 253

brachytherapy (65–68). Similar to prostatectomy,
rates of bPFS range from 25% to 75%, driven by
presalvage characteristics, and cumulative crude
grades 3 to 4 GU and GI toxicity rates were 13% and
5%, respectively (68). More favorable outcomes have
been seen using HDR brachytherapy (65,66). Such
findings have led to the accrued RTOG 0526, which
is using salvage LDR brachytherapy in select patients.
In light of dosimetric similarities between intact
prostate HDR brachytherapy and prostate SBRT,
salvage SBRT has also been explored as a means
to limit reirradiation to surrounding critical organs
(Table 16.3). Vavassori et al. initially reported on
feasibility in six patients treated using a CyberKnife
platform to deliver 30 Gy in five fractions after a
median EBRT dose of 80 Gy (69). In this limited
subset with only 1-year outcomes, four of six patients
developed biochemical failure, although none within
the prostate bed and no severe toxicities were
reported. Notably, these patients had a very short
median interval to reirradiation (13.5 months), which
reflected in the high rate of biochemical and distant
failure despite local control. Other published series,
all likewise suffering from the same limitation of short
follow-up, appear to have more favorable biochemical
control rates among more selective patients and no
reported severe toxicities as of yet (70–73). Application of salvage SBRT in this setting is, however, in its
infancy with requirement of more data and follow-up
in light of the high risks associated with reirradiation.

EXCLUSION CRITERIA FOR
PROSTATE SBRT
As existing literature is largely confined to short-term
follow-up and retrospective studies, prostate SBRT
should be conducted at a high-volume facility with

23/08/18 4:41 PM

254

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

TABLE 16.3 Retrospective Studies Evaluating Salvage SBRT After Prior Radiation Therapy
Study

n

Median Time (Months)
From EBRT (Range)

Median Dose (Gy)
of EBRT (Range)

SBRT Total
Dose/Fractions

bPFS (%)

Grade ≥3
Toxicity

Vavassori 2010 (68)

6

13.5 (2.7–38.4)

80 (70–80)

30/5

0.9y 33.3%
(crude)

GI 0%
GU 0%

Fuller 2015 (72)

29

88 (32–200)

73.8 (68.4–81)

34/5

2y 82%

GI 0%
GU 4%

Janoray 2016 (69)

21

98 (43.4–398)

70 (45–76)

36.25/5

1y 83.3%

GI 0%
GU 0%

Zerini 2015a (70)

32

115 (33–182)

74 (50–80)

15–30/5

2y 53.2%
(crude)

GI 0%
GU 0%

Detti 2016b (71)

8

115 (34.8–353)

66 (64–70)

35/5

0.8y 56.3%
(crude)

GI 0%
GU 0%

aA proportion treated with conventional radiation therapy methods and to prostate bed.

bAll with prior surgery; outcomes are from entire cohort (includes additional eight patients treated with salvage SBRT without prior
radiation therapy).
bPFS, biochemical progression-free survival; EBRT, external beam radiation therapy; GI, gastrointestinal; GU, genitourinary;
SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

appropriate technical support and expertise. Ideally,
patients should be treated on a clinical protocol with
meticulous follow-up. Nonetheless, a plethora of data
now exists for low- and favorable intermediate-risk
patients, such that prostate SBRT can be considered
an efficacious and safe definitive treatment option
in an equipped and experienced center. Maturation
of existing phase II data and future completion of
RTOG 0938 may ultimately support widespread
adoption of prostate SBRT.
Aside from those for any form of RT (i.e., scleroderma, active inflammatory bowel disease), SBRT
otherwise has few data-driven contraindications.
With the high doses delivered per fraction, one could
reasonably extrapolate relative contraindications
from brachytherapy and moderate hypofractionation literature. Compared with conventionally fractionated RT, Pollack et al. demonstrated increased
late grade ⱖ2 urinary toxicities with modest hypofractionation (hazard ratio [HR]: 4.41, p ⬍ .001)
for patients with higher baseline urinary symptoms, defined as having an International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) greater than 12 (11).
The American Brachytherapy Society (ABS) provides IPSS greater than 20 as a relative contraindication to LDR brachytherapy (74). However,
the ABS guidelines for HDR brachytherapy still
provide this as an option even in patients with significant baseline symptoms, albeit with appropriate counseling (75). Although LDR literature does
indeed suggest an increase in urinary toxicities for
patients with considerable baseline symptoms,
the data for HDR brachytherapy are less distinct
(76,77). This experience is similar for prostate

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 254

SBRT, where existing data have not shown an association with baseline urinary symptoms and the
risk of acute or chronic urinary toxicities. Transient
increases in IPSS and Expanded Prostate Cancer
Index Composite (EPIC)-26 urinary scores are still
expected after prostate SBRT with 13% experiencing late urinary flare symptoms as well (78,79).
Thus, appropriate counseling with patients about
this potential risk may still be advised for those
with exceptionally significant baseline lower urinary tract symptoms (IPSS ⬎20).
Although larger gland size (⬎60 cm3), prominent median lobe, and substantial transurethral
resection of the prostate (TURP) defect are all
relative contraindications for LDR brachytherapy,
these are driven largely by technical challenges
of implantation that should not solely preclude
a patient from SBRT (74). One study evaluating
patients with larger prostate gland size (ⱖ50 cm3)
treated with SBRT found higher rates of grade
2 acute GU toxicities (50% vs. 35%) compared
with their earlier published experience with varying gland size (28,80). Seymour et al. revealed a
roughly fivefold increase in the risk of late grade
2 or greater GU toxicities if gland size is 50 cm3
or higher (81). Prostate volume as a continuous
variable was also found to be predictive for the
risk of late toxicity with a 4% relative increase
per cubic centimeter. Katz et al. revealed a trend
toward significantly high rates of grade 2 (11.6%
vs. 5.3%) and grade 3 (3.1% vs. 0.6%, p = .051)
with prostate volumes greater than 60 cm3 (82).
These findings, however, may be confounded
by differences in dose homogeneity, which was

23/08/18 4:41 PM

16: PROSTATE SBRT

independently related to the risk of late GU toxicity (81). In all, these patients should be appropriately counseled that similar to brachytherapy
literature, there may be a correlation with larger
gland size being associated with a higher risk of
GU toxicities, albeit not conclusively.
As with prostate brachytherapy, patients with
limited life expectancy (⬍10 years), particularly
with low- or favorable intermediate-risk disease,
and non–organ-confined (T3–4 or node-positive)
disease are not suitable candidates for prostate
SBRT. Select T3 patients have been treated earlier
with prostate SBRT, as either monotherapy or a
boost after EBRT, but should not be routinely considered (33,57,59). Lastly, patients with inability
to undergo MRI for treatment planning or with
extensive hip prosthesis resulting in imaging artifact should ideally preclude prostate SBRT on the
basis of inability to accurately delineate the prostate and nearby critical structures. Data regarding
the limitations of non–MRI-based planning are
discussed later.

TREATMENT PROCESS
Because of the high level of precision required, prostate SBRT should be conducted in a setting with
adequate resources and an established workflow.
Much like SBRT in general, this entails careful consideration of immobilization at the time of simulation,
treatment planning processes, physics and dosimetry
support with a sufficient level of training, motion

255

management, daily image guidance, and processes
to ensure follow-up. Resources specific for prostate
SBRT can be ascertained from manuscripts with
large published experiences, the Radiosurgery Society
(RSS), and ongoing clinical protocols that are publically available (Table 16.4) (28,29,35,36,82–84).

Patient Selection Recommendations
On the basis of existing data and exclusion criteria
reviewed earlier, ideal patients for primary prostate
SBRT include low- and favorable intermediate-risk
patients with organ confined disease (T1–2N0M0),
life expectancy exceeding 10 years, no general contraindications to pelvic RT, and no specific imaging restrictions (hip prostheses artifact, inability to
complete MRI). Preference for prostate SBRT over
alternative RT treatment options may be driven by
patient preference and prioritization of convenience
and cost. Although a consistent association has not
been shown, patients with considerable lower urinary tract symptoms (IPSS ⬎20) and/or larger prostate volumes (⬎50–60 cm3) should be counseled
about potential increases in urinary toxicities. Highrisk patients with organ-confined disease may also be
suitable for SBRT, pending further data defining its
role amid pelvic EBRT and/or ADT.

Simulation
With required precision of prostate SBRT, the first
consideration before proceeding with simulation is
developing an adequate plan for immobilization,

TABLE 16.4 Selective Resources With Treatment Process Details
Resource

Details

RTOG 0938

Randomized phase II protocol
Simulation, treatment planning, dosimetry constraints, plan assessment, and image guidance
details on various treatment platforms

Georgetown/Beth Israel
Deaconess (83)

Review article
Treatment planning and image guidance details for CyberKnife platform

Sunnybrook (36)

Phase I/II trial
Treatment planning, dosimetry constraints, and image guidance details for linac-based SBRT

Georgetown (28)

Retrospective
Treatment planning, dosimetry constraints, plan assessment for CyberKnife platform

Stanford (35)

Phase II trial
Treatment planning and dosimetry constraints for CyberKnife platform

Stanford/Naples (29)

Retrospective pooled analysis
Simulation, treatment planning, dosimetry constraints for CyberKnife platform

Flushing (145)

Prospective/retrospective
Simulation, treatment planning, dosimetry constraints for CyberKnife platform

SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 255

23/08/18 4:41 PM

256

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

target localization, and reduction of intrafraction
motion. At least three radiopaque fiducials should
be placed transrectally or transperineally in a noncoplanar fashion with a 1- to 2-week delay from
simulation to account for migration. Custom immobilization is preferred to avoid rotational errors.
Patients should be positioned supine for comfort
as prone positioning has not been proven to reduce
prostate motion (85,86). Accounting for bladder
and rectal filling variation is critical to reduce anatomical distortion of the prostate and subsequent
systematic and dosimetric errors (87–90). Variation
approaches including dietary modifications (low-gas,
low-residue diet), fleet enema prior to each treatment,
and strict bladder filling protocols (16–24 ounces of
water 45–60 minutes prior to treatment) (91–96).
The goal of these approaches should be to maintain a comfortably full bladder and empty rectum.
Although data are conflicting regarding the impact of
dietary changes or fleet enemas, regardless of which
approach is undertaken, this should be maintained
consistently and assessed daily with image guidance
prior to each treatment. Use of a biodegradable
rectal spacer is an emerging option to reduce rectal
dose and avoid changes to the prostate–rectum interface during treatment (97,98).
Non–contrast-enhanced CT simulation should
be completed with 2.5-mm slice thickness or
less. Prostate MRI should be ideally completed
on the same day to avoid anatomical variability
from bladder and rectal changes. MRI should be
done without an endorectal coil and with preference toward thin-cut (ⱕ2.5-mm slice thickness)
T2-weighted images for sufficient delineation of
the prostate gland. CT imaging alone is inferior
to MRI by way of overestimation of prostate contours, difficulty in differentiating the apex of the
gland, and inability to identify the neurovascular bundles and prostatic urethra (99,100). For
patients unable to undergo MRI, retrograde urethrogram via injection of 8 to 10 mL of contrast
into a urinary catheter or the penile urethra may
overcome the latter two limitations (101). Still,
inability to assess the adjacent soft tissues and
overestimation of prostate volume can lead to an
increased risk of toxicities following SBRT; thus,
simulation without ability to perform an MRI
should be carefully reconsidered (102).

Target Delineation
T2-weighted MRI images should be fused to the
simulation CT with respect to the prostate contour
along the bladder and rectum, not bony anatomy.

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 256

Image fusion should be meticulously scrutinized
to avoid systematic error. The clinical target volume (CTV) should consist of the entire prostate defined by MRI for organ-confined disease
(Figure 16.1). The prostatic base and apex are
best identified by MRI. Inclusion of the proximal
seminal vesicles should be considered for intermediate- and high-risk patients on the basis of
the risk of microscopic involvement. The extent
of inclusion is typically within the first 2 cm on
the basis of surgical series, although this should
be in the context of rectal constraints achieved
(103). The planning target volume (PTV) should
involve a margin of 3 to 5 mm on the basis of institutional setup error. A 3-mm margin is favored
posteriorly to reduce overlap with the rectum.
Organs at risk that should be identified and contoured include the rectum, bladder, penile bulb,
femoral heads, prostatic urethra, neurovascular
bundles, sigmoid and small bowel (if applicable),
and skin (Figure 16.1).

Treatment Planning

Platforms
Various treatment platforms exist for delivery
of prostate SBRT, including linear accelerator
(linac)-based, CyberKnife, TomoTherapy™ (Accuray
Inc.), and proton therapy. CyberKnife robotic
radiosurgery allows for use of numerous noncoplanar beams and intrafraction motion assessment
that was not traditionally feasible through alternative platforms. Addition of motion management
systems such as Calypso (Varian Medical Systems,
Inc., Palo Alto, CA) and ExacTrac (BrainLAB,
Munich, Germany) and rotational arc therapy have
narrowed these differences (104,105). Conversely,
the use of IMRT in lieu of SBRT techniques has
been shown to be dosimetrically inferior with
reduced dose conformity, lower PTV coverage,
and higher doses to adjacent bladder and rectum
(106–108). Passive scatter proton therapy has lower
conformality indices compared with CyberKnife
or TomoTherapy (109). In regards to patient
convenience, flattening filter-free mode available
on linac-based SBRT has enabled a considerable
reduction in overall treatment time, although there
is less awareness of the radiobiological implications (110). In all, no outcome data tout superiority of one platform over another and, thus, all are
allowed on RTOG 0938. Stratification of patients
by platform on this study will hopefully provide the
opportunity for subset analysis.

23/08/18 4:41 PM

16: PROSTATE SBRT

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

(E)

(F)

257

FIGURE 16.1 Depictions of prostate and organ-at-risk contours. (A and C) Corresponding CT and MRI images identify-

ing the prostate (red), prostatic urethra (brown), neurovascular bundles (cyan), rectum (brown), and femoral heads (dark
blue and dark green). (B and D) Corresponding CT and MRI images, with the latter enabling better delineation of the prostatic apex. (E) The prostate (red) and 3-mm expansion to create the planning target volume (PTV, orange) with implanted
fiducials denoted by imaging artifact. (F) Three-dimensional representation of contours: prostate (red), bladder (yellow),
proximal seminal vesicles (blue), neurovascular bundles (cyan), rectum (brown), and penile bulb (purple).

Treatment Planning

Fractionation Schemes
Most published series support the use of 35 to
36.25 Gy in five fractions delivered either daily
or every other day. This fractionation scheme consisted of the most common regimens (89%) in
the 1,100-patient, prospective, multi-institutional
analysis (25). The question of further dose escalation arose from the nonsignificant improvement
in 5-year bPFS in this series: 92.5% with 35 Gy,
90.7% with 36.25 Gy (p = .08), and 95.8% with
38 to 40 Gy (p = .83). This trend was more pronounced among intermediate-risk patients: 72.3%
with 35 Gy, 87.2% with 36.25 Gy (p = .73), and
96.7% with 38 to 40 Gy (p = .58). Assuming an
␣/␤ value of 1.5, the respective equivalent 2 Gy
doses (EQD2) are 113, 121, and 132 to 145 Gy.
The lack of a dose–response relationship may
reflect the exceedingly high EQD2, which are likely
beyond the steep gradient of the dose–response
curve for prostate cancer. As shown in a phase I/II
trial, further dose escalation up to 50 Gy in five

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 257

fractions led to five patients (8.2%) in the highdose arm having grades 3 to 4 rectal toxicity requiring a diverting colostomy (31,111). Katz et al.
have also shown an increase in grades 2 to 3 late
urinary (13% vs. 1%) and rectal (2.9% vs. 0%)
toxicities with 36.25 Gy as opposed to 35 Gy delivered in equal daily fractions (112). No difference
in bPFS was seen between these two fractionation
regimens. On the contrary, Quon et al. evaluated
two separate fractionation schemes (35 or 40 Gy
in five weekly fractions) delivered on prospective
trials, showing no difference in quality of life survey scores between the two regimens (113). When
using 36.25 Gy in five fractions, King et al. identified lower rates of late grade 1 to 2 GU (17% vs.
56%, p = .007) and GI (5% vs. 44%, p = .001)
toxicities with treatment every other day rather
than daily fractionation (35). These findings compiled together should bring pause to escalation of
SBRT doses beyond 40 Gy, with preference toward
regimens of 35 to 40 Gy in five weekly fractions,
36.25 Gy in five fractions delivered every other
day, or 35 Gy in five fractions daily.

23/08/18 4:41 PM

258

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

Dose Constraints
Prospective trial constraints and those supported
by toxicity data are listed (Table 16.5). In general,
prescription dose coverage of the PTV should be
95% or greater. Published series have also used a
simultaneous integrated boost to the prostate or
dominant nodule seen on MRI (26,30). At minimum, 99% or more of the prostate should receive
the prescription dose, excluding the urethra if
constrained. Correlations have been made with
late grade 2 and greater urinary toxicities with dose
heterogeneity within the prostate (114). For this

reason, the prescription isodose line should be
greater than 80% on CyberKnife treatment plans if
not higher on alternative platforms. Priority should
otherwise be placed on the high-dose volume of the
rectum, rectal wall circumference dose, and mean
and maximum point urethral doses on the basis of
published data (30,81,111,115). Although urethral
dose reduction was initially avoided to prevent local
failures, emerging data regarding urethral dose and
known toxicity data from brachytherapy should
trump concerns about prostatic disease control,
particularly without supporting data to this claim.

TABLE 16.5 Summary of Dose Constraints for Prostate SBRT
Organ

Dose Constraint

Toxicity Correlate

Reference

Prostate (GTV)

V40 Gy(110%) ≥95%
V46 Gy <36.7%
V48 Gy <21%
V50 Gy <9.5%

Late grade ≥2 GU toxicity (21%)
Late grade ≥2 GU toxicity (20%)
Late grade ≥2 GU toxicity (20%)

28, 30
113
113
113

Prostate (PTV)

Dmax ≤120%
V100% ≥95%
Dmix ≥95%

-

RTOG 0938
RTOG 0938, 28, 35, 39
RTOG 0938

Bladder

D1 mL ≤105%
V37.5 Gy <5 mL
V37 Gy <10 mL
D90% ≤90%
D50% ≤50%
V50% <40%
D12.7% ≤33.5 Gy

2y late GU flare 16%–26% versus 4%

RTOG 0938
39
28
RTOG 0938
RTOG 0938
28
146

Rectum

V50 Gy >3 mL
PRC39 Gy ≤40%
PRC24 Gy ≤58%
D1 mL ≤105%
D1 mL ≤35 Gy
V95% <3 mL
V36 Gy <1 mL and <5%
V90% <10%
V80% <20%
V75% <25%
D90% ≤90%
D80% ≤80%
D50% ≤50%

Late grade 3–4 toxicity (OR: 2.7)
Late grade 3–4 toxicity (OR: 1.2)
Acute grade ≥2 (OR: 1.1)
Late bowel QoL (OR: 3.5)
-

110
110
110
RTOG 0938
114
RTOG 0938
28, 35, 39
28, 35
28, 35
28
RTOG 0938
RTOG 0938
RTOG 0938, 28, 35

Prostatic
urethra

V49 Gy <10%
Dmax <47 Gy
Dmax ≤107%
V37 Gy <50%
Reduce mean dose

Late grade ≥2 GU (18.6% vs. 46.2%)
-

39
80
RTOG 0938
28
30

Penile bulb

Dmax ≤100%
V35 Gy <4 mL
V20 Gy <3 mL
V29.5 Gy <50%

-

RTOG 0938
114
RTOG 0938
28, 39

Skin

Dmax ≤30 Gy

-

RTOG 0938

Femoral heads

Bilateral V20 Gy <10 mL

-

RTOG 0938

Sigmoid

V30 Gy <1 mL

-

28

Testicles

D20% <2 Gy

-

28

GTV, gross tumor volume; GU, genitourinary; PTV, planning target volume; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy; QoL, quality of life; Y, years.

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 258

23/08/18 4:41 PM

16: PROSTATE SBRT

Plan Evaluation
A sample plan is provided using volumetric arc
therapy and CyberKnife to deliver 36.25 Gy in
five fractions to the prostate with a 3-mm margin
(Figure 16.2). Limiting the urethral hot spot can be
completed as shown in Figure 16.3. When using the
CyberKnife stereotactic treatment platform, 120
to 160 beams should be used to achieve adequate
PTV and prostate coverage as outlined earlier. The
prescription isodose line selected should be no
lower than 80% to reduce intraprostatic hot spots.
Treatment time should be below 60 minutes per
fraction to prioritize patient comfort. Newer models may be more readily capable of achieving this
with the Iris collimator or higher MU (monitor unit)
output. If linac-based SBRT is pursued, noncoplanar beam arrangements are preferred. Rotational
arc therapy may also be used with no suggested
dosimetric differences between the use of a single
or two arcs (116). Once a suitable treatment plan,
beam arrangement, and isodose line are selected,

259

target organs should be more closely assessed with
prioritization toward the rectum, urethra, bladder,
penile bulb, and remaining critical structures in this
respective order (Figure 16.4).

Treatment Delivery
Patients arriving for treatment should undergo similar
bowel and bladder preparation as done for simulation.
Linac-based SBRT should be coupled with daily cone
beam CT imaging to assess bladder filling, rectal
distension, and adequate alignment of the prostate
target. Fiducials placed earlier can be used for guidance (117). Patients treated with CyberKnife platforms should have orthogonal films completed first
for verification of fiducial placement.

Motion Management
Intrafraction prostatic motion is a well-documented
phenomenon, a combination of respiratory motion
and variations in rectal and bladder filling

FIGURE 16.2 Isodose lines for treatment plans using volumetric arc therapy (left) and the CyberKnife platform (right).

FIGURE 16.3 Example of urethral dose-sparing technique via volumetric arc therapy, limiting the prostatic urethra to a
dose below the prescription isodose line.

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 259

23/08/18 4:41 PM

260

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

FIGURE 16.4 Example of an acceptable dose–volume histogram for delivery of 36.25 Gy in five fractions with a
simultaneous integrated boost of 40 Gy to the prostate using volumetric arc therapy.

(118–121). Combining the longer typical treatment
times for prostate SBRT, accounting for prostatic
motion can facilitate in reducing margins to reduce
toxicities and avoid prostate target miss. Patients
treated with volumetric modulated arc therapy,
particularly with a flattening filter-free mode, can
receive prostate SBRT in minutes, reducing the
impact of intrafraction motion (116,122,123).
For other SBRT platforms, prolonged treatment
times have been clearly correlated with a higher
risk of significant intrafraction motion (124,125).
Although abdominal compression is often used for
thoracic SBRT, this device has not been shown to
have as significant an impact for prostate SBRT and
is thus not recommended to be solely used (126).
Established methods to assess and correct for
intrafraction motion include the Calypso tracking
device and stereoscopic kV x-ray imaging (121,127).
The Calypso 4D Localization System uses beacon
electromagnetic transponders implanted into the
prostate to be detected and tracked in three dimensions through the course of RT. Kupelian et al.
provided a large experience using Calypso for fractionated RT with 41% of fractions having motion
exceeding the 3-mm threshold (127). Alternatively, stereoscopic kV x-ray imaging can similarly
account for prostate motion and avoid target miss
(107,121,128). Xie et al. examined the use of orthogonal films using a CyberKnife platform for prostate
SBRT. In this study, prostate movement thresholds
were set at 5 mm, with a 30-second sampling

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 260

interval enabling a vast majority (94.6%) of movement to be within 2 mm (121). Motion beyond 2 mm
was marginally increased (7.5% of datasets) with
a longer 60-second sampling interval. Through stereoscopic kV imaging, extreme variations in intrafraction motion have been shown to reduce prostate
prescription coverage, such that not accounting for
these differences may compromise outcomes (107).
In all, intrafraction and interfraction prostate motion
should be accounted for by daily image guidance and
motion tracking via electromagnetic transponders
or orthogonal kV imaging at a minimum of 30- or
60-second intervals to limit shifts to 2 mm or less.

Patient Assessment and Follow-Up
Patients should be seen weekly throughout the
course of prostate SBRT and at completion of RT.
Those at higher risk for developing urinary or bowel
toxicities should be appropriately counseled with
all patients being seen at minimum 1 month after
completion of prostate SBRT. Supportive measures
for symptoms include phenazopyridine or cranberry
tablets for dysuria, selective alpha receptor antagonists for obstructive symptoms, and hydrocortisone
and/or antidiarrheal agents for proctitis or diarrhea.
Patients should anticipate a transient worsening in
bowel and urinary symptoms with resultant return
to baseline approaching 3 months (129). As emphasized earlier, patients treated with prostate SBRT
should be diligently followed, ideally on a clinical
protocol, with stringent assessment.

23/08/18 4:41 PM

16: PROSTATE SBRT

PSA Kinetics
As with EBRT, the success of prostate SBRT is defined
by a combination of clinical examination and PSA
response. Following definitive management, patients
should be surveilled with PSA every 6 to 12 months up
to 5 years and then annually as per national guidelines
(19). More frequent PSA may be indicated for higher
risk patients or if there is any change in trajectory.
Biochemical failure should be defined as per ASTRO
recommendations as nadir plus two at the time of
failure (129). This being said, the expected kinetics
of PSA after prostate SBRT appears to be noticeably
different than that seen with brachytherapy or EBRT.
The PSA nadir following RT has been shown to
predict for bPFS and overall survival (130–133). For
example, Ray et al. revealed that nadir PSA less than
0.5 resulted in significantly lower rates of bPFS (8-year,
75% vs. 17%–52%) and distant metastasis-free survival (8-year, 97% vs. 73%–96%) (130). Furthermore, the rate of PSA decline may also predict for
outcomes, where a shorter time to nadir and PSA at
1 year (⬍0.5–2) led to lower bPFS and distant metastasis rates (130,134,135). Although the use of conventionally fractionated IMRT and prostate SBRT
have not been directly compared, assessment of PSA
kinetics suggests superiority of prostate SBRT in this
regard (136–138). In a small comparative study of
69 patients, Lee et al. demonstrated lower PSA nadir
values with prostate SBRT (0.37 vs. 0.23, p = .011)
and greater slope of decline over time (136). Kishan
et al. compared 439 patients treated with various
RT techniques, showing that more patients achieved
a nadir PSA less than 0.5 with prostate SBRT or
HDR brachytherapy as opposed to with IMRT
(75.9%–76.2% vs. 44.9%, p ⬍ .001) (137). Similar to that seen by Kim et al. and Anwar et al. in a
separate study, the decay rate of PSA was markedly
greater with SBRT or HDR brachytherapy with a
continued decline beyond 1,000 days after treatment
(138). In conjunction with data correlating PSA
response to outcomes, these findings would infer
equivalent if not superior efficacy of prostate SBRT.
A phenomenon well known following RT is PSA
bounce, defined as a rise in PSA greater or equal
to 0.2 ng/mL with a resultant decline (139). This
biochemical occurrence is poorly understood, theorized to represent delayed prostatic inflammation
or transition to cell kill following sublethal damage (140–142). Coincidentally, studies evaluating
PSA bounce have correlated this occurrence as a
predictor for improved bPFS (142–144). Contrary
to temporal and nadir trends in PSA response
between modalities, prostate SBRT appears to have

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 261

261

comparable rates of PSA bounce (12%–36.2%)
to IMRT and HDR (25,137,138,145–147). The
median time to PSA bounce and median PSA rise
following prostate SBRT is generally 9 to 36 months
and 0.50 to 0.55 ng/mL (25,137,145,146). These
findings should help to ease patient anxiety that
may occur with such transient rises in PSA following RT, even after achieving a PSA nadir.

TOXICITIES
Comparison of Modalities
Although no randomized comparison exists between
RT modalities, several quality of life and retrospective analyses have been published in an attempt to
define differences specific to conventional IMRT
and prostate SBRT (148,149). Yu et al. evaluated
Medicare claims between prostate SBRT and IMRT,
identifying higher rates of GU toxicities at 6 months
(12.6% vs. 15.6%, p = .009) and 2 years (36.3% vs.
43.9%, p = .001) with prostate SBRT (148). These
results were, however, largely hypothesis-generating,
limited by inability to account for baseline function,
treatment plan quality, fractionation schemes,
prostate volume, or concurrent medications including anticoagulants. The authors could not account
for differences in grade of toxicities. In response, the
Prostate Cancer Outcomes and Satisfaction With
Treatment Quality Assessment (PROSTQA) Study
Consortium published a large retrospective analysis
of 803 patients treated with IMRT, brachytherapy, or
prostate SBRT to assess trends in patient-reported
quality of life (EPIC-26) surveys (149). Prostate
SBRT had lower rates of minimal clinically detectable differences in sexual and bowel symptoms. Compared with brachytherapy, prostate SBRT had lower
domain score changes from baseline with urinary irritation or obstruction compared with brachytherapy.
In the absence of randomized, comparative data and
in contrast to the claims data analysis by Yu et al.,
these data allude to lower bowel symptoms following
prostate SBRT over alternative RT modalities and
less urinary symptoms compared with brachytherapy.

Urinary Toxicities

Acute Toxicity
Acute grades 1 to 2 urinary symptoms are expected
following prostate SBRT, typically returning to baseline at approximately 3 months following treatment
(128). With exceedingly low rates of acute grades 3
to 4 urinary toxicities after prostate SBRT, patientreported measures such as the EPIC-26 survey may

23/08/18 4:42 PM

262

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

be more relevant measures of treatment toxicity.
The clinically meaningful impact of a decline in quality of life survey scores is defined by the minimally
important difference (MID), which is one-half of the
standard deviation from baseline (150). In a pooled
quality of life analysis, Evans et al. demonstrated
that domain scores in urinary irritation and incontinence were significantly lower 1 month after prostate SBRT with mean differences of –10.43 ± 14.64
(MID in 69% of patients) and –5.19 ± 12.36 (MID
in 32% of patients), respectively (149). At 3 months,
although mean scores in these categories were lower
and a proportion still had a MID (32%–36%), these
were not significantly different from baseline. Use of
an alpha-blocker urinary medication appeared similar between baseline (39%) and at 6 months (44%),
such that improvement in urinary domain scores was
not confounded by an increase in medication use.
King et al. have shown similar findings, with patients
having a mean EPIC-26 urinary domain score decline
of 8.7 at 1 to 3 months compared with baseline with
recovery at 6 months and suggestion of improvement beyond 3 years (128). This trend was similar
in patients regardless of baseline urinary symptoms.
Patients developing acute obstructive urinary
symptoms including urgency, frequency, nocturia,
weakened stream, and intermittency can be managed with alpha-adrenergic antagonists (tamsulosin,
terazosin), 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors (dutasteride,
finasteride), and/or phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors
(tadalafil). Urinary frequency and retention symptoms are the most commonly reported (151). Repka
et al. evaluated the prophylactic use of an alphaadrenergic antagonist along with urethral dose
reduction (maximum point dose ⬍110%), showing
smaller increases in urinary domain scores compared with prior literature (151). In a Canadian randomized phase II study, patients treated once a week
(over 29 days) compared with those treated every
other day (11 days) had lower rates of acute grade 1
(41% vs. 64%) and grade 2 (11% vs. 18%) urinary
toxicities (p ⬍ .01) (152). Both of these approaches
may be reasonable considerations to reduce the risk
of acute, mainly grades 1 to 2, urinary toxicities with
prostate SBRT.

Late Toxicity
Long-term grades 3 to 4 urinary toxicities are exceptionally rare (0%–6%) in existing literature. Prospective quality of life studies have shown return to
baseline of urinary symptoms within 6 to 12 months
with prostate SBRT (35,149). Continued use of urinary medications such as alpha-adrenergic blockers

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 262

appears to be similar to prior to treatment (149). The
incidence of late grade 2 GU symptoms after conventionally fractionated RT and brachytherapy ranges
from 27% to 44% and 16% to 24%, respectively,
with variations on the basis of the grading system
used (11,12,14,153). Likewise, in a large series following prostate SBRT with median follow-up of
5 years or more, rates of late grade 2 GU toxicities
appear similar (7%–21%) if not lower (29,31,38,81).
Dose heterogeneity, bladder dose, prostatic urethral dose, and prostate gland size have all been
correlated with a higher risk of late GU toxicities,
many of these able to be corrected with careful
treatment planning (30,79,80,113,146). Two studies have correlated homogeneity index, particularly
the volume of prostate receiving 120%, with higher
rates of grade ⱖ2 late GU toxicities (80,113). Previously outlined in this chapter are the data regarding
prostate size, with a suggestion of 50 to 60 mL as a
sufficient cutoff to predict the risk of GU toxicities,
mainly obstructive symptoms (79,80,145). Sparing
of the prostatic urethra using various parameters with ultimate intent to reduce the maximum
point dose has been shown to correlate to late GU
toxicities and urinary quality of life survey scores
(30,79,80). Fractionation schemes using longer
treatment times (every other day fractions) have
further reduced the risk of late grades 1 to 2 GU
toxicities (35). The appropriate dose fractionation
scheme has been reviewed earlier (35,111,112).
Although overall studies have shown return
to baseline of urinary quality of life domains in
the long term after prostate SBRT, a proportion
(13.4%) of patients may still have a delayed flare
of urinary symptoms (77,147,149). This consists
of an increase in obstructive voiding symptoms
such as frequency, urgency, dysuria, and weakened
stream approximately 9 to 18 months after SBRT.
As shown in brachytherapy literature, patients with
this late flare in symptoms typically were younger
and did not have any correlation with higher PSA
bounce rates (77,154). These patients are generally managed conservatively with alpha-adrenergic
antagonists and, if not responsive, a short course
of corticosteroids with the theory being this represents delayed inflammation.

Bowel/Rectal Toxicities

Acute Toxicity
Similar to that seen with urinary toxicities, severe
(grade ⱖ3) GI toxicities are exceedingly uncommon with the largest incidence occurring in patients

23/08/18 4:42 PM

16: PROSTATE SBRT

treated with a high-dose scheme (31,110). Overall
rates of acute grades 2 or greater GI toxicities such as
bowel frequency, urgency, and proctitis range from
2% to 23% (27,30,32,36,81,155). As seen with urinary patient-reported outcomes, an initial decline in
EPIC bowel scores occurs between 1 and 3 months
(mean bowel domain score –12 vs. baseline) with
return to baseline around 6 months (128). Paydar
et al. found this trend to be even sooner for acute
proctitis, with a peak at 1 week and return to baseline at 3 months (155). Symptoms from acute
rectal toxicities are best managed with supportive measures such as antidiarrheals and/or steroid
suppositories.
Although acute rectal toxicity rates are low with
prostate SBRT, methods that may further reduce
rectal toxicities include use of a biodegradable rectal
spacer and intrarectal amifostine (96,97,156,157).
From EBRT literature, intrarectal placement of
amifostine suspension has been shown to reduce
the rates of acute proctitis (156,157). The largest
downside to this approach is patient discomfort
with daily insertion, which is less so an issue with
the fewer treatments delivered with prostate SBRT.
No direct comparisons have been made in prostate
SBRT series, although some have routinely used
amifostine for treatments with suggested low rates
of GI toxicity (145).

Late Toxicity
Rates of severe late rectal toxicities are generally
uncommon with exception of one series (grades 3–4,
6.6%) because of the use of a high-dose regimen (31,110). In this series, all severe toxicities
occurred in the highest dose arm (50 Gy in five
fractions) with five of six patients requiring colostomies because of rectal ulceration, pain, and/or
fistula formation. Dose correlations were found
with the risk of late grades 3 to 4 rectal toxicity,
most of which restricted to the high-dose volumes. These findings strongly indicate the need for
careful rectal dosimetry and avoidance of extreme
dose fractionation schemes. In all other reported
series and in quality of life data, late rectal toxicity
rates remain low with an expected return to baseline of bowel quality of life scores at 3 to 6 months
(149,155). Compared with IMRT and brachytherapy, prostate SBRT has been shown to have significantly higher bowel domain scores, suggesting
lower rates of long-term patient-reported toxicities (149).
Rectal bleeding can occur following RT because
of proximity of the anterior rectal wall to the

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 263

263

prostate gland. Sood et al. evaluated endoscopic
findings after prostate monotherapy or boost
SBRT using the Vienna Rectoscopy Score (VRS)
(158). Ten patients (20%) had telangiectasias on
endoscopy, mostly nonconfluent defined as VRS
grade 2. Nonetheless, the crude rate of symptomatic rectal bleeding requiring minor cauterization
was 1.9%. Musunuru et al. reported on 19% with
high-grade hematochezia after prostate SBRT at
a median time of 11.7 months from the start of
treatment (159). Patients receiving higher doses
with larger PTV margins or treatment to the seminal vesicles had higher rates of hematochezia at
2 years: 4.9% (35 Gy, prostate with 4-mm margin), 27.2% (40 Gy, prostate with 5-mm margin),
and 42.1% (40 Gy, prostate/seminal vesicles with
5-mm margin). As expected, this reflected the
rectal volume receiving a high dose (V38 ⱖ2 cm3:
odds ratio [OR]: 4.7, p = .0001). Other predictive
factors included prior history of hemorrhoids
(OR: 2.7, p = .0203) and use of anticoagulants
(OR: 6.5, p = .0027). Methods of rectal dose sparing, protracted fractionation, and cytoprotective
agents may be most critical in these patients.

Sexual Function Toxicity
Decline in patient-reported sexual function is
commonly reported after RT, although it is confounded often by ADT and expected effects of
aging. Unlike EPIC domain scores for urinary
and bowel function, sexual domain scores can
continue to decline after SBRT (149). Even after
selecting only patients with good baseline sexual
function, Evans et al. showed lower rates of twofold MID changes in sexual function at 2 years
with prostate SBRT (20%) compared to those
with IMRT (33%) and brachytherapy (35%).
The mean sexual domain score decline was significantly less with prostate SBRT (–14 vs. –20.6
to –23.6, p ⬍ .01), despite brachytherapy patients
being younger. However, on multivariable analysis, this difference was not statistically significant.
Other series have confirmed continued decline in
sexual potency with increasing need for medication
support (160,161). Use of MRI-based planning may
enable sparing of the neurovascular bundle akin to
nerve-sparing prostatectomy, although this has not
been correlated with outcomes as of yet. Therefore,
patients being treated with prostate SBRT should
be counseled that much like alternative forms of
RT and as expected with aging, erectile dysfunction
can transpire with time after treatment.

23/08/18 4:42 PM

264

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

CONCLUSIONS
The greatest limitation of prostate SBRT presently
is the lack of long-term prospective data. Maturation of existing retrospective and prospective data,
as approaching the 10-year median follow-up
mark, should provide further reassurance of the
role of prostate SBRT as monotherapy for lowand favorable intermediate-risk patients. Several randomized trials are attempting to directly
compare conventionally or moderately hypofractionated RT with prostate SBRT (Table 16.6).
The Prostate Advances in Comparative Evidence
(PACE) trial is a unique, ongoing randomized
trial evaluating prostate SBRT to IMRT and also
to radical prostatectomy for organ-confined, lowor intermediate-risk disease (NCT01584258).
Sponsored by the Proton Cooperative Group, a
randomized phase III trial (NCT01230866) is
accruing patients to compare conventional fractionated proton RT with extreme hypofractionation (38 Gy in five fractions). A similar trial is
being run at the University of Miami using photon
IMRT (NCT01794403) and a Hong Kong group
(NCT02339701). RTOG 0938, a French study, and
the Scandinavian Hypofractionated Radiotherapy
of Intermediate Risk Localized Prostate Cancer
(HYPO-RT-PC) trial are comparing moderate and
extreme hypofractionation (ISRCTN45905321,
NCT01434290, NCT02361515). The Lyon group

is also integrating injection of a hyaluronic acid as
a rectal spacer to reduce rectal toxicity. Ultimate
accrual and report from these trials will better
define the appropriate fractionation and treatment approach for these patients.
An alternative approach for low-risk prostate
cancer in the era of multiparametric MRI is the
use of focal therapy. Focal brachytherapy results
have been reported in early form using MRIbased planning to achieve similar efficacy to whole
gland irradiation while improving urethral and
rectal sparing (162,163). Aluwini et al. reported
early results of prostate SBRT using a simultaneous integrated boost (44 Gy in four fractions) to
the gross disease if identified by MRI (26). Only
28% had an identifiable dominant lesion, with 3 of
14 patients having multiple lesions. Results from
this series appeared comparable to other prostate
SBRT series. The Hypo-FLAME (Hypofractionated
Focal Lesion Ablative Microboost in prostatE Cancer) study (NCT02853110) is an ongoing phase
II study aiming to assess the impact of a similar
approach, delivering 50 Gy in five fractions to an
identified nodule by MRI.
The role of prostate SBRT among high-risk and
oligometastatic patients has yet to be well established. Traditionally, high-risk patients receive
ADT with dose-escalated RT on the basis of an
overall survival benefit (49,50). However, the role
of ADT with prostate SBRT is less clear. Early

TABLE 16.6 Select Ongoing Prospective, Randomized Trials for Prostate SBRT
Study

Inclusion Criteria

Arms

Primary Outcome

University of Miami

Low, intermediate risk

70.2 Gy/26 IMRT
36.25 Gy/5 SBRT

Biochemical PFS

PACE (Royal Marsden)

Low, intermediate risk
Surgical candidate

Radical prostatectomy
36.25–38 Gy/4–5 SBRT

Biochemical PFS

PACE (Royal Marsden)

Low, intermediate risk
Not surgical candidate

78 Gy/39 IMRT
36.25–38 Gy/4–5 SBRT

Biochemical PFS

HYPO-RT-PC (Sweden)

Intermediate risk

78 Gy/39 3DCRT/VMAT
42.7 Gy/7 3DCRT/VMAT

Biochemical PFS

RTOG 0938

Low risk

51.6 Gy/12 IMRT/SBRT/proton
36.25 Gy/5 IMRT/SBRT/proton

1-year quality of life

Hospices Civils de Lyon

Low, intermediate risk

62 Gy/20 IMRT
37.5 Gy/5 SBRT

Late grade ≥2 GU toxicity

PCG GU-002

Low risk

79.2 Gy (RBE)/44 proton
38 Gy (RBE)/5 proton

Biochemical PFS

PST005 (Hong Kong)

Low, intermediate risk

78 Gy/39 IMRT
36.25/5 SBRT

1-Year quality of life

GU, genitourinary; HYPO-RT-PC, Hypofractionated Radiation Therapy of Intermediate Risk Localized Prostate Cancer; IMRT, intensity-modulated
radiation therapy; PACE, Prostate Advances in Comparative Evidence; PCG, Proton Collaborative Group; PFS, progression-free survival;
SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy; VMAT, volumetric modulated arc therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 264

23/08/18 4:42 PM

16: PROSTATE SBRT

results of the FASTR (Fairly Brief Androgen Suppression and Stereotactic Radiotherapy for High
Risk Prostate Cancer) trial have shown feasibility of
an extreme hypofractionated approach along with
ADT and simultaneous coverage of a lower dose to
the pelvic nodes (164). FASTR-2 (NCT02229734),
an accruing follow-up study, has prolonged ADT
length to 18 months while excluding coverage of
the pelvic nodes. With improvements in the management of metastatic disease, several studies have
now suggested a benefit to cytoreductive definitive
prostate management in select patients (165,166).
If definitive management indeed plays a future role
in these patients, prostate SBRT provides the appeal
of being delivered in a shorter, noninvasive, and costeffective treatment course. Two trials (NCT02206724,
NCT02563691) are currently evaluating the safety
and efficacy of prostate SBRT in this setting.

REFERENCES
1. Torre LA, Siegel RL, Ward EM, et al. Global cancer incidence
and mortality rates and trends: an update. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev. 2016;25(1):16-27. doi:10.1158/1055-9965.
EPI-15-0578
2. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. (2016, April).
SEER cancer statistics review, 1975-2013, National Cancer
Institute. Bethesda, MD. Available at: http://seer.cancer.gov/
csr/1975_2013/, based on November 2015 SEER data submission, posted to the SEER web site.
3. Michalski JM, Moughan J, Purdy JA, et al. Initial results of a
phase 3 randomized study of high dose 3DCRT/IMRT versus
standard dose 3D-CRT/IMRT in patients treated for localized
prostate cancer (RTOG 0126). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2014;90(5):1263. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2014.10.035
4. Al-Mamgani A, Heemsbergen WD, Levendag PC, et al. Subgroup analysis of patients with localized prostate cancer treated
within the Dutch-randomized dose escalation trial. Radiother
Oncol. 2010;96(1):13-18. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2010.02.022
5. Zietman AL, Bae K, Slater JD, et al. Randomized trial comparing conventional-dose with high-dose conformal radiation therapy in early-stage adenocarcinoma of the prostate: long-term
results from Proton Radiation Oncology Group/American College of Radiology 95-09. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(7):1106-1111.
doi:10.1200/JCO.2009.25.8475
6. Kuban DA, Tucker SL, Dong L, et al. Long-term results of
the M. D. Anderson randomized dose-escalation trial for prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008;70(1):67-74.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.06.054
7. Michalski JM, Yan Y, Watkins-Bruner D, et al. Preliminary analysis of 3D-CRT vs. IMRT on the high dose arm of the RTOG
0126 prostate cancer trial: toxicity report. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys. 2011;81(2):S1-S2. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.06.004
8. Fowler J, Chappell R, Ritter M. Is alpha/beta for prostate tumors
really low? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2001;50(4):10211031. PubMed PMID: 11429230.
9. Brenner DJ, Martinez AA, Edmundson GK, et al. Direct evidence that prostate tumors show high sensitivity to fractionation (low alpha/beta ratio), similar to late-responding normal
tissue. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2002;52(1):6-13. PubMed
PMID: 11777617.

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 265

265

10. Miralbell R, Roberts SA, Zubizarreta E, et al. Dose-fractionation sensitivity of prostate cancer deduced from radiotherapy
outcomes of 5,969 patients in seven international institutional
datasets: ␣/␤ = 1.4 (0.9-2.2) Gy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2012;82(1):e17-e24. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.10.075
11. Pollack A, Walker G, Horwitz EM, et al. Randomized trial
of hypofractionated external-beam radiotherapy for prostate
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(31):3860-3868. doi:10.1200/
JCO.2013.51.1972
12. Incrocci L, Wortel RC, Alemayehu WG, et al. Hypofractionated versus conventionally fractionated radiotherapy
for patients with localised prostate cancer (HYPRO): final
efficacy results from a randomised, multicenter, openlabel, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(8):1061-1069.
doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30070-5
13. Dearnaley D, Syndikus I, Mossop H, et al. Conventional
versus hypofractionated high-dose intensity-modulated
radiotherapy for prostate cancer: 5-year outcomes of
the randomised, non-inferiority, phase 3 CHHiP trial.
Lancet Oncol . 2016 ; 17 ( 8 ): 1047 - 1060 . doi: 10.1016/
S1470-2045(16)30102-4
14. Lee WR, Dignam JJ, Amin MB, et al. Randomized phase
III noninferiority study comparing two radiotherapy fractionation schedules in patients with low-risk prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(20):2325-2332. doi:10.1200/
JCO.2016.67.0448
15. Kupelian PA, Potters L, Khuntia D, et al. Radical prostatectomy, external beam radiotherapy ⬍72 Gy, external beam
radiotherapy > or =72 Gy, permanent seed implantation, or
combined seeds/external beam radiotherapy for stage T1-T2
prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2004;58(1):
25-33. PubMed PMID: 14697417.
16. Hamdy FC, Donovan JL, Lane JA, et al. 10-year outcomes
after monitoring, surgery, or radiotherapy for localized
prostate cancer. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(15):1415-1424.
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1606220
17. Klotz L, Vesprini D, Sethukavalan P, et al. Long-term follow-up
of a large active surveillance cohort of patients with prostate
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(3):272-277. doi:10.1200/JCO.
2014.55.1192
18. Tosoian JJ, Trock BJ, Landis P, et al. Active surveillance program for prostate cancer: an update of the Johns Hopkins
experience. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(16):2185-2190. doi:
10.1200/JCO.2010.32.8112
19. Mohler JL, Armstrong AJ, Bahnson RR, et al. Prostate cancer,
version 1.2016. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2016;14(1):19-30.
PubMed PMID: 26733552.
20. Nguyen PL, Gu X, Lipsitz SR, et al. Cost implications of the
rapid adoption of newer technologies for treating prostate
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(12):1517-1524. doi:10.1200/
JCO.2010.31.1217
21. Paravati AJ, Boero IJ, Triplett DP, et al. Variation in the
cost of radiation therapy among Medicare patients with
cancer. J Oncol Pract. 2015;11(5):403-409. doi:10.1200/
JOP.2015.005694
22. Parthan A, Pruttivarasin N, Davies D, et al. Comparative
cost-effectiveness of stereotactic body radiation therapy versus
intensity-modulated and proton radiation therapy for localized prostate cancer. Front Oncol. 2012;2:81. doi:10.3389/
fonc.2012.00081
23. Hodges JC, Lotan Y, Boike TP, et al. Cost-effectiveness analysis of stereotactic body radiation therapy versus intensitymodulated radiation therapy: an emerging initial radiation
treatment option for organ-confined prostate cancer.
J Oncol Pract. 2012;8(suppl 3):e31s-e37s. doi:10.1200/
JOP.2012.000548

23/08/18 4:42 PM

266

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

24. King CR, Lehmann J, Adler JR, et al. Cyberknife radiotherapy for localized prostate cancer: rationale and technical feasibility. Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2003;2(1):25-30.
doi:10.1177/153303460300200104
25. King CR, Freeman D, Kaplan I, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy for localized prostate cancer: pooled analysis
from a multi-institutional consortium of prospective phase II
trials. Radiother Oncol. 2013;109(2):217-221. doi:10.1016/
j.radonc.2013.08.030
26. Aluwini S, Van Rooij P, Hoogeman M, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy with a focal boost to the MRI-visible
tumor as monotherapy for low- and intermediate-risk
prostate cancer: early results. Radiat Oncol. 2013;8:84.
doi:10.1186/1748-717X-8-84
27. Bolzicco G, Favretto MS, Satariano N, et al. A single-center
study of 100 consecutive patients with localized prostate cancer treated with stereotactic body radiotherapy. BMC Urol.
2013;13:49. doi:10.1186/1471-2490-13-49
28. Chen LN, Suy S, Uhm S, et al. Stereotactic body radiation
therapy (SBRT) for clinically localized prostate cancer: the
Georgetown University experience. Radiat Oncol. 2013;8:58.
doi:10.1186/1748-717X-8-58
29. Freeman DE, King CR. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for
low-risk prostate cancer: five-year outcomes. Radiat Oncol.
2011;6:3. doi:10.1186/1748-717X-6-3
30. Gill BS, Olsheski ME, D’Ambrosio DJ, et al. Hypofractionated
stereotactic body radiation therapy for low- and intermediaterisk prostate cancer: a multi-institutional phase 2 analysis.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015;93(3):E197-E198.
31. Hannan R, Tumati V, Xie XJ, et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy for low and intermediate risk prostate cancer:
results from a multi-institutional clinical trial. Eur J Cancer.
2016;59:142-151. doi:10.1016/j.ejca.2016.02.014
32. Jabbari S, Weinberg VK, Kaprealian T, et al. Stereotactic
body radiotherapy as monotherapy or post-external beam
radiotherapy boost for prostate cancer: technique, early
toxicity, and PSA response. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2012;82(1):228-234. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.10.026
33. Kang JK, Cho CK, Choi CW, et al. Image-guided stereotactic
body radiation therapy for localized prostate cancer. Tumori.
2011;97(1):43-48. PubMed PMID: 21528663.
34. Katz A, Kang J. Stereotactic body radiotherapy with or without external beam radiation as treatment for organ confined
high-risk prostate carcinoma: a six year study. Radiat Oncol.
2014;9:1. doi:10.1186/1748-717X-9-1
35. King CR, Brooks JD, Gill H, et al. Long-term outcomes
from a prospective trial of stereotactic body radiotherapy
for low-risk prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2012;82(2):877-882. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.11.054
36. Loblaw A, Cheung P, D’Alimonte L, et al. Prostate stereotactic ablative body radiotherapy using a standard linear accelerator: toxicity, biochemical, and pathological outcomes. Radiother
Oncol. 2013;107(2):153-158. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2013.03.022
37. Madsen BL, Hsi RA, Pham HT, et al. Stereotactic hypofractionated accurate radiotherapy of the prostate (SHARP), 33.5 Gy
in five fractions for localized disease: first clinical trial results.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2007;67(4):1099-1105. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2006.10.050
38. Mantz C. A phase II trial of stereotactic ablative body radiotherapy for low-risk prostate cancer using a non-robotic
linear accelerator and real-time target tracking: report of toxicity, quality of life, and disease control outcomes with 5-year
minimum follow-up. Front Oncol. 2014;4:279. doi:10.3389/
fonc.2014.00279
39. McBride SM, Wong DS, Dombrowski JJ, et al. Hypofractionated stereotactic body radiotherapy in low-risk prostate

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 266

adenocarcinoma: preliminary results of a multi-institutional
phase 1 feasibility trial. Cancer. 2012;118(15):3681-3690.
doi:10.1002/cncr.26699
40. Meier R, Beckman A, Henning G, et al. Five-year outcomes
from a multicenter trial of stereotactic body radiation therapy
for low- and intermediate-risk prostate cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2016;96(2):S33-S34.doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2016.06.094
41. Oliai C, Lanciano R, Sprandio B, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for the primary treatment of localized prostate cancer. J Radiat Oncol. 2013;2(1):63-70. doi:10.1007/
s13566-012-0067-2
42. Freeman D, Dickerson G, Perman M, et al. Multi-institutional
registry for prostate cancer radiosurgery: a prospective observational clinical trial. Front Oncol. 2014;4:369. doi:10.3389/
fonc.2014.00369
43. American Society for Radiation Oncology. Model policies:
stereotactic body radiation therapy. Available at: https://www.
astro.org/uploadedFiles/Main_Site/Practice_Management/
Reimbursement/2013HPcoding%20guidelines_SBRT_Final.
pdf. Accessed December 18, 2016.
44. Pommier P, Chabaud S, Lagrange JL, et al. Is there a role
for pelvic irradiation in localized prostate adenocarcinoma? Update of the long-term survival results of the
GETUG-01 randomized study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2016;96(4):759-769. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2016.06.2455
45. Lawton CA, DeSilvio M, Roach M, et al. An update of the
phase III trial comparing whole pelvic to prostate only radiotherapy and neoadjuvant to adjuvant total androgen suppression:
updated analysis of RTOG 94-13, with emphasis on unexpected
hormone/radiation interactions. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys .
2007 ; 69 ( 3 ): 646 - 655 . doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.04.003
46. Zumsteg ZS, Spratt DE, Pei I, et al. A new risk classification
system for therapeutic decision making with intermediaterisk prostate cancer patients undergoing dose-escalated
external-beam radiation therapy. Eur Urol. 2013;64(6):
895-902. doi:10.1016/j.eururo.2013.03.033
47. Katz A, Formenti SC, Kang J. Predicting biochemical disease-free survival after prostate stereotactic body radiotherapy: risk-stratification and patterns of failure. Front Oncol.
2016;6:168. doi:10.3389/fonc.2016.00168
48. Spratt DE, Pei X, Yamada J, et al. Long-term survival and
toxicity in patients treated with high-dose intensity modulated radiation therapy for localized prostate cancer. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013;85(3):686-692. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2012.05.023
49. Zapatero A, Guerrero A, Maldonado X, et al. High-dose
radiotherapy with short-term or long-term androgen deprivation in localised prostate cancer (DART01/05 GICOR):
a randomised, controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol.
2015;16(3):320-327. doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(15)70045-8
50. Bolla M, Maingon P, Carrie C, et al. Short androgen suppression and radiation dose escalation for intermediate- and
high-risk localized prostate cancer: results of EORTC trial
22991. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(15):1748-1756. doi:10.1200/
JCO.2015.64.8055
51. James ND, Sydes MR, Clarke NW, et al. Addition of
docetaxel, zoledronic acid, or both to first-line long-term
hormone therapy in prostate cancer (STAMPEDE): survival
results from an adaptive, multiarm, multistage, platform
randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2016;387(10024):
1163-1177. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(15)01037-5
52. Sandler HM, Hu C, Rosenthal SA, et al. A phase III protocol of androgen suppression (AS) and 3DCRT/IMRT versus
AS and 3DCRT/IMRT followed by chemotherapy (CT) with
docetaxel and prednisone for localized, high-risk prostate

23/08/18 4:42 PM

16: PROSTATE SBRT
cancer (RTOG 0521). J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(suppl 18):
LBA5002. doi:10.1200/jco.2015.33.18_suppl.lba5002
53. Hoskin PJ, Rojas AM, Bownes PJ, et al. Randomised trial of
external beam radiotherapy alone or combined with highdose-rate brachytherapy boost for localised prostate cancer. Radiother Oncol. 2012;103(2):217-222. doi:10.1016/
j.radonc.2012.01.007
54. Rodda SL, Tyldesley S, Morris WJ. Toxicity outcomes in
ASCENDE-RT: A multicenter randomized trial of doseescalation trial for prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2015;93(3):S121. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.07.289
55. Morris WJ, Tyldesley S, Rodda S, et al. ASCENDE-RT: an
analysis of survival endpoints for a randomized trial comparing a low-dose-rate brachytherapy boost to a dose-escalated
external beam boost for high- and intermediate-risk prostate
cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2017;98(2):275-285.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2016.11.026
56. Anwar M, Weinberg V, Seymour Z, et al. Outcomes of hypofractionated stereotactic body radiotherapy boost for intermediate and high-risk prostate cancer. Radiat Oncol. 2016;11:8.
doi:10.1186/s13014-016-0585-y
57. Mercado C, Kress MA, Cyr RA, et al. Intensity-modulated
radiation therapy with stereotactic body radiation therapy
boost for unfavorable prostate cancer: the Georgetown University experience. Front Oncol. 2016;6:114. doi:10.3389/
fonc.2016.00114
58. Paydar I, Pepin A, Cyr RA, et al. Intensity modulated radiation therapy with stereotactic body radiation therapy boost
for unfavorable prostate cancer: a report on three-year toxicity. Front Oncol. 2017;7:5. doi:10.3389/fonc.2017.00005
59. Kim HJ, Phak JH, Kim WC, et al. Clinical outcomes of whole
pelvis radiotherapy and stereotactic body radiotherapy boost
for intermediate- and high-risk prostate cancer. Asia Pac J
Clin Oncol. 2017;13(5):e342-e347. doi:10.1111/ajco.12455
60. Fuller DB, Naitoh J, Lee C, et al. Virtual HDR CyberKnife
treatment for localized prostatic carcinoma: dosimetry comparison with HDR brachytherapy and preliminary clinical
observations. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008;70(5):
1588-1597. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.11.067
61. Jalloh M, Leapman MS, Cowan JE, et al. Patterns of local
failure following radiation therapy for prostate cancer. J Urol.
2015;194(4):977-982. doi:10.1016/j.juro.2015.04.111
62. Chade DC, Shariat SF, Cronin AM, et al. Salvage radical prostatectomy for radiation-recurrent prostate cancer: a multiinstitutional collaboration. Eur Urol. 2011;60(2):205-210.
doi:10.1016/j.eururo.2011.03.011
63. Chade DC, Eastham J, Graefen M, et al. Cancer control and
functional outcomes of salvage radical prostatectomy for
radiation-recurrent prostate cancer: a systematic review of
the literature. Eur Urol. 2012;61(5):961-971. doi:10.1016/
j.eururo.2012.01.022
64. Chen CP, Weinberg V, Shinohara K, et al. Salvage HDR
brachytherapy for recurrent prostate cancer after previous
definitive radiation therapy: 5-year outcomes. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2013;86(2):324-329. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2013.01.027
65. Yamada Y, Kollmeier MA, Pei X, et al. A phase II study of salvage high-dose-rate brachytherapy for the treatment of locally
recurrent prostate cancer after definitive external beam radiotherapy. Brachytherapy. 2014;13(2):111-116. doi:10.1016/
j.brachy.2013.11.005
66. Wong WW, Buskirk SJ, Schild SE, et al. Combined prostate
brachytherapy and short-term androgen deprivation therapy
as salvage therapy for locally recurrent prostate cancer after
external beam irradiation. J Urol. 2006;176(5):2020-2024.
doi:10.1016/j.juro.2006.07.008

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 267

267

67. Ramey SJ, Marshall DT. Re-irradiation for salvage of prostate cancer failures after primary radiotherapy. World
J Urol. 2013;31(6):1339-1345. doi:10.1007/s00345-0120953-7
68. Vavassori A, Jereczek-fossa BA, Beltramo G, et al. Imageguided robotic radiosurgery as salvage therapy for locally
recurrent prostate cancer after external beam irradiation:
retrospective feasibility study on six cases. Tumori. 2010;
96(1):71-75. PubMed PMID: 20437861
69. Janoray G, Reynaud-Bougnoux A, Ruffier-Loubière A, et al.
Stereotactic body re-irradiation therapy for locally recurrent
prostate cancer after external-beam radiation therapy: initial
report. Cancer Radiother. 2016;20(4):275-281. doi:10.1016/
j.canrad.2016.03.005
70. Zerini D, Jereczek-fossa BA, Fodor C, et al. Salvage imageguided intensity modulated or stereotactic body reirradiation of local recurrence of prostate cancer. Br J Radiol.
2015;88(1052):20150197. doi:10.1259/bjr.20150197
71. Detti B, Bonomo P, Masi L, et al. Cyberknife stereotactic radiotherapy for isolated recurrence in the prostatic bed. World
J Urol. 2016;34(3):311-317. doi:10.1007/s00345-015-1613-5
72. Fuller DB, Wurzer J, Shirazi R, et al. High-dose-rate stereotactic body radiation therapy for postradiation therapy
locally recurrent prostatic carcinoma: preliminary prostatespecific antigen response, disease-free survival, and toxicity
assessment. Pract Radiat Oncol. 2015;5(6):e615-e623.
doi:10.1016/j.prro.2015.04.009
73. Davis BJ, Horwitz EM, Lee WR, et al. American Brachytherapy
Society consensus guidelines for transrectal ultrasoundguided permanent prostate brachytherapy. Brachytherapy.
2012;11(1):6-19. doi:10.1016/j.brachy.2011.07.005
74. Yamada Y, Rogers L, Demanes DJ, et al. American Brachytherapy Society consensus guidelines for high-dose-rate prostate
brachytherapy. Brachytherapy. 2012;11(1):20-32. doi:10.
1016/j.brachy.2011.09.008
75. Terk MD, Stock RG, Stone NN, et al. Identification of
patients at increased risk for prolonged urinary retention
following radioactive seed implantation of the prostate.
J Urol. 1998;160(4):1379-1382. PubMed PMID: 9751358
76. Keyes M, Miller S, Moravan V, et al. Predictive factors for acute
and late urinary toxicity after permanent prostate brachytherapy:
long-term outcome in 712 consecutive patients. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 2009;73(4):1023-1032. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2008.05.022
77. Woo JA, Chen LN, Bhagat A, et al. Clinical characteristics and management of late urinary symptom flare following stereotactic body
radiation therapy for prostate cancer. Front Oncol. 2014;4:122.
doi:10.3389/fonc.2014.00122
78. Bhattasali O, Chen LN, Woo J, et al. Patient-reported outcomes following stereotactic body radiation therapy for clinically localized prostate cancer. Radiat Oncol. 2014;9:52.
doi:10.1186/1748-717X-9-52
79. Janowski E, Chen LN, Kim JS, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy (SBRT) for prostate cancer in men with
large prostates (ⱖ50 cm3). Radiat Oncol. 2014;9:241.
doi:10.1186/s13014-014-0241-3
80. Seymour ZA, Chang AJ, Zhang L, et al. Dose-volume
analysis and the temporal nature of toxicity with stereotactic body radiation therapy for prostate cancer. Pract
Radiat Oncol. 2015;5(5):e465-e472. doi:10.1016/j.prro.
2015.02.001
81. Katz AJ, Kang J. Quality of life and toxicity after SBRT for
organ-confined prostate cancer: a 7-Year study. Front Oncol.
2014;4:301. doi:10.3389/fonc.2014.00301
82. The Radiosurgery Society. White paper: prostate cancer
and stereotactic radiosurgery. Available at: http://therss.

23/08/18 4:42 PM

268

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

org/docs/62cbe93b-7f5b-437f-a726-be5668510f19.pdf .
Accessed December 28, 2016.
83. Lischalk JW, Kaplan ID, Collins SP, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for localized prostate cancer. Cancer J.
2016;22(4):307-313. doi:10.1097/PPO.0000000000000209
84. Wilder RB, Chittenden L, Mesa AV, et al. A prospective
study of intrafraction prostate motion in the prone vs. supine
position. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;77(1):165-170.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.04.041
85. Shah AP, Kupelian PA, Willoughby TR, et al. An evaluation of
intrafraction motion of the prostate in the prone and supine
positions using electromagnetic tracking. Radiother Oncol.
2011;99(1):37-43. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2011.02.012
86. de Crevoisier R, Tucker SL, Dong L, et al. Increased risk of
biochemical and local failure in patients with distended rectum on the planning CT for prostate cancer radiotherapy. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005;62(4):965-973. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2004.11.032
87. Roeske JC, Forman JD, Mesina CF, et al. Evaluation of changes
in the size and location of the prostate, seminal vesicles,
bladder, and rectum during a course of external beam radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1995;33(5):
1321-1329. doi:10.1016/0360-016(95)00225-1
88. Ten Haken RK, Forman JD, Heimburger DK, et al. Treatment
planning issues related to prostate movement in response
to differential filling of the rectum and bladder. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 1991;20(6):1317-1324. PubMed PMID:
2045306.
89. Wahl M, Descovich M, Shugard E, et al. Interfraction anatomical variability can lead to significantly increased rectal dose for
patients undergoing stereotactic body radiotherapy for prostate cancer. Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2017;16(2):178-187.
doi:10.1177/1533034616649495
90. O’Doherty UM, McNair HA, Norman AR, et al. Variability
of bladder filling in patients receiving radical radiotherapy
to the prostate. Radiother Oncol. 2006;79(3):335-340. doi:
10.1016/j.radonc.2006.05.007
91. Fiorino C, Di Muzio N, Broggi S, et al. Evidence of limited
motion of the prostate by carefully emptying the rectum as
assessed by daily MVCT image guidance with helical tomotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008;71(2):611-617.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.01.048
92. Smitsmans MH, Pos FJ, de Bois J, et al. The influence of a
dietary protocol on cone beam CT-guided radiotherapy for
prostate cancer patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2008;71(4):1279-1286. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.03.036
93. Nichol AM, Warde PR, Lockwood GA, et al. A cinematic
magnetic resonance imaging study of milk of magnesia laxative and an antiflatulent diet to reduce intrafraction prostate
motion. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;77(4):1072-1078.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.06.005
94. McNair HA, Wedlake L, McVey GP, et al. Can diet combined
with treatment scheduling achieve consistency of rectal filling in
patients receiving radiotherapy to the prostate? Radiother Oncol.
2011;101(3):471-478. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2011.08.003
95. Lips IM, Kotte AN, van Gils CH, et al. Influence of antiflatulent dietary advice on intrafraction motion for prostate cancer radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;81(4):
e401-e406. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.04.062
96. Song DY, Herfarth KK, Uhl M, et al. A multi-institutional
clinical trial of rectal dose reduction via injected polyethyleneglycol hydrogel during intensity modulated radiation therapy
for prostate cancer: analysis of dosimetric outcomes. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013;87(1):81-87. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2012.12.019

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 268

97. Mariados N, Sylvester J, Shah D, et al. Hydrogel spacer
prospective multicenter randomized controlled pivotal trial:
dosimetric and clinical effects of perirectal spacer application in men undergoing prostate image guided intensity
modulated radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2015;92(5):971-977. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.04.030
98. Roach M, Faillace-akazawa P, Malfatti C, et al. Prostate
volumes defined by magnetic resonance imaging and computerized tomographic scans for three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1996;35(5):
1011-1018. PubMed PMID: 8751410.
99. Milosevic M, Voruganti S, Blend R, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for localization of the prostatic apex:
comparison to computed tomography (CT) and urethrography. Radiother Oncol. 1998;47(3):277-284. PubMed PMID:
9681891.
100. Roach M, Pickett B, Holland J, et al. The role of the urethrogram during simulation for localized prostate cancer.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1993;25(2):299-307. PubMed
PMID: 8420878.
101. Paydar I, Kim BS, Cyr RA, et al. Urethrogram-directed
stereotactic body radiation therapy for clinically localized
prostate cancer in patients with contraindications to magnetic
resonance imaging. Front Oncol. 2015;5:194. doi:10.3389/
fonc.2015.00194
102. Kestin L, Goldstein N, Vicini F, et al. Treatment of prostate cancer with radiotherapy: should the entire seminal
vesicles be included in the clinical target volume? Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2002;54(3):686-697. PubMed
PMID: 12377319.
103. Macdougall ND, Dean C, Muirhead R. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy in prostate cancer: is rapidarc a better solution
than cyberknife? Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 2014;26(1):
4-9. doi:10.1016/j.clon.2013.08.008
104. Lin YW, Lin KH, Ho HW, et al. Treatment plan comparison
between stereotactic body radiation therapy techniques for
prostate cancer: non-isocentric cyberknife versus isocentric
rapidarc. Phys Med. 2014;30(6):654-661. doi:10.1016/
j.ejmp.2014.03.008
105. Seppälä J, Suilamo S, Tenhunen M, et al. Dosimetric comparison
and evaluation of 4 stereotactic body radiotherapy techniques
for the treatment of prostate cancer. Technol Cancer Res Treat.
2017;16(2):238-245. doi:10.1177/1533034616682156
106. Hossain S, Xia P, Huang K, et al. Dose gradient near targetnormal structure interface for nonisocentric cyberknife and
isocentric intensity-modulated body radiotherapy for prostate
cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;78(1):58-63. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.07.1752
107. Potharaju M, Venkatraman M, Gopalakrishna K. Dosimetric
comparison of stereotactic body radiotherapy and intensitymodulated radiotherapy to deliver hypofractionated radiotherapy in organ-confined prostate cancer. Cureus. 2013;
5(2):e99. doi:10.7759/cureus.99
108. Wessels BW, Brindle JM, Cheng CW, et al. Retrospective
prostate treatment plan comparison for proton, tomotherapy, and Cyberknife therapy. Int J Particle Ther. 2015;2(2):
385-393.
109. Alongi F, Cozzi L, Arcangeli S, et al. Linac based SBRT for
prostate cancer in 5 fractions with VMAT and flattening filter
free beams: preliminary report of a phase II study. Radiat
Oncol. 2013;8:171. doi:10.1186/1748-717X-8-171
110. Kim DW, Cho LC, Straka C, et al. Predictors of rectal tolerance
observed in a dose-escalated phase 1-2 trial of stereotactic body
radiation therapy for prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2014;89(3):509-517. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2014.03.012

23/08/18 4:42 PM

16: PROSTATE SBRT
111. Katz AJ, Santoro M, Ashley R, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for organ-confined prostate cancer. BMC Urol.
2010;10:1. doi:10.1186/1471-2490-10-1
112. Quon HC, Musunuru HB, Cheung P, et al. Dose-escalated
stereotactic body radiation therapy for prostate cancer:
quality-of-life comparisons of two prospective trials. Front
Oncol. 2016;6:185. doi:10.3389/fonc.2016.00185
113. Zhang L, Johnson J, Gottschalk AR, et al. Receiver operating curves and dose-volume analysis of late toxicity with
stereotactic body radiotherapy for prostate cancer. Pract
Radiat Oncol. 2017;7(2):e109-e116. doi:10.1016/j.prro.
2016.07.004
114. Elias E, Helou J, Zhang L, et al. Dosimetric and patient
correlates of quality of life after prostate stereotactic ablative radiotherapy. Radiother Oncol. 2014;112(1):83-88.
doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2014.06.009
115. Fortin D, Mestrovic A, Alexander A, et al. Stereotactic ablative radiation therapy with volumetric modulated arc therapy
in flattening filter-free mode for low-, intermediate-, and
high-risk prostate cancer patients: are 2 arcs better than 1?
Pract Radiat Oncol. 2015;5(5):e489-e497. doi:10.1016/
j.prro.2015.04.002
116. Barney BM, Lee RJ, Handrahan D, et al. Image-guided radiotherapy (IGRT) for prostate cancer comparing kV imaging
of fiducial markers with cone beam computed tomography
(CBCT). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;80(1):301-315.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.06.007
117. Kitamura K, Shirato H, Seppenwoolde Y, et al. Threedimensional intrafractional movement of prostate measured
during real-time tumor-tracking radiotherapy in supine and
prone treatment positions. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2002;53(5):1117-1123. PubMed PMID: 12128110.
118. Li HS, Chetty IJ, Enke CA, et al. Dosimetric consequences of
intrafraction prostate motion. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
2008;71(3):801-812. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.10.049
119. Kupelian PA, Willoughby TR, Meeks SL, et al. Intraprostatic
fiducials for localization of the prostate gland: monitoring
intermarker distances during radiation therapy to test for
marker stability. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005;62(5):
1291-1296. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2005.01.005
120. Xie Y, Djajaputra D, King CR, et al. Intrafractional motion
of the prostate during hypofractionated radiotherapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008;72(1):236-246. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2008.04.051
121. Aznar MC, Petersen PM, Logadottir A, et al. Rotational radiotherapy for prostate cancer in clinical practice. Radiother Oncol.
2010;97(3):480-484. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2010.09.014
122. Wolff D, Stieler F, Welzel G, et al. Volumetric modulated
arc therapy (VMAT) vs. serial tomotherapy, step-and-shoot
IMRT and 3D-conformal RT for treatment of prostate cancer.
Radiother Oncol. 2009;93(2):226-233. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.
2009.08.011
123. Ghilezan MJ, Jaffray DA, Siewerdsen JH, et al. Prostate
gland motion assessed with cine-magnetic resonance imaging
(cine-MRI). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005;62(2):406-417.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2003.10.017
124. Kotte AN, Hofman P, Lagendijk JJ, et al. Intrafraction motion
of the prostate during external-beam radiation therapy: analysis of 427 patients with implanted fiducial markers. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2007;69(2):419-425. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2007.03.029
125. Rosewall T, Chung P, Bayley A, et al. A randomized comparison of interfraction and intrafraction prostate motion
with and without abdominal compression. Radiother Oncol.
2008;88(1):88-94. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2008.01.019

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 269

269

126. Kupelian P, Willoughby T, Mahadevan A, et al. Multiinstitutional clinical experience with the Calypso System
in localization and continuous, real-time monitoring of the
prostate gland during external radiotherapy. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2007;67(4):1088-1098. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2006.10.026
127. Lei S, Piel N, Oermann EK, et al. Six-dimensional correction
of intra-fractional prostate motion with cyberknife stereotactic body radiation therapy. Front Oncol. 2011;1:48. doi:
10.3389/fonc.2011.00048
128. King CR, Collins S, Fuller D, et al. Health-related quality
of life after stereotactic body radiation therapy for localized
prostate cancer: results from a multi-institutional consortium of prospective trials. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2013;87(5):939-945. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.08.019
129. Roach M, Hanks G, Thames H, et al. Defining biochemical failure following radiotherapy with or without hormonal
therapy in men with clinically localized prostate cancer:
recommendations of the RTOG-ASTRO Phoenix Consensus Conference. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2006;65(4):
965-974. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2006.04.029
130. Ray ME, Thames HD, Levy LB, et al. PSA nadir predicts biochemical and distant failures after external beam radiotherapy
for prostate cancer: a multi-institutional analysis. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2006;64(4):1140-1150. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2005.07.006
131. Pollack A, Zagars GK, Antolak JA, et al. Prostate biopsy
status and PSA nadir level as early surrogates for treatment
failure: analysis of a prostate cancer randomized radiation
dose escalation trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2002;54(3):
677-685. PubMed PMID: 12377318
132. Cavanaugh SX, Kupelian PA, Fuller CD, et al. Early prostatespecific antigen (PSA) kinetics following prostate carcinoma
radiotherapy: prognostic value of a time-and-PSA threshold model. Cancer. 2004;101(1):96-105. doi:10.1002/cncr.
20328
133. Miller N, Smolkin ME, Bissonette E, et al. Undetectable
prostate specific antigen at 6-12 months: a new marker
for early success in hormonally treated patients after prostate brachytherapy. Cancer. 2005;103(12):2499-2506.
doi:10.1002/cncr.21077
134. Hanlon AL, Diratzouian H, Hanks GE. Posttreatment
prostate-specific antigen nadir highly predictive of distant failure and death from prostate cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2002;53(2):297-303. PubMed PMID:
12023133.
135. Ogawa K, Nakamura K, Sasaki T, et al. External beam radiotherapy for clinically localized hormone-refractory prostate
cancer: clinical significance of nadir prostate-specific antigen value within 12 months. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2009;74(3):759-765. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.08.06
136. Lee SH, Kim HJ, Kim WC, et al. Prostate-specific antigen
kinetics following hypofractionated stereotactic body radiotherapy versus conventionally fractionated external beam
radiotherapy for low- and intermediate-risk prostate cancer.
Asia Pac J Clin Oncol. 2016;12(4):388-395. doi:10.1111/
ajco.12566
137. Kishan AU, Wang PC, Upadhyaya SK, et al. SBRT and
HDR brachytherapy produce lower PSA nadirs and different
PSA decay patterns than conventionally fractionated IMRT
in patients with low- or intermediate-risk prostate cancer.
Pract Radiat Oncol. 2016;6(4):268-275. doi:10.1016/
j.prro.2015.11.002
138. Anwar M, Weinberg V, Chang AJ, et al. Hypofractionated
SBRT versus conventionally fractionated EBRT for prostate

23/08/18 4:42 PM

270

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

cancer: comparison of PSA slope and nadir. Radiat Oncol.
2014;9:42. doi:10.1186/1748-717X-9-42
139. Caloglu M, Ciezki J. Prostate-specific antigen bounce
after prostate brachytherapy: review of a confusing phenomenon. Urology. 2009;74(6):1183-1190. doi:10.1016/
j.urology.2009.01.043
140. Waters A, Delouya G, Donath D, et al. Risk factors for
PSA bounce following radiotherapy: outcomes from a multimodal therapy analysis. Can J Urol. 2014;21(6):7548-7553.
PubMed PMID: 25483763.
141. Critz FA, Williams WH, Benton JB, et al. Prostate specific
antigen bounce after radioactive seed implantation followed
by external beam radiation for prostate cancer. J Urol.
2000;163(4):1085-1089. PubMed PMID: 10737471.
142. Rosser CJ, Kamat AM, Wang X, et al. Is patient age a factor in the occurrence of prostate-specific antigen bounce
phenomenon after external beam radiotherapy for prostate cancer? Urology. 2005;66(2):327-331. doi:10.1016/
j.urology.2005.02.026
143. Bernstein MB, Ohri N, Hodge JW, et al. Prostate-specific
antigen bounce predicts for a favorable prognosis following
brachytherapy: a meta-analysis. J Contemp Brachytherapy.
2013;5(4):210-214. doi:10.5114/jcb.2013.38875
144. Hinnen KA, Monninkhof EM, Battermann JJ, et al. Prostate specific antigen bounce is related to overall survival
in prostate brachytherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2012;82(2):883-888. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.11.049
145. Katz AJ, Santoro M, Diblasio F, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy for localized prostate cancer: disease control
and quality of life at 6 years. Radiat Oncol. 2013;8:118.
doi:10.1186/1748-717X-8-118
146. Kole TP, Chen LN, Obayomi-davies O, et al. Prostate specific
antigen kinetics following robotic stereotactic body radiotherapy for localized prostate cancer. Acta Oncol. 2015;54(6):
832-888. doi:10.3109/0284186X.2014.983656
147. King CR, Brooks JD, Gill H, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy for localized prostate cancer: interim
results of a prospective phase II clinical trial. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2009;73(4):1043-1048. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2008.05.059
148. Yu JB, Cramer LD, Herrin J, et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy versus intensity-modulated radiation therapy for
prostate cancer: comparison of toxicity. J Clin Oncol. 2014;
32(12):1195-1201. doi:10.1200/JCO.2013.53.8652
149. Evans JR, Zhao S, Daignault S, et al. Patient-reported
quality of life after stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT),
intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT), and brachytherapy. Radiother Oncol. 2015;116(2):179-184. doi:10.1016/
j.radonc.2015.07.016
150. Norman GR, Sloan JA, Wyrwich KW. Interpretation
of changes in health-related quality of life: the remarkable
universality of half a standard deviation. Med Care.
2003;41(5):582-592. doi:10.1097/01.MLR.0000062554.
74615.4C
151. Repka MC, Guleria S, Cyr RA, et al. Acute urinary morbidity following stereotactic body radiation therapy for
prostate cancer with prophylactic alpha-adrenergic antagonist and urethral dose reduction. Front Oncol. 2016;6:122.
doi:10.3389/fonc.2016.00122
152. Quon HC, Ong A, Cheung P, et al. PATRIOT trial: randomized phase 2 study of prostate stereotactic body radiation
therapy comparing 11 versus 29 days overall treatment time.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015;93(3):S198. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2015.07.473

Heron_68566_PTR_16_249-270_08-23-18.indd 270

153. Zelefsky MJ, Yamada Y, Pei X, et al. Comparison of tumor
control and toxicity outcomes of high-dose intensitymodulated radiotherapy and brachytherapy for patients
with favorable risk prostate cancer. Urology. 2011;77(4):
986-990. doi:10.1016/j.urology.2010.07.539
154. Cesaretti JA, Stone NN, Stock RG, et al. Urinary symptom
flare following I-125 prostate brachytherapy. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2003;56(4):1085-1092. PubMed PMID:
12829146.
155. Paydar I, Cyr RA, Yung TM, et al. Proctitis 1 week after
stereotactic body radiation therapy for prostate cancer:
Implications for clinical trial design. Front Oncol. 2016;
6:167. doi:10.3389/fonc.2016.00167
156. Simone NL, Ménard C, Soule BP, et al. Intrarectal amifostine during external beam radiation therapy for prostate
cancer produces significant improvements in quality of
life measured by EPIC score. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2008;70(1):90-95. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.05.057
157. Kouloulias VE, Kouvaris JR, Pissakas G, et al. A phase II
randomized study of topical intrarectal administration of
amifostine for the prevention of acute radiation-induced
rectal toxicity. Strahlenther Onkol. 2004;180(9):557-562.
doi:10.1007/s00066-004-1226-1
158. Sood S, Ju AW, Wang H, et al. Rectal endoscopy findings
following stereotactic body radiation therapy for clinically
localized prostate cancer. Radiat Oncol. 2013;8:197. doi:10
.1186/1748-717X-8-197
159. Musunuru HB, Davidson M, Cheung P, et al. Predictive
parameters of symptomatic hematochezia following
5-fraction gantry-based SBRT in prostate cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2016;94(5):1043-1051. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2015.12.010
160. Wiegner EA, King CR. Sexual function after stereotactic
body radiotherapy for prostate cancer: results of a prospective clinical trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;78:
442-448. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.07.1748
161. Obayomi-Davies O, Chen LN, Bhagat A, et al. Potency
preservation following stereotactic body radiation therapy
for prostate cancer. Radiat Oncol. 2013;8:256. doi:10.1186/
1748-717X-8-256
162. Cosset JM, Cathelineau X, Wakil G, et al. Focal brachytherapy for selected low-risk prostate cancers: a pilot study.
Brachytherapy. 2013;12(4):331-337. doi:10.1016/j.brachy.
2013.02.002
163. Nguyen PL, Chen MH, Zhang Y, et al. Updated results
of magnetic resonance imaging guided partial prostate
brachytherapy for favorable risk prostate cancer: implications for focal therapy. J Urol. 2012;188(4):1151-1156.
doi:10.1016/j.juro.2012.06.010
164. Bauman G, Ferguson M, Lock M, et al. A phase 1/2 trial
of brief androgen suppression and stereotactic radiation
therapy (FASTR) for high-risk prostate cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2015;92(4):856-862. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2015.02.046
165. Rusthoven CG, Jones BL, Flaig TW, et al. Improved survival
with prostate radiation in addition to androgen deprivation
therapy for men with newly diagnosed metastatic prostate
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(24):2835-2842. doi:10.1200/
JCO.2016.67.4788
166. Satkunasivam R, Kim AE, Desai M, et al. Radical prostatectomy or external beam radiation therapy vs no local
therapy for survival benefit in metastatic prostate cancer: a
SEER-Medicare analysis. J Urol. 2015;194:378-385. doi:10
.1016/j.juro.2015.02.084

23/08/18 4:42 PM

C H A P T E R

17

Gynecologic SBRT
Charles Kunos, Ronny Kalash, and Sushil Beriwal

Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT)
clinical trials for gynecologic indications are few in
number (1,2). This is in spite of the observation
that the persistence or recurrence of gynecologic
malignancies (i.e., ovary, uterus, cervix, and vulva)
following first-line treatments is a leading cause
of cancer-related death among women worldwide (3). In retrospective review, persistent or
recurrent gynecologic tumors abut formerly irradiated tissues or chemotherapy-taxed hematopoietic
marrow in as many as 40% of patients (4,5). When
surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation therapy have
already been attempted, selection of appropriate
second- or third-line intervention becomes vital,
as additional treatment may also bring about harm
to the patient. As such, women with persistent
or recurrent metastatic gynecologic malignancies
have unmet therapeutic needs, especially when
these malignancies are chemorefractory or have
been irradiated earlier. Gynecologic SBRT meets
at least one of the unmet needs by offering a noninvasive way of controlling disease at sites in which
conventional surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation
therapy are likely incapable of doing so.
Gynecologic SBRT demands sophisticated planning features critical to maximizing radiation dose
delivery performance. Cancer care delivery research
and clinical trials have studied (a) motion management of the patient on the tabletop, (b) motion
management of the internal SBRT target because of
physiologic motion, (c) high-level SBRT treatment
planning and software performance, and (d) challenges of “real-time” beam-on on-board image

capture for quality radiation dose delivery. Retrospective research and clinical trial efforts have
been spent to best understand merits and demerits
of hypofractionated, high-dose (8 Gy) radiation
treatments that are intended to safely shorten weeks
of conventional radiation therapy to as few as
3 days. Currently, gynecologic SBRT involves clinical radiation accelerators fitted to industrial robots
(CyberKnife® [1,2,6–9]), to helical mounts (TomoTherapyTM or Vero [10–14]), or to conventional
image-guided teletherapy machines (linear accelerator [linac]-based radiation therapy [15–18]).
This chapter offers a management synopsis of
SBRT for persistent or recurrent metastatic gynecologic malignancies, and an up-to-date review of
SBRT’s activity relative to disease control.

TREATMENT INDICATIONS
Treatment indications for gynecologic SBRT
continue to evolve with clinical experience. So
far, phase II clinical trial evidence offers support
for the treatment of women whose persistent or
recurrent metastatic ovarian, uterine, cervical, or
vulvar disease (a) is chemorefractory or (b) has
been irradiated earlier (1). Phase I clinical trial
data support gynecologic SBRT–chemotherapy
in combination (2). Anecdotal gynecologic SBRT
indications include medically inoperable disease
(15,16) or as a dose boost when conventional
radiation therapy and brachytherapy are conceded
(10,11,17,18). Each needs further investigation
before being considered mainstream.
271

Heron_68566_PTR_17_271-278_08-23-18.indd 271

21/08/18 2:07 PM

272

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

PATIENT SELECTION
Patient candidate selection for gynecologic SBRT
remains arbitrary. This is due in part to the
relative dearth of level I evidence in this area. Consequently, investigators are still exploring the exact
indications, prescriptions, and timetables for optimal gynecologic SBRT treatment. For now, gynecologic SBRT clinical trials usually recruit patient
candidates who are older than 18 years, have an
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG)
performance status of 0, 1, or 2 (i.e., relatively fit,
attend their own activities of daily living), and have
four or less (4) intended sites of SBRT treatment.
There are no restrictions for gynecologic SBRT
target volume when used as monotherapy (1); in
gynecologic SBRT–chemotherapy combinations
(2), a conservative 160 cm3 or less volume for each
individual SBRT target is recommended (i.e., up
to four 160 cm3 or less targets could be treated in
one gynecologic SBRT session overlapping a chemotherapy cycle). Gynecologic SBRT has not yet
been limited by prior chemotherapy exposure or by
prior radiation therapy dose (1,2).

WHY SBRT?
SBRT permits the use of a noninvasive radiation
therapy treatment that increases the likelihood
of local disease control for persistent or recurrent
metastatic tumors. It has demonstrated durable clinical benefit in women with persistent or recurrent
metastatic gynecologic malignancies (1). A rationale
for gynecologic SBRT arises out of the notion that
gynecologic tumors are particularly sensitive to radiation therapy–related nuclear and mitochondrial
DNA damage, demonstrating steep drop-off of the
radiation dose–cell survival curve at an ablative dose
of 8 Gy (19). Indeed, ablative 8 Gy or higher radiation therapy doses lead to nuclear and mitochondrial DNA damage in targeted cells, increasing the
difficulty of cell repair and possibly proving lethal to
targeted cells (20). If gynecologic SBRT can deliver
spot-on accurate and precise radiation therapy dose
without unwarranted normal tissue injury, control
of gynecologic SBRT-targeted disease is plausible.

SIMULATION
Video-supplemented guides are accessible for gynecologic SBRT simulation logistics for targets in
the abdomen (21) and in the lung (22). Currently,

Heron_68566_PTR_17_271-278_08-23-18.indd 272

before gynecologic SBRT simulation, it is recommended that at least one long (0.75 mm × 20 mm)
gold-coated fiducial be placed through the SBRT
target center of mass of each tumor intended for
SBRT treatment.
Although there are likely to be numerous simulation setup positions, clinical trial standard
operating procedures align patients in a head-first
supine position for a contrast CT scan that captures anatomy from the orbitomeatal line through
the upper thighs during quiet free breathing. The
arms are supported over the head. For deep pelvic gynecologic SBRT, a comfortable full-bladder
technique is recommended to push small bowel
away from disease targets. Otherwise, an empty
bladder technique is used. Two-pin localized ankle
or knee sponges and head supports are used for
patient comfort and consistency of setup over
the 3 consecutive days of SBRT treatment. For
breathing motion management, machine platforms may use skin-surface infrared markers or
vests with integrated light-emitting diodes and,
thus, should be included at simulation. Other
in-room devices, such as video, infrared, or beam’seye-view cameras, and their relative alignment
to the patient, should be well thought out prior
to simulation, as these aid motion management.
Because of video monitoring and engineering features such as motion synchrony by robotics or linac
pan-and-tilt, rigid immobilization of the patient on
the tabletop occurs infrequently for gynecologic
SBRT.
Advanced radiology studies frequently enhance
accuracy of gynecologic SBRT delivery for gynecologic recurrences (or applications). A 2-[18F]
fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose PET scan captured in the
same SBRT simulation position affords metabolic
and anatomic overlay. An alternative or added
imaging study such as MRI scan could be obtained
for further anatomic detail. The gynecologic SBRT
clinical trials recommended that both treating
radiation oncologists and gynecologic oncologists
contour on CT images, adding metabolic (i.e.,
PET) or anatomic (i.e., MRI) detail when drawing
the SBRT primary gross target volumes (GTVp).
In prior work, it was decided that a 40% thresholded tumor PET maximum standard uptake
value enclosed clinically suspicious target margins
and was labeled as another intended SBRT target
volume (named clinical target volume on PET
[CTVpet]) (23). For gynecologic SBRT planning,
an internal target volume (ITV) represented the
sum of the CT GTVp plus CTVpet contours.

21/08/18 2:07 PM

17: GYNECOLOGIC SBRT

TARGET DELINEATION
Simulation CT images, in-room laser-aligned tattoo
and breathing motion sensor data (if acquired),
and SBRT platform parameters are all imported
into the SBRT treatment planning software prior to
target and normal anatomy delineation. Contours
for normal anatomy are determined. GTVp targets (i.e., up to four targets for one SBRT treatment session) and corresponding MRI GTVp or
CTVpet contours (as described earlier) are compiled
into ITVs. To reduce a chance for geographic miss,
gynecologic SBRT clinical trials enlarged ITVs in
all dimensions by 5 mm for a SBRT planning target
volume (PTV). SBRT dose planning occurred on
the referent free-breathing phase CT scan.
An alternative approach to ITV contouring
involves segmenting tumor and normal anatomy
position among three types of CT scans: (a) free
breathing; (b) comfortable maximum inspiration;
and (c) comfortable maximum expiration phase.
Here, the obvious corresponding GTVp volumes
are labeled free-breathing (GTVfb), inspiration
(GTVi), and expiration (GTVe). The ITV, therefore,
is computed as the sum of the GTVfb, GTVi, and

273

GTVe contours. For many cases, a CTVpet adds
into the ITV. Again, a composite ITV is enlarged
by 5 mm in every direction for a final PTV. For this
alternative approach, radiation planning occurs on
the free-breathing phase CT scan.
In a clinical scenario of when a thoracic target
is considered for gynecologic SBRT, it has been
recommended that normal anatomy contours of
the trachea and right and left mainstem bronchi be
enlarged by an additional 3 mm in all directions.
These expanded trachea and bronchial contours
are assigned a high-priority planning constraint to
avoid late toxicity in airway fibrosis.

TREATMENT PLAN EVALUATION
The treating radiation oncologist must assess gynecologic SBRT treatment plans slice by slice. Each
SBRT platform’s high-technology planning software permits three- or four-dimensional treatment
plan rendering, making review of radiation beam
orientation relative to radiation dose–volume histograms practical. Clinical trials have provided guidance for SBRT plan evaluation and acceptable plan
deviations as listed in Table 17.1.

TABLE 17.1 Features, Performance, and Limits of Gynecologic SBRT Platforms
Feature

Accuray M6
CyberKnife

Accuray
TomoTherapy

Brainlab Vero
Hybrid Arc

Conventional
Accelerator

Linear accelerator

Robotic 6 MV

Helical 6 MV

O-ring 6 MV

Conventional 6 MV

Dose rate

1,000 MU/min

850 MU/min

500 MU/min

2,400 MU/min

Isocenter accuracy

0.4 mm

0.6 mm

0.4 mm

0.8 mm

Beam collimation

2.5 mm microleaf
MLC, 12 cm × 10 cm
field

10-, 25-, 50-mm
slice, 80 cm ×
135 cm field

Up to 5 mm MLC,
15 cm × 15 cm field

2.5 mm microleaf MLC,
40 cm × 22 cm field

Localization

Fiducial, XSIGHT

Fiducial, anatomy

Fiducial, anatomy

Fiducial, anatomy

On-board imaging

Cross-plane kV x-ray

Integrated MV CT

Cross-plane kV x-ray

4D kV CT

Tabletop (weight limit)

Robotic (500 lb)

Robotic (440 lb)

Robotic (330 lb)

Robotic (330 lb)

Motion management

Synchrony, Intempo

ITV

Pan–tilt accelerator

ITV

Planning system

MultiPlan

Hi-Art TomoTherapy

iPlan

Commercial rapid arc

ITV margin—
suggested

5 mm

5 mm

3 mm

5 mm

Field definition

Nonisocenter,
80 cm S-TD

Nonisocenter,
85 cm S-TD

Isocenter, 100 cm
S-TD

Isocenter, 100 cm S-TD

Degrees of
freedom

214° noncoplanar

360° coplanar

±185° noncoplanar
±60° O-ring

360° coplanar,
tabletop rotates

ITV, internal target volume; kV, kilovolt; MLC, multileaf collimator; MV, megavolt; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy; S-TD, source-totarget distance.

Heron_68566_PTR_17_271-278_08-23-18.indd 273

21/08/18 2:07 PM

274

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

DOSE CONSTRAINTS TO
CRITICAL STRUCTURES
As the majority of gynecologic SBRT cases exist in
the setting of reirradiation, abiding by cumulative
tissue tolerance dose constraints is paramount.
The goal is to deliver an effective target dose while
minimizing traumatic inflammation to the spinal
cord (myelitis), bowel (enteritis), bladder (cystitis),
and skin (ulceration) and preserve function in the
case of liver or kidney. On the basis of conservative / ratio predictions, specific recommendations regarding dose constraints can be found in
Table 17.2.

GYNECOLOGIC SBRT PLATFORMS
As of now, there are no gynecologic SBRT platform
selection criteria restrictions. The most common
platforms that offer engineered features for gynecologic SBRT are delineated in Table 17.1. Clinical
trials studying gynecologic SBRT uniformly used
CyberKnife machine technology to remove confounding radiation dose prescriptions and timetable variability (1,2), but other platforms amenable
to gynecologic SBRT have been studied (13,24).

DOSE FRACTIONATION AND
TREATMENT PLANNING
The gynecologic SBRT prescription used in clinical trials was 24 Gy in three 8-Gy consecutive
daily fractions. This prescription has been vetted
for safety and efficacy (1,2). A separate review
reported a 2-year local control of 100% when
prescribing a target EQD2 dose of greater than
60 Gy, with no reported grade 3 or higher bowel/
bladder/rectum toxicity if the cumulative equivalent dose in 2 Gy (EQD2) to critical organs
was kept below 110 Gy. Others advise that the
maximum point dose to the bowel be kept below
55 Gy (25). This report suggested that multiple
fractionation schedules are feasible involving 6 to
20 Gy per fraction (26). Additional reports have
demonstrated the feasibility of daily reirradiation
schedules of 25 Gy in five fractions and 30 Gy in
six fractions (15) as well as 36 Gy in three fractions or 12 to 18 Gy in a single fraction (27).
On most SBRT hardware platforms with up-todate planning software, the 100% prescription
isodose line should cover greater than 95% of the
target, with acceptable deviation being a +7%
hot-spot dose heterogeneity in tumor. Fixed-

Heron_68566_PTR_17_271-278_08-23-18.indd 274

collimator CyberKnife gynecologic SBRT studies
used radiation dose prescribed to the 70% isodose line to achieve greater than 95% target coverage. It is important to note that there are no
restrictions on SBRT prescriptions and isodose
line assignment, and it is very likely that broad
SBRT prescription variation exists in current
practice.
Each SBRT treatment planning system uses
proprietary software algorithms for radiation
dose calculation. Because SBRT platforms have
unique degrees of freedom for radiation beam
position and have different means of beam collimation (refer to Table 17.2), treatment plans
are frequently complex and diverse. In early
clinical experience with gynecologic SBRT, it
was observed that variation in tissue thickness,
intervening low-density tissue (e.g., lung), breathing, heartbeat, digestive motions, or bladder and
rectum fills all introduced variation in calculated
radiation dose, target coverage, and target dose
heterogeneity. Further study of these parameters,
as they related to SBRT platform performance,
should be done to guide whether gynecologic
SBRT–agent combination clinical trials should
be limited to a single platform or be all-platform
inclusive. Figure 17.1 demonstrates an example
of a patient with a nodal recurrence of squamous
cell carcinoma of the cervix who underwent
SBRT following previous definitive chemoradiation therapy (50.4 Gy in 28 fractions).

TREATMENT WORKFLOW
For any given SBRT treatment session, the treating radiation oncologist should provide direct
on-site supervision. In some practices, at least one
radiation physicist and up to three radiation therapists attend SBRT treatment delivery. For patient
workflow, the first in-room positioning step necessitates alignment of laser-aligned skin tattoos and
wearable motion devices (if any). Pretherapy,
machine–patient collision checks are done. On the
basis of the needs of each SBRT platform’s motion
management, images are acquired for internal target marker alignment. Comparison of treatment
day with simulation digitally reconstructed radiograph (DRR) images is done for proper pretherapy alignment. The on-site supervising radiation
oncologist approves pretherapy alignment images
prior to beam-on. During beam-on treatment,
SBRT platform robotics or other hardware–software subsystems compensate for target motion

21/08/18 2:07 PM

17: GYNECOLOGIC SBRT

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

275

FIGURE 17.1 The CT (A) and FDG-PET (B) scan of a 50-year-old female with a nodal recurrence of squamous cell carci-

noma of the cervix following definitive chemoradiation therapy at a dose of 50.4 Gy in 28 fractions. Shown is a 13-field
static SBRT plan (C) targeting the PTV with a dose of 30 Gy in five fractions (D).
FDG-PET, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose–positron emission tomography; PTV, planning target volume; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation
therapy.

and for positional drift, and should be periodically checked by the treatment team for proper
alignment.

OUTCOMES
A CyberKnife SBRT monotherapy phase II trial
(NCT01079832) recruited 50 women with one or
four or less thoracic or abdominopelvic gynecologic metastases. These women underwent three
consecutive daily 8-Gy SBRT dose fractions (1).
Strict two-step SBRT dose constraints were used
during planning (Table 17.1). On trial, gynecologic SBRT led to attributable grade 2 or higher
fatigue (16%), nausea (8%), and diarrhea (4%).
Also on trial, one (2%) woman had grade 4 hyperbilirubinemia when gynecologic SBRT was used
for a 300-cm3 intrahepatic metastasis. The overall target response rate for gynecologic SBRT was
96% (48 of 50 patients). There were no (0%)
SBRT-targeted sites of disease progression. On
trial, the overall disease progression rate was
62% (31 of 50 patients), with a median time to
elsewhere disease recurrence of 5 months (range,
1–16 months).
A phase I SBRT–chemotherapy combination
trial (NCT01652794) recruited 12 women with
one or four or less chemorefractory abdominopelvic metastases (2). Dose-escalated carboplatin
(area-under-the-curve [AUC] 2 or 4) plus gemcitabine (600 or 800 mg/m2) was given on day 1 (1).
CyberKnife SBRT (8 Gy × 3 consecutive daily fractions) was given on days 2 to 4. Carboplatin AUC 4
and gemcitabine 600 mg/m2 in combination with

Heron_68566_PTR_17_271-278_08-23-18.indd 275

gynecologic SBRT were identified as the maximum tolerated drug doses. On trial, the gynecologic SBRT–chemotherapy combination led to
attributable neutropenia (42%), fatigue (25%),
thrombocytopenia (25%), nausea (16%), and diarrhea (16%). One (8%) woman developed a grade
3 rectovaginal fistula 16 months after combination
treatment. There were no (0%) SBRT-targeted sites
of disease progression. Elsewhere, disease recurrences occurred in 75% (nine of 12) of women,
with six of the nine women having undergone
additional posttrial chemotherapy or hormonal
therapy. Median time to disease recurrence was
2 months (range, 1–7 months).
Other clinical experience for gynecologic
SBRT in metastatic or previously-irradiated gynecologic tumors remains limited. One study (6)
used robotic SBRT in 30 women having isolated
para-aortic lymph node uterine (n = 2) or cervical (n = 28) cancer metastases. A nonuniform
SBRT prescription ranging between 33 and 45 Gy
in three equally divided treatments produced
a 96% overall response rate. A 4-year actuarial
control rate of 67%, progression-free survival rate
of 45%, and 32-month median time to disease
progression were reported in this study. Adverse
events attributed to SBRT in this study listed
five (17%) occasions of grade 3 or higher hematological toxicity. An American CyberKnife study
(7) and an Italian conventional linac study (15)
found para-aortic lymph node control of 79%
and 84%, respectively. SBRT-related adverse
events were uncommon and reversible in these
two studies.

21/08/18 2:07 PM

276

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

QUALITY OF LIFE
Limited data exist regarding patient-reported
quality of life specifically following gynecologic
SBRT. The rate of grade 3 or higher toxicities to
organs at risk is exceedingly low. In the authors’
experience, when planned appropriately, less than
1% of gynecologic SBRT patients develop symptoms such as diarrhea/nausea/fatigue that are
not short-lived, self-resolving, or responsive to
medication.

TREATMENT SAFETY AND FOLLOW-UP
In the largest clinical trial experience (1), erythema, epilation (loss of hair), or desquamation
adverse events were infrequent. Gynecologic
SBRT irradiation of the vaginal mucosa leading to discomfort because of vaginal desquamation (10%) was relieved by bacteria-containing
plain yogurt, applied topically to the vaginal
mucosa by hand or by a vaginal dilator. Grade
3 or higher bladder cystitis (2%) or bowel frequency (2%) within the first 7 days posttherapy
was rare. Obstructed bowel or intestinovaginal

fistulas (3%) or vesicovaginal fistulas (2%) were
also rare. Bone, nerve, and muscle were not often
injured (<1%).
Women treated by SBRT should be followed
daily on therapy, 4 weeks posttherapy, and 3 to
6 months afterward for care of any adverse events.
In some practices, posttherapy CT-based imaging
begins at 8 weeks posttherapy.

CONCLUSIONS
Gynecologic SBRT clinical trials have been few
and far between despite clinical interest in the
technique. It should be appreciated that women
with persistent or recurrent metastatic gynecologic
tumors still have unmet treatment needs for disease
control, and treatments that combine gynecologic
SBRT for measurable disease and novel anticancer
agents for occult disease remain appealing. New initiatives at the National Cancer Institute bring forth
opportunities to study the gynecologic SBRT technique in combination with novel anticancer drugs.

SUMMARY OF DOSE CONSTRAINTS
(TABLE 17.2)

TABLE 17.2 Constraints for a SBRT Prescription of 8 Gy × 3 Fractions
Tissue

Target

Spinal Cord

Liver

Kidney

Bowel

Bladder

Skin

Per fraction
constraint #1

95%

95%

67%

90%

≤1 mL

90%

95%

>8 Gy

<6 Gy

<5.7 Gy

<4.7 Gy

Not ≥8
Gy

<6.7 Gy

<8 Gy

90%

≤0.3 mL

≤700 mL

50%

50%

60%

60%

>7.2 Gy

Not ≥6.7 Gy

Not ≥5 Gy

<3.3 Gy

<3.3 Gy

<4 Gy

<4 Gy

<+7%

+4%

+7%

+7%

+4%

+7%

+7%

/ ratio

—

2.5

2.5

2.4

8.4

7.8

10.5

End point

—

Myelitis

Liver fxn

Renal fxn

Enteritis

Cystitis

Ulceration

Expected grade 3+
AE rate

—

1%

2%

8%

6%

1%

5%

Per fraction
constraint #2

Acceptable
deviation

AE, adverse event; fxn, basic function; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.
Source: From Kunos CA, Brindle J, Waggoner S, et al. Phase II clinical trial of robotic stereotactic body radiosurgery for metastatic gynecologic
malignancies. Front Oncol. 2012;2:181. doi:10.3389/fonc.2012.00181; Kunos CA, Sherertz TM, Mislmani M, et al. Phase I trial of carboplatin
and gemcitabine chemotherapy and stereotactic ablative radiosurgery for the palliative treatment of persistent or recurrent gynecologic cancer.
Front Oncol. 2015;5:126. doi:10.3389/fonc.2015.00126

Heron_68566_PTR_17_271-278_08-23-18.indd 276

21/08/18 2:07 PM

17: GYNECOLOGIC SBRT

REFERENCES
1. Kunos CA, Brindle J, Waggoner S, et al. Phase II clinical
trial of robotic stereotactic body radiosurgery for metastatic gynecologic malignancies. Front Oncol. 2012;2:
181. doi:10.3389/fonc.2012.00181
2. Kunos CA, Sherertz TM, Mislmani M, et al. Phase I trial
of carboplatin and gemcitabine chemotherapy and stereotactic ablative radiosurgery for the palliative treatment of
persistent or recurrent gynecologic cancer. Front Oncol.
2015;5:126. doi:10.3389/fonc.2015.00126
3. Ferlay J, Soerjomataram I, Ervik M, et al. GLOBOCAN
2012v1.0, Cancer incidence and mortality worldwide: IARC
cancer base no. 11. Lyon, France: International Agency for
Research on Cancer; 2013. Available at: http://globocan.
iarc.fr
4. Kunos CA, Debernardo R, Radivoyevitch T, et al. Hematological toxicity after robotic stereotactic body radiosurgery
for treatment of metastatic gynecologic malignancies. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;84(1):e35-e41. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2012.02.027
5. Mislmani M, Frasure H, Suppiah S, et al. Acute gastrointestinal toxicity after robotic stereotactic ablative radiotherapy for treatment of metastatic gynecological malignancies.
Future Oncol. 2014;10(2):241-248. doi:10.2217/fon.13.215
6. Choi CW, Cho CK, Yoo SY, et al. Image-guided stereotactic body radiation therapy in patients with isolated paraaortic lymph node metastases from uterine cervical and
corpus cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2009;74(1):
147-153. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.07.020
7. Higginson DS, Morris DE, Jones EL, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT): technological innovation
and application in gynecologic oncology. Gynecol Oncol.
2011;120(3):404-412. doi:10.1016/j.ygyno.2010.11.042
8. Kunos C, Chen W, DeBernardo R, et al. Stereotactic
body radiosurgery for pelvic relapse of gynecologic malignancies. Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2009;8(5):393-400.
doi:10.1177/153303460900800510
9. Kunos C, von Gruenigen V, Waggoner S, et al. Cyberknife
radiosurgery for squamous cell carcinoma of vulva after
prior pelvic radiation therapy. Technol Cancer Res Treat.
2008;7(5):375-380. doi:10.1177/153303460800700504
10. Barraclough LH, Swindell R, Livsey JE, et al. External beam
boost for cancer of the cervix uteri when intracavitary therapy cannot be performed. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2008;71(3):772-778. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.10.066
11. Hsieh CH, Tien HJ, Hsiao SM, et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy via helical tomotherapy to replace brachytherapy for brachytherapy-unsuitable cervical cancer patients: a
preliminary result. Onco Targets Ther. 2013;6:59-66.
doi:10.2147/OTT.S40370
12. Kim YB, Kim JH, Jeong KK, et al. Dosimetric comparisons
of three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy, intensitymodulated radiotherapy, and helical tomotherapy in whole
abdominopelvic radiotherapy for gynecologic malignancy.
Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2009;8(5):369-377. doi:10.1177/
153303460900800507
13. Kunos CA, Shaffer H, Fabien J. Hybrid arc stereotactic ablative body radiation therapy for pelvic relapse of gynecologic

Heron_68566_PTR_17_271-278_08-23-18.indd 277

277

malignancies. Obstet Gynecol Cases Rev. 2015;2(2):30.
doi:10.23937/2377-9004/1410030
14. Swamidas VJ, Mahantshetty U, Vineeta G, et al. Treatment
planning of epithelial ovarian cancers using helical tomotherapy. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2009;10(4):3003. PubMed
PMID: 19918228.
15. Deodato F, Macchia G, Grimaldi L, et al. Stereotactic
radiotherapy in recurrent gynecological cancer: a case
series. Oncol Rep. 2009;22(2):415-419. PubMed PMID:
19578785.
16. Guckenberger M, Bachmann J, Wulf J, et al. Stereotactic
body radiotherapy for local boost irradiation in unfavourable
locally recurrent gynaecological cancer. Radiother Oncol.
2010;94(1):53-59. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2009.12.004
17. Jorcano S, Molla M, Escude L, et al. Hypofractionated
extracranial stereotactic radiotherapy boost for gynecologic tumors: a promising alternative to high-dose rate
brachytherapy. Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2010;9(5):
509-514. doi:10.1177/153303461000900509
18. Mollà M, Escude L, Nouet P, et al. Fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy boost for gynecologic tumors: an alternative to brachytherapy? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2005;62(1):118-124. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2004.09.028
19. Kunos CA, Zhang Y, Brindle J. Stereotactic body radiosurgery in gynecologic carcinomas. In: Ayhan A, Reed N,
Gultekin M, et al., (eds.). Textbook of Gynaecological Oncology. Ankara, Turkey: Güneş Publishing; 2011:835-841.
20. Kunos CA. Cyberknife stereotactic radiosurgery in gynaecologic carcinomas. In: Ayhan A, Reed N, Gultekin M, Dursun P,
(eds.). Textbook of Gynaecological Oncology. Ankara,
Turkey: Güneş Publishing; 2016:1389-1395.
21. Kunos C, Brindle JM, Debernardo R. Stereotactic radiosurgery for gynecologic cancer. J Vis Exp. 2012;(62):3793.
doi:10.3791/3793
22. Kunos CA, Fabien JM, Shanahan JP, et al. Dynamic lung
tumor tracking for stereotactic ablative body radiation therapy. J Vis Exp. 2015;(100):e52875. doi:10.3791/52875
23. Kunos CA, Debernardo R, Fabien J, et al. 18FDG-PET/CT
definition of clinical target volume for robotic stereotactic body radiosurgery treatment of metastatic gynecologic
malignancies. J Nucl Med Radiat Ther. 2011;4(1):3117.
PubMed PMID: 25506042.
24. Kunos CA, Spelic M. Role of stereotactic radiosurgery in
gynecologic cancer. Curr Opin Oncol. 2013;25(5):532-538.
doi:10.1097/CCO.0b013e328363e0ad
25. Stanic S, Mayadev JS. Tolerance of the small bowel to
therapeutic irradiation: a focus on late toxicity in patients
receiving para-aortic nodal irradiation for gynecologic
malignancies. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2013;23(4):592-597.
doi:10.1097/IGC.0b013e318286aa68
26. Abusaris H, Hoogeman M, Nuyttens JJ, et al. Re-irradiation:
outcome, cumulative dose and toxicity in patients retreated
with stereotactic radiotherapy in the abdominal or pelvic
region. Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2012;11(6):591-597.
doi:10.7785/tcrt.2012.500261
27. Defoe SG, Bernard ME, Rwigema JC, et al. Stereotactic
body radiotherapy for the treatment of presacral recurrences
from rectal cancers. J Cancer Res Ther. 2011;7(4):408-411.
doi:10.4103/0973-1482.92000

21/08/18 2:07 PM

Heron_68566_PTR_17_271-278_08-23-18.indd 278

21/08/18 2:07 PM

C H A P T E R

18

Spine SBRT
John A. Vargo, Alina Mihai, Johnathan A. Engh, Nduka Amankulor, and Steven A. Burton

Advances in radiation therapy treatment planning and delivery have paved the way for
increasing clinical implementation of extracranial stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT),
with spine SBRT representing the second most
common indication for SBRT across both academic and private practices in the United States (1).
Although the oncological community awaits
the completion and publication of a number of
important international comparative effectiveness randomized clinical trials, such as RTOG
0631 and UK DOSIS (2,3), a growing body of
literature continues to evolve supporting the role
of spine SBRT in a number of clinical indications
including the following:
1. De novo SBRT as an alternative to pri-

mary conventional external beam radiation
therapy for previously untreated spine
metastases
2. SBRT as salvage treatment for previously

irradiated spine metastases
3. Postoperative

SBRT following surgical
decompression with or without surgical
stabilization

4. Decompressive SBRT as an alternative to

surgical decompression for spinal epidural
metastases
5. SBRT as a nonoperative alternative for the

definitive treatment of primary intradural
extramedullary spine tumors

De Novo SBRT
The improvements in systemic therapy, including
the emergence of targeted therapies and immunotherapy, have created an emerging challenge in
the treatment of stage IV cancer. Improved systemic therapy has significantly increased overall
survival and improved clinical performance in
patients with stage IV solid malignancies, thereby
creating an increasingly important role for local
therapy to high-risk lesions that occur in otherwise
stable patients. This challenge places an increased
emphasis on effective long-term treatments of
spine metastases and spinal cord compression to
mitigate the associated pain and risks of compromised neurological function. Modern radiation
oncology and neurosurgical literature have highlighted the extended survival expectations for
certain patients with spinal metastasis. Subgroups
with a long interval from primary diagnosis,
younger age at presentation, high performance
status, and primary histologies with favorable systemic treatment options generally demonstrate a
median survival in the range of 20 to 30 months
(4,5). These prognostic data should mitigate any
high expectations of conventional techniques for
the treatment of bone metastases or spine cord
compression. The UK/New Zealand Bone Metastases randomized controlled trial, one of the many
comparing low-dose single-fraction 8 Gy with
conventional fractionated external beam radiation therapy of 20 Gy in five fractions or 30 Gy in

279

Heron_68566_PTR_18_279-292_08-23-18.indd 279

23/08/18 4:43 PM

280

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

10 fractions, showed a 40% to 50% probability
of pain increase at 1 year irrespective of fractionation for uncomplicated bone metastases (6).
Similarly, the landmark randomized clinical trial
by Patchell et al., which established direct surgical decompression plus postoperative radiation
therapy as standard of care over radiation therapy
alone for malignant spinal cord compression, had
a median time of ambulation for the winning arm
of only 122 days with an estimated 1-year ambulation rate of 30% to 40% (7). When juxtaposed to
the increasing survival of patients with stage IV
cancer, the limited efficacy of conventional radiation
therapy suggests that it is likely not an acceptable
treatment modality for the 21st-century management
of spine metastases. Further limiting the expectations
with conventional irradiation is the impact of radiosensitivity, in which the median duration of response
for radiosensitive histologies (e.g., breast, prostate,
and hematological malignancies) is 11 months
versus 3 months for radioresistant histologies (sarcoma, melanoma, renal cell carcinoma), and the estimated 2-year local control is 86% versus 30% (8,9).
With subgroups of patients with metastatic cancer
surviving longer than the pain relief and tumor control provided by conventional techniques, SBRT has
opened the door to a treatment option with potentially more effective and longer lasting treatment for
spine metastases. A number of clinical series have
been published highlighting the benefits of primary
SBRT for de novo treatment of spine metastases in
favorable subgroups, including rapid and durable
pain relief with 1-year pain control rates of 85% to
95%, lasting effective tumor control in the 80% to
90% range, and cost-effective treatment over conventional irradiation (10–14).

Salvage SBRT for Previously Irradiated
Spine Metastases
With increasing survival and limited long-term
control and pain relief of conventional irradiation,
a number of patients will present with recurrent
or progressive spine metastases after prior irradiation. Historically, the application of reirradiation
was limited because of concerns of spinal cord
myelopathy, and lower reirradiation doses were
often required to mitigate the risks posed by reirradiation with conventional radiation therapy (15).
SBRT with sharp dose gradients permits delivery
of high-dose radiation to the target lesion, while
sparing the adjacent spinal cord in spine metastases
that were irradiated earlier (16). Detailed multiinstitutional analyses have confirmed the safety of

Heron_68566_PTR_18_279-292_08-23-18.indd 280

reirradiation with SBRT following prior external
beam radiation therapy, in which five cases of radiation myelopathy following SBRT were confirmed
and compared with patients treated with SBRT not
experiencing radiation myelopathy, providing practitioners objective dosimetry to guide safe application of spine SBRT (17). This recommendation for
safe treatment with SBRT has similarly been made
for spinal cord tolerance in the reirradiation setting.
The guidelines assume a minimum of a 5-month
reirradiation interval, SBRT comprising less than
50% of the total cord dose, and a SBRT cord maximum biologically effective dose 2 Gy (BED2 Gy) of
20 to 25 Gy and cumulative cord BED2 Gy of 70 Gy
(measured at the thecal sac adding in a planning risk
volume margin of 1.5 mm for safety margin, cord
uncertainty in fusion, contouring, and motion). This
guideline is generally considered safe and in line
with prior reirradiation dose models (17).

Postoperative SBRT
For nonmoribund patients with intermediate- to
high-grade neurologic symptoms, defined as paraparesis 4/5 or less, loss of ambulation, cauda equina
syndrome, or symptoms of mechanical instability,
surgical decompression or stabilization remains the
preferred initial approach to spine metastasis management (18,19). The improvements in expected
rates of tumor control of SBRT because of dose
escalation techniques have been used to justify
minimizing the extent of surgical decompression
to limit potentially adverse effects of surgery.
Specifically, the focus of complete circumferential
surgical decompression is shifting to a less invasive approach known as separation surgery, which
focuses more on surgical decompression of the
spinal cord/thecal sac and less on surgical cytoreduction. Surgery is then followed by postoperative
SBRT (20–22). Similarly, for patients with spine
metastasis presenting with mechanical instability,
some centers have reported use of vertebroplasty
or kyphoplasty plus SBRT as an alternative to
complete surgical fixation (23,24). By reducing
the extent of surgery, these combined approaches
integrating SBRT may facilitate postoperative recovery and minimize interruptions in systemic therapy
in select patients (25).

Decompressive SBRT
For patients with epidural tumors, conventional
options have included surgical decompression plus
external beam radiation therapy versus radiation

23/08/18 4:43 PM

18: SPINE SBRT

therapy alone, with the landmark trial of Patchell
et al. setting a historic precedent favoring combined surgery and radiation therapy (7). The
potent short-term palliation achieved with external beam radiation therapy alone gave rise to the
hypothesis that SBRT with more rapid and durable tumor control may be used as an alternative
to surgical decompression for certain patients with
epidural compression (26); this approach potentially reduces the morbidity, recovery, and interruptions in systemic therapy associated with surgical
decompression. This hypothesis was confirmed in
a recent phase II trial by Ryu et al. with 62 patients
with malignant epidural compression, showing an
80% epidural tumor response at 2 months with
increased thecal sac decompression from 55% to
76% by SBRT (27). This trial presents a challenge to the conventional dogma of surgical
decompression as the standard and supports the
concept that patients with minimal neurological
deficits can achieve effective decompression with
SBRT while reserving surgical decompression
for patients with rapidly progressing overt neurological deficits. For example, comparing the
results from Patchell et al. and Ryu et al. (albeit
with the caveat of differences in patient selection) demonstrates relatively similar ambulatory
rates across groups at 84% versus 81% for
all patients, 94% versus 88% rate of retaining
ambulation in previously ambulatory patients,
and 62% versus 59% for nonambulatory patients
becoming ambulatory (7,27).

SBRT for Primary Spine Tumors
Benign intradural extramedullary spinal tumors
such as meningioma, neurofibroma, and schwannoma are most often treated with open surgical
resection. However, surgical resection carries some
morbidity. Moreover, factors such as tumor location and medical comorbidities may obviate surgical
resection. Building on the paradigm of effective nonoperative management for similar benign primary
intracranial tumors with stereotactic radiosurgery
(SRS) as an alternative to surgical resection, spine
SBRT is emerging as an attractive nonoperative
option for selected patients with benign primary
spine tumors. A number of single institutional
series have been published supporting the potential role of primary SBRT as an alternative to surgical resection in terms of both symptom relief
and tumor control (28–30). However, unlike
malignant spine tumors, in which life expectancy at
best is typically measured over a few years, patients

Heron_68566_PTR_18_279-292_08-23-18.indd 281

281

with benign spine tumors generally have long life
expectancy, raising concerns of the potential for
delayed radiation-induced myelopathy. To date,
these reports have been rare and this growing body
of literature promises to challenge the conventional
treatment paradigms of benign spine tumors with
continued follow-up (31).

IMAGING AND TARGET DELINEATION
Radiation therapy is an established treatment
for painful vertebral metastases. SBRT is rapidly
gaining an important role as a palliative treatment both in patients with painful disease and
in patients with oligometastatic disease. Retrospective and prospective studies have shown high
rates of response (pain control in 70%–90%
of the patients) with very low risk of toxicity
(2,11,32,33).
However, clinical practice reviews of imageguided SRS (34–36) since 2011 have shown significant variability in all steps of planning and
delivery, despite use of a similar platform (Elekta
consortium). Therefore, a need for treatment
standardization is essential.

Imaging for Assessment of Patients With
Metastatic Disease Considered for SBRT
Initial assessment of patients with spinal metastases should evaluate for neural element compression, pathological fractures, bone density, and
skeletal disease burden (37). Although patients
with spinal metastases usually undergo plain
x-rays and bone scans as first imaging modalities,
their utility in the assessment of patients considered for spine SBRT is limited. These patients are
usually assessed using CT, MRI of the spine, and/
or PET-CT. Radiographic evaluation should be
performed within 1 month prior to SBRT.
1. The gold standard for imaging of vertebral

metastases is a MRI of the spine with and
without IV contrast. As concurrent nonadjacent bone metastases are common, MRI
of the entire spine can be helpful to assess
the full extent of spinal column metastatic
disease and the degree of epidural extension
or paravertebral involvement. MRI is also
useful in contouring both the target and the
spinal cord for SBRT (however, for the latter
purpose, a dedicated planning MRI in treatment position is recommended). The most
useful MRI sequences for spine metastases

23/08/18 4:43 PM

282

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

are T1–T2-weighted images ± contrast and
fat-suppressed short tau inversion recovery
(STIR) sequences. Both axial and sagittal
images are used (see Figure 18.1):
●

●

●

T1-weighted imaging is used to identify bone pathological lesion. On this sequence, the fluid appears dark and the fat
bright. Pathological bone lesions are associated with increased water content and
will therefore appear hypointense (dark)
on T1; such lesions typically enhance
following gadolinium administration.
T2-weighted imaging is useful in identifying the spinal cord and cauda equina as
well as neural element compression, but
can sometimes mask epidural involvement. Both fluids and fat generally appear
bright on this sequence.
Gadolinium-enhanced STIR imaging is
characterized by suppression of the fat,
which appears dark, whereas the cerebral
spinal fluids (CSFs) and pathological processes generally appear bright. Therefore, this sequence may be very useful
in identifying the degree of epidural and
paravertebral involvement by tumor.

MRI allows identification of the degree of
involvement of the spinal cord, enabling selection
of patients who would benefit from SBRT alone
versus those for whom a surgical decompression
followed by SBRT is more appropriate (in addition
to neurological assessment). Epidural spinal cord
compression is a significant predictor of failure
post-SBRT and the most common location of the
failure. Bilsky et al. (38) described four patterns

of epidural involvement and/or cord compression, from 0 (epidural extension without thecal sac
deformation) to grade 3 (complete effacement of
the CSF and spinal cord compression). The degree
of epidural spinal cord compression is best assessed
on T2 images.
2. CT scan is useful in assessing the degree of

bone destruction, spinal mechanical stability,
and whether the bone or the tumor itself
is causing spinal cord compression. In the
postsurgical setting with metal instrumentation of the vertebra, imaging can be subject
to streak artifact, rendering the imaging less
sensitive.
3. CT myelography is an invasive technique

that consists of injecting contrast in the
spinal subarachnoidal space to identify the
spinal cord and exiting nerve roots. This
technique can be quite useful when MRI is
contraindicated or in the postoperative setting, especially when imaging artifact from
instrumentation prevents identification of
the spinal cord. In addition, block of dye
flow on CT myelography is an excellent way
to demonstrate neural element compression.
4. PET-CT can identify both the sites of bony

involvement and the extent of extravertebral
systemic disease. In patients with lytic metastases or mixed lytic–sclerotic metastases,
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET can differentiate between osteoporotic or traumatic
fractures versus the malignant ones, using a
SUVmax cutoff of 2 (39); however, it is less
reliable in sclerotic lesions, characterized by
a low SUVmax. If used for target delineation,

FIGURE 18.1 Identification of the metastatic lesions on MRI sequences. Example of delineation of GTV and CTV using
registered MRI-CT. In this case, dedicated MRI planning (in treatment position) and CT planning were registered.
CTV, clinical target volume; GTV, gross tumor volume; STIR, short tau inversion recovery.

Heron_68566_PTR_18_279-292_08-23-18.indd 282

23/08/18 4:43 PM

18: SPINE SBRT

care to the quality of coregistration with
CT planning and/or MRI should be taken
to ensure accurate targeting.

Imaging for Target and OAR Delineation
Volumetric thin-sliced CT and MRI are used for
target delineation. Dedicated planning FDG-PET is
used by some institutions.
●

●

●

CT simulation should be acquired with
slice thickness of 1 to 2 mm. CT remains
the reference imaging modality for planning. It should extend 10 cm above and
below the target.
Dedicated MRI spine with 1- to 2-mm
slice thickness is required for accurate
delineation of the target and spinal cord.
Although studies have shown agreement
in the type of imaging used for SBRT,
the type of MRI sequences is different
between institutions. However, most of
the studies report use of T1 and T2 sequences, ± contrast (34). Although the
diagnostic MRI can be used, we recommend dedicated spine MRI in treatment
position, incorporating the target and
one vertebra above and below. Whenever
possible, high-resolution images should
be used.
Automatic registration of CT and MRI is
used; however, manual adjustments are
usually necessary (34).

Target Delineation SBRT Alone
●

Spinal metastases are usually enhancing,
appearing bright on T2/STIR sequences
and dark on T1-weighted images. Studies assessing the pattern of failure after
SRS on the basis of the treated target
volume indicate that treatment of the
visible tumor only (gross tumor volume
[GTV]) results in higher rates of failure, less pain control, and higher rates
of retreatment (25,40–43). Therefore,
the current recommendation is to avoid
treatment of the GTV only. There is considerable variability in the literature in
target delineation and margins used to
generate planning target volume (PTV);
however, in 2012, the International
Spine Radiosurgery Consortium (44)

Heron_68566_PTR_18_279-292_08-23-18.indd 283

283

elaborated guidelines for contouring
on the basis of the location of the
metastasis within the vertebral body
(see Figure 18.2):
●

The GTV should include the areas of
tumor involvement on the MRI and/or
CT, including the epidural and paravertebral extension.

●

The clinical target volume (CTV) should
include the GTV and the areas of possible microscopic extension.

●

The most significant variation is encountered in the definition of margins used
to generate the PTV: some institutions
use no margins, and in this case the
CTV = PTV. Other institutions use margins
between 1 and 3 mm around the CTV
(PTV = CTV + 1–3 mm). If margins are
used to generate the PTV, the expansion should not be isotropic; posterior
expansion is usually 0 to 1 mm, allowing
exclusion of the spinal cord (the most
sensitive organ at risk for spine SBRT).

Target Delineation for Postoperative
SBRT Spinal Metastases
Patients with malignant epidural spinal cord compression (MESCC), frank instability of the vertebral column, or impending instability generally
benefit from surgery first, followed by postoperative radiation therapy. Currently, the role of surgery
is circumferential decompression of the MESCC,
using minimally invasive or conventional surgical
techniques, facilitating the shortest possible recovery time for the patients. In this setting, SBRT is
increasingly used to achieve local control. Multiple
large studies have shown high rates of local control in this setting, with risk of local failure usually below 20% (22,45). In addition, progression
of the disease posttreatment is rare in the adjacent vertebral bodies, and only affected vertebrae
should be treated. The most common site of failure remains the epidural space, where progression
can be associated with neurological deterioration,
need for reoperation, and decreased quality of
life. Therefore, whenever possible, care should be
taken to avoid underdosing the epidural disease,
as this would be associated with geographic miss
and higher risk of local failure. Separation surgery
increases the distance between the epidural disease and the spinal cord and is therefore helpful
in allowing better dose distribution around the

23/08/18 4:43 PM

284

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

Target Volume

Guidelines

GTV

●
●

CTV

Contour gross tumor using all available imaging
Include epidural and paraspinal components of tumor

Include abnormal marrow signal suspicious for microscopic invasion
Include bony CTV expansion to account for subclinical spread
● Should contain GTV
● Circumferential CTVs encircling the cord should be avoided except in
rare instances where the vertebral body, bilateral pedicles/lamina, and
spinous process are all involved or when there is extensive metastatic
disease along the circumference of the epidural space without spinal cord
compression
●
●

PTV

Uniform expansion around CTV
CTV to PTV margin <3 mm
● Modified at dural margin and adjacent critical structures to allow spacing at
discretion of the treating physician unless GTV compromised
● Never overlaps with cord
● Should contain entire GTV and CTV
●
●

FIGURE 18.2 CTV concept for spine SBRT.
CTV, clinical target volume; GTV, gross tumor volume; PTV, planning target volume; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.
Source: International Spine Radiosurgery Consortium Consensus Guidelines for Target Volume Definition in Spinal Stereotactic
Radiosurgery.

epidural disease and minimizing the risk of geographic miss.
In the postoperative setting, recently published consensus guidelines (46) are also available to guide the contouring of GTV, CTV,
and PTV. These guidelines are based on the
analysis of agreement of contouring between

Heron_68566_PTR_18_279-292_08-23-18.indd 284

nine radiation oncologists and one neurosurgeon
with expertise in spinal SBRT. On the basis of
these guidelines:
●

The target delineation is based on
preoperative and postoperative MRI, as
well as CT simulation (same technical

23/08/18 4:43 PM

18: SPINE SBRT

specifications as mentioned earlier,
high-resolution, thin-slice imaging).
●

The GTV includes the residual tumor
postsurgery, with special care to include
the whole epidural disease present
postoperatively.

●

The CTV is based on the preoperative
extension of the disease, regardless of
the amount of postoperative gross disease (see Table 18.1).

●

The PTV is defined as CTV + 0- to
2.5-mm margin (depending on the institution protocol).

●

The metal instruments and the scar
should not be included in the target volume, except if they are considered at risk
of involvement.

TREATMENT PLANNING
Dose Fractionation for Treatment Planning
No current consensus exists for the optimal dose
selection for spine SBRT, with ample evidence for
both primary and recurrent spine metastases to
support single-fraction regimens ranging from 16 to
24 Gy and fractionated regimens ranging from
8 to Gy × 3 fractions or 6 to 7 Gy × 5 fractions (47).
This is reflected in the difference in fractionation

285

across ongoing international clinical trials in spinal
SBRT (2,3). A multi-institutional study including
de novo, postoperative, and salvage spine SBRT
compared single-fraction SBRT (mean dose of
16.3 Gy) with multifraction SBRT (mean of
20.6 Gy in three fractions, 23.8 Gy in four fractions, or 24.5 Gy in five fractions). This study
demonstrated no difference in toxicity or neurological improvement, but better short-term pain
control with single-fraction SBRT. On the contrary,
single-fraction SBRT demonstrated inferior longterm local control in comparison to multifraction
SBRT (48). Conversely, a recent multi-institutional
study focused only on reirradiation of spine metastases suggested improved local control with singlefraction SBRT over multifraction SBRT (16).
Recognizing that pain relief is often the most
important goal when using SBRT for spine metastases, we have favored 16 to 18 Gy single fraction for
most patients treated for spine metastases. In general,
we have not favored single-fraction doses higher than
20 Gy as used in other series, recognizing the higher
incidence of vertebral insufficiency fracture with
single-fraction doses higher than 20 Gy and risks of
esophageal complications when the maximum dose
to the esophagus exceed 22 Gy or 2.5 mL of esophagus exceeds 14 Gy (49–53). Multifraction SBRT
(8–9 Gy × 3 fractions or 6–7 Gy × 5 fractions)
is favored in scenarios such as oligometastases or
larger tumors in which long-term local control may

TABLE 18.1 Guidelines for Definition of Target Volumes in Postoperative Spine SBRT
Target Volume

Guidelines

GTV

●

CTV

●

PTV

●

Gross tumor on the basis of postoperative CT and MRI with attention to residual epidural or paraspinal disease
● Include postoperative residual epidural and paraspinal components of tumor
Include the postoperative region and entire anatomic compartment corresponding to all preoperative
MRI abnormalities suspicious for tumor involvement
● Include entire GTV
● Surgical instrumentation and incision not included unless involved
● Judicious use of circumferential CTVs limited to cases of preoperative circumferential osseous and/or
epidural involvement; however, can be considered for near-circumferential epidural disease involvement
● Modified at reconstructed dural space and to account for changes in anatomy after surgery at discretion of treating physician
● Consider additional anatomic expansions of up to 5 mm beyond paraspinal extension and craniocaudally for epidural disease
Uniform CTV to PTV expansion of up to 2.5 mm
Treating physician may modify expansion at the interface with critical organs at risk
● May subtract cord avoidance structure from PTV as a modified PTV for planning and dose reporting
purposes
● Include entire GTV and CTV
●

CTV, clinical target volume; GTV, gross tumor volume; PTV, planning target volume; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_18_279-292_08-23-18.indd 285

23/08/18 4:44 PM

286

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

be a more important end point than pain relief.
Additional scenarios where fractionation might be
favored include when treating larger volumes (multilevel SBRT), longer life expectancy, or when critical
organ dosimtery is unfavorbale. For primary benign
tumors of the spine, although the majority of initial
series used a higher dose of 16 to 21 Gy in one to
three fractions, experience in intracranial radiosurgery has led to dose de-escalation (54,55). Recognizing that the majority of these lesions are benign
and intimately associated with the spinal cord or
cauda equine, we favor 12 to 13 Gy in a single fraction, 6 Gy × 3 fractions, or 5 Gy × 5 fractions (56).

Dose Constraints to Critical Structures
Although spine SBRT is generally considered to
be exceedingly safe, a number of important critical
structures require unique consideration given the
proximity to the target and extreme hypofractionation inherent to SBRT (57).

2. Esophagus: The close proximity of the esopha-

gus to the cervical and thoracic spinal column
requires careful attention for prevention of
esophageal stricture or ulceration following
spine SBRT. Detailed dose–volume analyses
following single-fraction spine SBRT have
outlined important dosimetric end points to
minimize risks of esophageal toxicity recommending a maximum dose to less than 2.5 mL
of 14 Gy and maximum point dose of less
than 22 Gy (53). Practically, we are often even
more conservative with esophagus dose similar to the constraints published with SBRT
for other disease sites (59,60). It is important
to attempt to avoid invasive procedures and
concurrent administration with potent radiosensitizing agents (e.g., vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) inhibitors, Adriamycin,
gemcitabine), practically striving for ideally a
minimum of 1 week before and after chemotherapy for SBRT administration (53,61).

1. Spinal cord: In the initial development of

3. Skin: Posteriorly located spine tumors treat-

spine SBRT, concerns of spinal cord myelopathy existed, especially in reirradiation cases.
However, likely because of the steep dose gradients achievable with modern SBRT-planning
techniques, few cases of cord myelopathy have
been documented in the thousands of cases reported in the literature. Using a case–control
cohort study, logistic regression models have
been created to guide safe practice in both the
de novo and the reirradiation setting (17,58).
If the one-fraction maximum point dose to
the thecal sac for de novo treatment of spine
metastases is less than 9.2 Gy or less than
12.4 Gy and three-fraction maximum point
dose is less than 14.8 Gy and less than
20.3 Gy, this would carry an estimated risk of
cord myelopathy of 1% and 5% probability,
respectively (58). Similarly, in the reirradiation setting, assuming a minimum 5-month
reirradiation interval, a thecal sac maximum
point dose of BED2/2 of 20 to 25 Gy with
cumulative maximum point dose of 70 Gy is
suggested to be safe on the basis of a similar
case–control cohort study (17). Practically
with improvements in image registration
and target delineation, we apply these constraints to the true spinal cord as delineated on
T2-weighted MRI with a 1- to 2-mm planning
risk volume expansion to account for interand intrafraction motion, as well as uncertainties in image fusion and dose calculation.

ed with spine SBRT can often have high skin
doses that can result in skin ulceration or
enhanced reactions if not accounted for in
the planning (62). It is important to use
multibeam planning to reduce skin dose,
account for the autobolus effects of the immobilization device, and keep skin dose less
than 50% of the prescription dose (62).

Heron_68566_PTR_18_279-292_08-23-18.indd 286

4. Bowel/stomach: For patients being treated

for thoracic and lumbosacral spinal lesions,
attention to adjacent bowel and stomach
is warranted as severe toxicities have been
reported for abdominal malignancies, for
which it is suggested to limit the dose of
V15 Gy less than 9 mL, V20 Gy less than
3 mL, and maximum point dose less than
23 Gy (63). Even more stringent dose constraints are necessary in the reirradiation
setting (64). In addition, when using multifraction SBRT, we use every-other-day fractionation and again attempt to void concurrent administration with chemotherapy (65).

Treatment Planning
When designing treatment plans for spine SBRT,
it has been our practice to favor linear accelerator (linac)-based multibeam delivery with 10 to
15 coplanar beams or two to three arcs with
volumetric-modulated arc therapy. Because of the
increase in treatment time in a patient population,

23/08/18 4:44 PM

18: SPINE SBRT

often in significant pain from involvement of the
spine, coplanar beams, or alternate treatment
platforms such as CyberKnife®, are rarely used. An
example of a treatment plan for a patient treated
with a de novo spine metastasis from renal cell
cancer is seen in Figure 18.3 and is an example of
the multibeam arrangement that facilitates sparing
of critical organs as discussed earlier. An example
of a good and a bad plan is seen in Figure 18.4 for
a patient with recurrent spine metastasis.

FOLLOW-UP AND QUALITY OF LIFE
On the basis of recently published international consensus guidelines, clinical follow-up is recommended
preferably with spine MRI every 2 to 3 months following SBRT for the first 12 to 18 months, and then
every 3 to 6 months thereafter (66). When assessing
response, akin to SBRT at other sites, it is important
to consider pseudoprogression or necrosis because
commonly using criteria such as Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) is not

287

optimal following SBRT (66). Similarly, when developing a spine SBRT program, we suggest a detailed
assessment of pain using commonly available
tools such as the Brief Pain Inventory, Visual Analogue Score, or the International Consensus Pain
Response Endpoint Guidelines (66–68). A number
of retrospective datasets have documented that pain
relief following spine SBRT is rapid (median time to
pain relief 14 days) and durable (1-year pain relief
>85%–90%; 10,69). In fact, quality-of-life end
points are a keystone of ongoing trial examining the
role of SBRT in spinal metastases (2,3,70).

SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
Unique complications following SBRT have been
reported following SBRT for spine tumors not seen
with conventional radiation therapy techniques:
1. Vertebral compression fracture: Patients with

spine metastases are inherently at risk of
fracture because of neoplastic involvement

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

FIGURE 18.3 Case example. (A) Epidural tumor from metastatic renal cell carcinoma; (B) 15-beam SBRT delivery of

18 Gy in one fraction prescribed to the 80% isodose line; (C) critical organ sparing of spinal cord, skin, and pharyngeal
constrictors; and (D) 3-month post-SBRT MRI showing disease regression and radiosurgical decompression of thecal sac.

SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_18_279-292_08-23-18.indd 287

23/08/18 4:44 PM

288

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

FIGURE 18.4 Good plan versus bad plan. (A) Prescription isodose and (B) 50% isodose for bad plan. Note the arrows
showing hot spots posteriorly toward the cord, and the lack of conformity with both the prescription and the 50% isodose
lines spilling into critical organs. This is compared with (C) prescription isodose and (B) 50% isodose for a good plan in the
same patient. Notice the improved conformity and sparing of critical organs.

of spine (see Figure 18.5). Multidisciplinary
evaluation of the patient prior to spine SBRT
is essential to identify patients with spine instability prior to consideration from SBRT.
Clinically, we recommend application of the
spinal instability neoplastic score (SINS) criteria for all patients prior to consideration of
SBRT, and consider all patients with SINS
score greater than 12 for surgical stabilization
prior to SBRT (71). The incidence of vertebral
compression deformity has been reported to
range from 10% to 20% with the majority
occurring within the first 3 months following SBRT (51). Important clinical factors

(A)

for vertebral compression fracture to consider when evaluating patients for SBRT
include baseline compression deformity, lytic
primary tumor, spine malalignment or instability, mechanical pain, and SBRT dose (57).
2. Skin toxicity: As discussed earlier, especially

for patients with low body-mass index (BMI)
with posterior-oriented lesions, special attention to skin dose is warranted to avoid skin
complications following SBRT. During treatment planning, it is important to use multibeam planning to minimize skin dose as well
as pay attention to streaking phenomena that

(B)

FIGURE 18.5 Vertebral compression fracture. (A) SBRT 21 Gy in three fractions to lytic lesion involving T12 vertebral body
in a patient with multiple myeloma having failed prior external beam radiation therapy (notice lytic involvement of L1 vertebral body below the treated lesion); and (B) 1-month MRI obtained because of increased pain showing acute vertebral
compression deformity of the treated T12 vertebral body with >50% loss of height.
SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_18_279-292_08-23-18.indd 288

23/08/18 4:44 PM

18: SPINE SBRT

(A)

289

(B)

FIGURE 18.6 Streaking phenomena. (A) Multibeam SBRT 16 Gy in one fraction for solitary sacral metastasis from prostate

cancer; and (B) because of posterior location and preferential inverse optimization, notice the 50% isodose lines “streaking,” and important phenomena that should be watched for carefully especially in posterior targets to avoid unnecessary
risks of skin toxicity.

SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

FIGURE 18.7 Bowel toxicity. Shown is the 20 Gy in

five-fraction isodose cloud for a patient receiving 30 Gy in
five fractions of SBRT following prior 30 Gy in 10 fractions
and surgical depression for a solitary metastasis from renal
cell carcinoma. Notice the loops of bowel stuck to the retroperitoneal space adjacent to the treated vertebral body
following prior nephrectomy, requiring special attention
during planning to avoid bowel ulceration or blockage.

SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

can occur during inverse optimization where
the optimizer is overutilizing preferential
beam angles (see Figure 18.6).
3. Bowel or esophageal ulceration: Prior sur-

gical manipulation often places these usually mobile structures in close fixed locations
next to the spine. When considering SBRT,
it is important to keep close attention to
postoperative fixation of these structures
and the dose received following SBRT (see
Figure 18.7).

CONCLUSIONS
Spine SBRT has developed into a valuable and safe
technique for the treatment of select patients with

Heron_68566_PTR_18_279-292_08-23-18.indd 289

both benign and malignant spinal tumors. Patient
selection and careful treatment planning are critical to the success of these treatments. For patients
with benign tumors, sophisticated targeting and
dose planning allow for excellent tumor control at
minimal risk. For patients with malignant tumors,
SBRT facilitates improved local control and pain
relief compared with conventional external beam
radiation therapy in most settings. In addition,
SBRT is effective for many patients who have
received prior conventional radiation therapy.
Future studies will help to delineate the limitations
of SBRT as it continues to be used successfully at
multiple centers.

SUMMARY OF DOSE CONSTRAINTS
(TABLE 18.2)
TABLE 18.2 Dose Constraints for Spine SBRT

Targets

16 Gy ⴛ 1 Fraction
8–9 Gy ⴛ 3 Fractionsa
6–7 Gy ⴛ 5 Fractionsa

Critical Structures

Dose Limits

Spinal canal

8–10 Gy in single fraction
12–14 Gy in three fractions

Esophagus

14 Gy <2.5 mL
22 Gy maximum point dose

Skin

<50% prescription dose

Bowel

V15 <9 mL
V20 <3 mL
23 Gy maximum point dose

aIf soft tissue mass present or long life expectancy.

SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

23/08/18 4:44 PM

290

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

REFERENCES
1. Pan H, Simpson DR, Mell LK, et al. A survey of stereotactic body radiotherapy use in the United States. Cancer.
2011;117:4566-4572. doi:10.1002/cncr.26067
2. Ryu S, Pugh SL, Gerszten PC, et al. RTOG 0631 Phase II/
III Study of image-guided stereotactic radiosurgery for localized (1-3) spine metastases: phase II results. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;81:S131-S132. doi:10.1016/j.prro.
2013.05.001
3. Guckenberger M, Hawkins M, Flentje M, et al. Fractionated radiosurgery for painful spinal metastases: DOSIS:
a phase II trial. BMC Cancer. 2012;12:530. doi:10.1186/
1471-2407-12-530
4. Chao ST, Koyfman SA, Woody N, et al. Recursive partitioning analysis index is predictive for overall survival in patients
undergoing spine stereotactic body radiation therapy for
spinal metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;82:
1738-1743. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.02.019
5. Tabouret E, Gravis G, Cauvin C, et al. Long-term survivors after surgical management of metastatic spinal cord
compression. Eur Spine J. 2015;24:209-215. doi:10.1007/
s00586-014-3676-1
6. Yarnold JR. 8 Gy single fraction radiotherapy for the treatment of metastatic skeletal pain: randomised comparison
with a multifraction schedule over 12 months of patient
follow-up. Bone Pain Trial Working Party. Radiother Oncol.
1999;52:111-121. PubMed PMID: 10577696.
7. Patchell RA, Tibbs PA, Regine WF, et al. Direct decompressive surgical resection in the treatment of spinal cord compression caused by metastatic cancer: a randomised trial. Lancet.
2005;366:643-648. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(05)66954-1
8. Maranzano E, Latini P. Effectiveness of radiation therapy
without surgery in metastatic spinal cord compression: final
results from a prospective trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
1995;32:959-967. PubMed PMID: 7607970.
9. Mizumoto M, Harada H, Asakura H, et al. Radiotherapy
for patients with metastases to the spinal column: a review
of 603 patients at Shizuoka Cancer Center Hospital. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;79:208-213. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2009.10.056
10. Ryu S, Jin R, Jin JY, et al. Pain control by image-guided radiosurgery for solitary spinal metastasis. J Pain Symptom Manage.
2008;35:292-298. doi:10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2007.04.020
11. Sohn S, Chung CK. The role of stereotactic radiosurgery in
metastasis to the spine. J Korean Neurosurg Soc. 2012;51:
1-7. doi:10.3340/jkns.2012.51.1.1
12. De Bari B, Alongi F, Mortellaro G, et al. Spinal metastases: Is
stereotactic body radiation therapy supported by evidences?
Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2016;98:147-158. doi:10.1016/
j.critrevonc.2015.11.002
13. Papatheofanis FJ, Williams E, Chang SD. Cost-utility
analysis of the cyberknife system for metastatic spinal
tumors. Neurosurgery. 2009;64:A73-A83. doi:10.1227/01.
NEU.0000341205.37067.DE
14. Kim H, Gill B, Beriwal S, et al. Cost-effectiveness analysis
of stereotactic body radiation therapy compared with radiofrequency ablation for inoperable colorectal liver metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2016;95:1175-1183.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2016.02.045
15. Maranzano E, Trippa F, Casale M, et al. Reirradiation of
metastatic spinal cord compression: definitive results of
two randomized trials. Radiother Oncol. 2011;98:234-237.
doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2010.12.011
16. Hashmi A, Guckenberger M, Kersh R, et al. Re-irradiation
stereotactic body radiotherapy for spinal metastases: a

Heron_68566_PTR_18_279-292_08-23-18.indd 290

multi-institutional outcome analysis. J Neurosurg Spine.
2016;25:646-653. doi:10.3171/2016.4.SPINE151523
17. Sahgal A, Ma L, Weinberg V, et al. Reirradiation human
spinal cord tolerance for stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;82:107-116. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2010.08.021
18. Laufer I, Rubin DG, Lis E, et al. The NOMS framework:
approach to the treatment of spinal metastatic tumors.
Oncologist. 2013;18:744-751. doi:10.1634/theoncologist.
2012-0293
19. Fourney DR, Frangou EM, Ryken TC, et al. Spinal instability neoplastic score: an analysis of reliability and validity from the spine oncology study group. J Clin Oncol.
2011;29:3072-3077. doi:10.1200/JCO.2010.34.3897
20. Rock JP, Ryu S, Shukairy MS, et al. Postoperative radiosurgery for malignant spinal tumors. Neurosurgery. 2006;58:
891-898. doi:10.1227/01.NEU.0000209913.72761.4F
21. Laufer I, Iorgulescu JB, Chapman T, et al. Local disease
control for spinal metastases following “separation surgery”
and adjuvant hypofractionated or high-dose single-fraction
stereotactic radiosurgery: outcome analysis in 186 patients.
J Neurosurg Spine. 2013;18:207-214. doi:10.3171/2012.11.
SPINE12111
22. Moulding HD, Elder JB, Lis E, et al. Local disease control
after decompressive surgery and adjuvant high-dose singlefraction radiosurgery for spine metastases. J Neurosurg
Spine. 2010;13:87-93. doi:10.3171/2010.3.SPINE09639
23. Gerszten PC, Germanwala A, Burton SA, et al. Combination kyphoplasty and spinal radiosurgery: a new treatment
paradigm for pathological fractures. Neurosurg Focus.
2005;18:e8. PubMed PMID: 15771398.
24. Gerszten PC, Monaco EA. Complete percutaneous treatment
of vertebral body tumors causing spinal canal compromise
using a transpedicular cavitation, cement augmentation,
and radiosurgical technique. Neurosurg Focus. 2009;27:E9.
doi:10.3171/2009.9.FOCUS09184
25. Chang EL, Shiu AS, Mendel E, et al. Phase I/II study of
stereotactic body radiotherapy for spinal metastasis and
its pattern of failure. J Neurosurg Spine. 2007;7:151-160.
doi:10.3171/SPI-07/08/151
26. Maranzano E, Latini P. Effectiveness of radiation therapy
without surgery in metastatic spinal cord compression: final
results from a prospective trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 1995;32:959-967. PubMed PMID: 7607970.
27. Ryu S, Rock J, Jain R, et al. Radiosurgical decompression
of metastatic epidural compression. Cancer. 2010;116:
2250-2257. doi:10.1002/cncr.24993
28. Gerszten PC, Burton SA, Ozhasoglu C, et al. Radiosurgery
for benign intradural spinal tumors. Neurosurgery. 2008;62:
887-895. doi:10.1227/01.neu.0000318174.28461.fc
29. Sachdev S, Dodd RL, Chang SD, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery yields long-term control for benign intradural, extramedullary spinal tumors. Neurosurgery. 2011;69:533-539.
doi:10.1227/NEU.0b013e318218db23
30. Shin DW, Sohn MJ, Kim HS, et al. Clinical analysis of spinal stereotactic radiosurgery in the treatment of neurogenic
tumors. J Neurosurg Spine. 2015;23:429-437. doi:10.3171/
2015.1.SPINE14910
31. Chang UK, Lee DH. Stereotactic radiosurgery for spinal
neoplasms: current status and future perspective. J Neurosurg Sci. 2013;57:87-101. PubMed PMID: 23676858.
32. Sohn S, Chung CK, Sohn MJ, et al. Radiosurgery compared with external radiation therapy as a primary treatment in spine metastasis from hepatocellular carcinoma: a
multicenter, matched-pair study. J Korean Neurosurg Soc.
2016;59:37-43. doi:10.3340/jkns.2016.59.1.37

23/08/18 4:44 PM

18: SPINE SBRT
33. Gerszten PC, Welch WC. Cyberknife radiosurgery for
metastatic spine tumors. Neurosurg Clin N Am. 2004;15:
491-501. doi:10.1016/j.nec.2004.04.013
34. Guckenberger M, Sweeney RA, Flickinger JC, et al. Clinical practice of image-guided spine radiosurgery: results
from an international research consortium. Radiat Oncol.
2011;6:172. doi:10.1186/1748-717X-6-172
35. Toussaint A, Richter A, Mantel F, et al. Variability in spine
radiosurgery treatment planning - results of an international multi-institutional study. Radiat Oncol. 2016;11:57.
doi:10.1186/s13014-016-0631-9
36. Guckenberger M, Mantel F, Gerszten PC, et al. Safety and
efficacy of stereotactic body radiotherapy as primary treatment for vertebral metastases: a multi-institutional analysis.
Radiat Oncol. 2014;9:226. doi:10.1186/s13014-014-0226-2
37. Soliman M, Taunk NK, Simons RE, et al. Anatomic and
functional imaging in the diagnosis of spine metastases and
response assessment after spine radiosurgery. Neurosurg
Focus. 2017;42:E5. doi:10.3171/2016.9.FOCUS16350
38. Bilsky MH, Laufer I, Fourney DR, et al. Reliability analysis
of the epidural spinal cord compression scale. J Neurosurg
Spine. 2010;13:324-328. doi:10.3171/2010.3.SPINE09459
39. Laufer I, Lis E, Pisinski L, et al. The accuracy of [(18)F]
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography as confirmed by biopsy in the diagnosis of spine metastases in
a cancer population. Neurosurgery. 2009;64:107-113.
doi:10.1227/01.NEU.0000335176.98788.A1
40. Gerszten PC, Burton SA, Ozhasoglu C, et al. Radiosurgery
for spinal metastases: clinical experience in 500 cases from a
single institution. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2007;32:193-199.
doi:10.1097/01.brs.0000251863.76595.a2
41. Nelson JW, Yoo DS, Sampson JH, et al. Stereotactic
body radiotherapy for lesions of the spine and paraspinal
regions. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2009;73:1369-1375.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.06.1949
42. Nguyen QN, Shiu AS, Rhines LD, et al. Management of
spinal metastases from renal cell carcinoma using stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2010;76:1185-1192. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.03.062
43. Patel VB, Wegner RE, Heron DE, et al. Comparison of
whole versus partial vertebral body stereotactic body radiation therapy for spinal metastases. Technol Cancer Res
Treat. 2012;11:105-115. doi:10.7785/tcrt.2012.500239
44. Cox BW, Spratt DE, Lovelock M, et al. International Spine
Radiosurgery Consortium consensus guidelines for target
volume definition in spinal stereotactic radiosurgery. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;83:e597-e605. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2012.03.009
45. Sahgal A, Bilsky M, Chang EL, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for spinal metastases: current status, with a focus
on its application in the postoperative patient. J Neurosurg
Spine. 2011;14:151-166. doi:10.3171/2010.9.SPINE091005
46. Redmond KJ, Lo SS, Soltys SG, et al. Consensus guidelines for postoperative stereotactic body radiation therapy
for spinal metastases: results of an international survey. J
Neurosurg Spine. 2017;26(3):299-306. doi:10.3171/201
6.8.SPINE16121
47. Gerszten PC, Mendel E, Yamada Y. Radiotherapy and
radiosurgery for metastatic spine disease: what are the
options, indications, and outcomes? Spine (Phila Pa 1976).
2009;34:S78-S92. doi:10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181b8b6f5
48. Heron DE, Rajagopalan MS, Stone B, et al. Single-session
and multisession cyberknife radiosurgery for spine metastasesUniversity of Pittsburgh and Georgetown University experience. J Neurosurg Spine. 2012;17:11-18. doi:10.3171/2012.4.
SPINE11902

Heron_68566_PTR_18_279-292_08-23-18.indd 291

291

49. Cunha MV, Al-Omair A, Atenafu EG, et al. Vertebral
compression fracture (VCF) after spine stereotactic body
radiation therapy (SBRT): analysis of predictive factors.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;84:e343-e349. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2012.04.034
50. Jawad MS, Fahim DK, Gerszten PC, et al. Vertebral compression fractures after stereotactic body radiation therapy: a
large, multi-institutional, multinational evaluation. J Neurosurg Spine. 2016;24:928-936. doi:10.3171/2015.10.
SPINE141261
51. Sahgal A, Atenafu EG, Chao S, et al. Vertebral compression fracture after spine stereotactic body radiotherapy: a
multi-institutional analysis with a focus on radiation dose
and the spinal instability neoplastic score. J Clin Oncol.
2013;31:3426-3431. doi:10.1200/JCO.2013.50.1411
52. Rose PS, Laufer I, Boland PJ, et al. Risk of fracture after
single fraction image-guided intensity-modulated radiation therapy to spinal metastases. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:
5075-5079. doi:10.1200/JCO.2008.19.3508
53. Cox BW, Jackson A, Hunt M, et al. Esophageal toxicity from
high-dose, single-fraction paraspinal stereotactic radiosurgery. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;83:e661-e667.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2012.01.080
54. Niranjan A, Lunsford LD, Flickinger JC, et al. Dose reduction improves hearing preservation rates after intracanalicular acoustic tumor radiosurgery. Neurosurgery. 1999;
45:753-762. PubMed PMID: 10515468.
55. Flickinger JC, Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD. Dose and diameter relationships for facial, trigeminal, and acoustic neuropathies following acoustic neuroma radiosurgery. Radiother
Oncol. 1996;41:215-219. PubMed PMID: 9027936.
56. Gerszten PC, Chen S, Quader M, et al. Radiosurgery for
benign tumors of the spine using the Synergy S with conebeam computed tomography image guidance. J Neurosurg.
2012;117(suppl):197-202. doi:10.3171/2012.8.GKS12981
57. Chang JH, Shin JH, Yamada YJ, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for spinal metastases: what are the risks and how do
we minimize them? Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2016;41(suppl
20):S238-S245. doi:10.1097/BRS.0000000000001823
58. Sahgal A, Weinberg V, Ma L, et al. Probabilities of radiation
myelopathy specific to stereotactic body radiation therapy
to guide safe practice. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013;
85:341-347. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2012.05.007
59. Wu AJ, Williams E, Modh A, et al. Dosimetric predictors of
esophageal toxicity after stereotactic body radiotherapy for
central lung tumors. Radiother Oncol. 2014;112:267-271.
doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2014.07.001
60. Nuyttens JJ, Moiseenko V, McLaughlin M, et al. Esophageal
dose tolerance in patients treated with stereotactic body
radiation therapy. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2016;26:120-128.
doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.2015.11.006
61. Stephans KL, Djemil T, Diaconu C, et al. Esophageal dose
tolerance to hypofractionated stereotactic body radiation
therapy: risk factors for late toxicity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2014;90:197-202. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2014.05.011
62. Hoppe BS, Laser B, Kowalski AV, et al. Acute skin toxicity following stereotactic body radiation therapy for stage
I non-small-cell lung cancer: who’s at risk? Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2008;72:1283-1286. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2008.08.036
63. Murphy JD, Christman-Skieller C, Kim J, et al. A dosimetric model of duodenal toxicity after stereotactic body radiotherapy for pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2010;78:1420-1426. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.09.075
64. Mislmani M, Frasure H, Suppiah S, et al. Acute gastrointestinal toxicity after robotic stereotactic ablative radiotherapy for

23/08/18 4:44 PM

292

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

treatment of metastatic gynecological malignancies. Future
Oncol. 2014;10:241-248. doi:10.2217/fon.13.215
65. Bae SH, Kim MS, Cho CK, et al. Predictor of severe gastroduodenal toxicity after stereotactic body radiotherapy for
abdominopelvic malignancies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2012;84:e469-e474. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2012.06.005
66. Thibault I, Chang EL, Sheehan J, et al. Response assessment
after stereotactic body radiotherapy for spinal metastasis:
a report from the SPIne response assessment in NeuroOncology (SPINO) group. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16:e595-e603.
doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00166-7
67. Chow E, Hoskin P, Mitera G, et al. Update of the international consensus on palliative radiotherapy endpoints
for future clinical trials in bone metastases. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;82:1730-1737. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2011.02.008

Heron_68566_PTR_18_279-292_08-23-18.indd 292

68. Chow E, Wu JS, Hoskin P, et al. International consensus
on palliative radiotherapy endpoints for future clinical trials in bone metastases. Radiother Oncol. 2002;64:275-280.
PubMed PMID: 12242115.
69. Lee S, Chun M. Pain relief by cyberknife radiosurgery for spinal metastasis. Tumori. 2012;98:238-242.
doi:10.1700/1088.11936
70. Braam P, Lambin P, Bussink J. Stereotactic versus conventional radiotherapy for pain reduction and quality of life in
spinal metastases: study protocol for a randomized controlled
trial. Trials. 2016;17:61. doi:10.1186/s13063-016-1178-7
71. Fisher CG, DiPaola CP, Ryken TC, et al. A novel classification system for spinal instability in neoplastic disease:
an evidence-based approach and expert consensus from
the Spine Oncology Study Group. Spine. 2010;35:E1221E1229. doi:10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181e16ae2

23/08/18 4:44 PM

C H A P T E R

19

SBRT for Oligometastatic Disease
Alina Mihai and Michael T. Milano

Cancer Metastasis
The progression of cancer from a localized disease
to metastatic disease requires a sequence of events,
likely reflecting genomic and phenotypic changes.
A cancer cell must first locally invade surrounding
tissue and then intravasate into surrounding vasculature; it must then circulate through the body
and extravasate into a similar versus different
microenvironment (i.e., same vs. different organ)
where it must then develop the capacity to grow
at that distant site. It remains unknown whether
the propensity to metastasize develops early or
late in the course of cancer development, despite
several genomic analyses attempting to address
this question (1,2,3). In the late 1800s, Halsted
hypothesized an orderly process wherein cancer
cells spread progressively from the primary tumor
into regional lymph nodes and ultimately into
distant organs. In the 1980s, Fisher hypothesized an
opposite extreme, on the basis of his experiments
with murine breast cancer models, that cancer is
metastatic from initial presentation even in the
absence of clinically apparent metastatic disease (4).
Recognizing that biological systems are complex
and do not necessarily follow strict paradigms,
Hellman proposed a model in which the extent of
cancer progression in any given patient exists along
a spectrum (5), ranging from a state of limited disease with the propensity to spread in an orderly,
contiguous manner (as postulated by Halsted) to
a state of widespread systemic disease from clinical inception (as postulated by Fisher [6,7]).
The oligometastatic state can be extrapolated

from this “spectrum model” to represent an early
course of metastatic progression.

The Oligometastatic State
In 1995, Hellman and Weichselbaum hypothesized
a “clinical significant state of oligometastases” in
which metastases limited in number and location
may represent a relatively indolent disease state in
which full metastatic potential is not reached (8).
Resection or ablative therapy to all known metastases could lead to prolonged disease-free survival
with the potential for cure in these patients (9).
Although the term “oligometastases” was coined
in 1995, surgery (10,11) and radiation (11) for limited metastases had been practiced for many decades prior to that. In 1968, Rubin questioned, Are
metastases curable? in a Journal of the American
Medical Association (JAMA) editorial (12) in
addition to writing a book Solitary Metastasis (11)
in which localized therapies were discussed. In
1983, Peters et al. explored the concept of radiation therapy as a curative treatment for metastatic
disease (13), discussing the potential of systemic
therapy to sterilize subclinical (i.e., occult) disease.
Moreover, the importance of tumor burden of detectable disease as well as the need to deliver sufficient
radiation dose while not exceeding unacceptable
normal tissue tolerances was emphasized. Systemic
therapy remains the standard of care for metastatic
disease, and in the early to mid-20th century, less
effective chemotherapy regimens and supportive care
warranted attention to local therapies for metastatic
disease. However, advances in systemic treatment,
293

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 293

23/08/18 5:49 PM

294

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

radiographic and functional imaging, minimally invasive surgical and ablative techniques, and radiation
therapy have made the hypothesis of local therapy for
oligometastatic disease even more compelling.
Radiation therapy for oligometastases is
better suited for patients with medical comorbidities precluding surgery or invasive ablative therapies, unresectable disease, lesions in areas with
significant risk for resection, and/or multiple lesions
for which multiple resections would not be feasible. In the 1990s, radiation planning and delivery
technology was burgeoning, with the development
of three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy
(3D-CRT) delivery. In fact, in their 1995 editorial,
Hellman and Weichselbaum (8) noted that these
technologies allow for an “increase in the tumor
dose and a reduction in normal tissue toxicity by
restricting as much as possible, the radiation to
the accurately imaged tumor while avoiding critical normal tissues.” Over the past 20-plus years,
more novel technologies have become readily available, although it should be emphasized that these
technologies facilitate the treatment of oligometastases, but the concept of locally ablative treatment,
often in conjunction with systemic treatment, as a
potentially curable treatment option for oligometastatic disease, is independent of the technology.
Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT),
also called “stereotactic ablative body radiation”
(SABR) therapy, has become an accepted standard in the treatment of oligometastases because
of the ability to deliver high biologically effective
dose, while taking advantage of a steep dose gradient (i.e., inhomogeneous dose delivery in which
the maximum dose is appreciably less than the
periphery of the target) such that the normal tissue volume receiving therapeutic doses is relatively
low. The high fractional doses of radiation may
have some biological benefits such as the ability to
overcome intratumoral regional hypoxia as well as
potentially stimulating an immune response (14).

SBRT FOR OLIGOMETASTATIC DISEASE
Selection Factors
Published studies generally use specific clinical criteria for the number of metastases (solitary to ⱕ5)
to establish study eligibility, although an ideal
cutoff for the number of metastases is not well
established. Although a consensus definition of the
“oligometastatic state” has not been reached, some
have further subdivided patients on the basis of the
temporal development or progression of metastases

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 294

in regards to diagnosis and systemic therapy (15). De
novo (also called “synchronous”) oligometastasis
refer to the presence of few metastases at the time of
initial diagnosis; oligorecurrence (also called "metachronous" oligometastases) refers to the development of few metastases after definitively treating
the primary site, whereas “induced” or “persistent”
oligometastasis describes residual metastatic lesions
after response to systemic therapy. Oligoprogression describes a patient with widespread metastases
with relatively stable disease on systemic therapy with only one or a few lesions demonstrating
growth. SBRT (or other local therapy) is considered
a means to allow continuation of the mostly effective systemic agent, with radiation addressing the
oligoprogressive disease less responsive to that drug
(perhaps reflecting tumor cells that have undergone
a genetic change). Most of the data on outcomes
after SBRT are from patients with de novo oligometastatic or oligorecurrent disease (i.e., synchronous vs. metachronous oligometastases).
Proper selection of patients who will most benefit
from SBRT (or other local therapy) for oligometastases is not well understood. Unknown patient/host
and tumor factors likely play a role in the propensity to develop new metastases as well as the likelihood of durable control of the treated metastases
(Figure 19.1). Tumor and host biological factors
are certainly important but not currently used in the
clinical setting. Moffitt Cancer Center has described
the use of a radiation sensitivity index (RSI) to predict for relative radiation sensitivity/resistance of
oligometastases (16,17). One major limitation of
these studies, acknowledged by the authors, is that
the RSI and clinical response to SBRT came from
two independent datasets, precluding a direct correlation between radiosensitivity and clinical outcome. Second, it is still unclear how (or if) radiation
sensitivity correlates with survival outcomes. The
University of Chicago has shown that microRNAs
and their target genes may regulate multiple steps
in the metastatic cascade, perhaps lending itself to
a better understanding of the molecular basis of oligometastatic disease (18). Among 34 patients with
a variety of primary sites, metastatic sites, and histologies who underwent SBRT for oligometastases,
the microRNA signature was able to differentiate
oligometastatic versus polymetastatic phenotypes
(19). Compellingly, microRNA expression was
also able to discriminate oligo- and polymetastases phenotypes in an animal model, and investigators were able to use microRNA enhancement
in an oligometastatic cell line to convert to polymetastatic progression. Similar findings were

23/08/18 5:49 PM

19: SBRT FOR OLIGOMETASTATIC DISEASE

295

Disease spectrum
bulk of disease
? micrometastases
? number and extent of metastases

Disease control
and
survival

Tumor factors
? genomics
? proteomics
↑
environmental factors

Host factors
? tumor immunity
genomics/proteomics

FIGURE 19.1 Among patients with oligometastatic disease, many clinicopathological features likely affect disease
control and survival as well as interact with each other.

described in a study of 63 patients with resected
lung metastases (20). Despite the promising early
results of these bioassays, they have not yet been
validated in larger clinical cohorts. Presently, practicing physicians must rely on clinicopathological
factors.
Many studies describe patient and tumor clinicopathological factors that predict for better outcome
after SBRT for oligometastases, although the question remains as to what extent of benefit (if any)
local ablative therapy afforded these patients (i.e.,
whether better outcomes in patients with favorable
prognostic factors are reflective of better response
to SBRT/ablative therapy or better underlying
prognosis). Nevertheless, these factors do provide
insight into patient selection for SBRT. In a prospective study of 121 oligometastatic patients treated
with SBRT at the University of Rochester (21),
breast cancer patients fared significantly better
than those with other primary sites with respect
to survival and tumor control. Among those with
breast cancer, one versus two to five oligometastatic sites was of borderline significance (p = .055)
for survival; for non–breast cancer patients, a
larger net gross tumor volume (GTV) significantly
predicted for worse overall survival. Breast cancer
primary site was also significantly favorable for
overall survival in University of Chicago’s phase
I study of 63 patients (22). In a German pooled
analysis of patients with lung metastases, breast
cancer primary, smaller lesion size, one versus
more than one metastases, and longer duration between initial diagnosis and metastatic disease were

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 295

significantly favorable factors for survival (23). In
a pooled analysis of only non–small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients treated with SBRT, curativeintent radiation, and/or resection, adenocarcinoma
histology and metachronous (vs. synchronous)
metastases were significantly favorable predictors
of overall survival (24).
Many other studies (mostly single-institution
and/or smaller studies) have attempted to characterize factors predictive of better survival. In a
recent review by Palma et al., the “4 Aces” of major
prognostic factors for patients with oligometastatic
disease were described: young age (i.e., <65–70),
patient fitness (i.e., Karnofsky Performance Status
[KPS] ⱖ70), slow-growing cancers (i.e., metachronous vs. synchronous; longer duration to develop
metastases), and minimal disease burden (smaller
number of sites and organs; 25). On the basis of
the aforementioned studies, a fifth factor (a fifth
Ace or royal flush) would be favorable cancer histopathology, such as breast cancer (as discussed
earlier).

Dose Fractionation
The optimal dose fractionation schedule for SBRT
of oligometastases should provide a balance
between tumor control probability (TCP) and
normal tissue complication probability (NTCP).
With increasing prescribed dose, TCP increases,
eventually reaching a threshold beyond which
dose-dependent incremental increases in TCP are
negligible (Figure 19.2). With increased dose,

23/08/18 5:49 PM

296

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT
Optimum

100

Complication

Percent

Local
tumor
ablation
50

Uncomplicated
local cures
0

A

B

C
Dose

FIGURE 19.2 Treatment outcomes—biology of doselimiting tissues.

Source: Brookhaven National Laboratory. Used with permission.

NTCP risks increase. The image and/or stereotactic
guidance of SBRT allows for a reduction in typical
planning target volume (PTV) margins, resulting in
less normal tissue dose exposure. Also, with SBRT,
steep dose gradients across the target volume allow
for a gradient across normal tissues, such that the
volume of normal tissues exposed to therapeutic dose is minimized. Modulating the beam (i.e.,
intensity-modulated radiation therapy [IMRT]) to
deliver a homogeneous dose to the target volume
will reduce this effect, but may be preferable for
complex-shaped targets, to reduce hot spots within
the target and/or to reduce high-dose exposure to
neighboring normal tissue. One could dose paint
with IMRT in attempt to mimic a dose gradient,
recognizing that the total monitor units and thus
total integral dose delivered will be higher. No
matter which technique is used, the normal tissue
around the target will be exposed to high doses of
radiation such that NTCP risks need to be considered in addition to TCP.

Tumor Control Probability
The ideal dose fractionation for TCP remains
unknown for oligometastases and is likely dependent on many factors such as tumor bulk, histopathology, response to prior treatment, tumor location
(i.e., tumor microenvironment), and unknown
genotypic/phenotypic characteristics of the tumor
and patient (see the introductory text of this
chapter) that may dictate response to treatment.
Although increasing dose seems to correlate with
increased local control (26; as would be expected
from classic radiobiological principles), the ideal
prescription for any given patients remains difficult

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 296

to ascertain, as many different fractionation
schemes have been reported in published studies
(typically ranging from one to 10+ fractions) and
the utility of different models (i.e., linear quadratic
model) to compare different fractionation schemes
is not well understood and has been heavily debated
(14,27–30).
The American Society for Radiation Oncology
(ASTRO) and the American College of Radiology (ACR) practice guidelines state that SBRT is
used to precisely deliver one or “a small number”
of fractions (31); the ASTRO and the ACR have
defined SBRT earlier as the delivery of five or fewer
fractions. Limiting the number of SBRT fractions
to five is somewhat arbitrary, and strictly adopting
such practice may hinder our understanding of the
optimal dose fractionation schedules for various
tumor types and treatment locations as slightly
more protracted regimens may be more efficacious
(in balancing NTCP and TCP) when treating larger
tumors and/or tumors abutting critical organs and
tissues (14).
The ongoing NRG BR002 randomized study
protocol (NCT02364557, randomizing patients
to standard of care with or without SBRT or surgery for one to two breast cancer oligmetastases)
provides suggested one-, three-, and five-fraction
prescription doses for lung (peripheral or central
location), mediastinal, cervical, liver, abdominal/
pelvic, spine, and bone (other than spine) sites. The
protocol delineates, for each specific organ/site,
both allowed and preferred number of fractions
(with the “preferred” nomenclature accounting for
varying practices of dose fractionation). For example, one fraction is allowed only for paraspinal/
spinal sites, peripheral lung, or solitary liver metastases; three fractions are preferred for nonspinal
bone, peripheral lung, liver, and abdominal/pelvic
metastases; and five fractions are preferred for
thoracic/cervical spine, central lung, and mediastinal/
cervical lymph node metastases. The NRG BR002
also describes “per protocol” prescription doses of
30, 45, and 50 Gy for one, three, and five fractions,
respectively, for nonosseous sites, and prescription doses for osseous sites of 20, 30, and 35 Gy,
respectively, although a range of prescribed doses
are acceptable. The NRG BR001 study is a phase I
study for patients with two metastases (within 5 cm
of each other) or three to four metastases to be
treated with three- to five-fraction SBRT, with
initial doses of 30 Gy in three fractions for spinal/
paraspinal and other osseous sites, 45 Gy in three
fractions for peripheral lung, liver, and abdominal/
pelvic metastases, and 50 Gy in five fractions for

23/08/18 5:49 PM

19: SBRT FOR OLIGOMETASTATIC DISEASE

central lung and mediastinal/cervical lymph node
metastases; there is no plan to increase the prescribed dose; protocol doses will be de-escalated
if sufficient treatment-related toxicity is observed.
The ongoing randomized SABR-COMET study
(NCT01446744) of SBRT for patients with one
to five metastases uses single-fraction (brain and
spine) and three- to eight-fraction SBRT regimens
(with dose fractionation on the basis of location).
Although randomized studies will help to better
define optimal practice, including the ongoing
Trans-Tasman Radiation Oncology Group (TROG)
of one-fraction versus four-fraction SBRT for
lung metastases (NCT01965223), the number of
clinical scenarios (primary site, tumor location,
disease bulk) for which to study is overwhelming.
In practice, it is best to adhere to published dose
fractionation schedules and normal tissue constraints (see the following text) in treatment planning, with the understanding that optimal dose
fractionation schemes will evolve over time as more
efforts are devoted toward future investigations.

Normal Tissue Complication Probability
Several reviews have summarized published literature in an attempt to better define NTCP risks
and normal tissue dose constraints after SBRT
(14,32–34). This remains a complicated area of
study. Phase I studies can generally assess the tolerability within the acute phase after SBRT, but late
complications can occur months to years after radiation. Furthermore, dosimetric measures extracted
from dose–volume histograms do not account for
organ/tissue heterogeneity or biological factors
that may affect risk of radiation-related injury. Nevertheless, clinicians need guidance on dose–volume
constraints (DVCs) to evaluate a plan, acknowledging that these constraints are subject to limitations.
The American Association of Physicists in Medicine (AAPM) Task Group 101 (TG-101) report
(34) provides recommended DVCs for normal
tissues, many of which are incorporated into the
ongoing NRG BR002 randomized study. The AAPMsponsored hypofractionated radiation therapy
tumor and tissue effects in the clinic (HYTEC)
reports on NTCP as well as TCP will be forthcoming in 2018, and provide some additional insight
into NTCP and normal tissue dose constraints. We
recommend that practitioners adhere to the AAPM
TG-101 and forthcoming HYTEC guidelines. Future
research efforts should be directed toward optimizing treatment parameters, such as fractional dose and
total dose, as well as specific normal tissue DVCs.

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 297

297

PATIENT SELECTION FOR SBRT
Why SBRT?
Metastatic progression is a common occurrence
in the trajectory of cancer (35). Surgical series in
patients with oligometastatic disease to the lung
or liver have shown that a subset of these patients
will survive for a long time, with local treatments
only (36–40). However, only a minority of patients
will present with a limited number of metastases,
and/or will be deemed suitable for surgical resection (because of comorbidities, cumulative toxicity
of therapy, or anatomical location of the tumors).
In the primary and oligometastatic settings,
SBRT has been reported to be an effective, minimally invasive alternative, associated with high
rates of local control (70–90%) (21–23,25, 41–47).
SBRT delivers high biological equivalent doses
(BEDs) to the target, while minimizing the dose to
the critical structures nearby. The reported toxicity
is generally low. The overall treatment time is significantly shorter than for conventional radiation
therapy (1–2 weeks for SBRT vs. 6–8 weeks for
conventional radiation therapy). Therefore, this
technique is suitable for patients who are not candidates for other more invasive treatments. However,
because of the large fractional dose, the treatment
time for each fraction is longer; therefore, patient
compliance is essential.

Eligibility for SBRT
Although SBRT achieves high rates of local control
with minimal toxicity in patients with oligometastatic disease from different primaries, current available data failed to identify a group of patients who
benefit most from these treatments. The following
are recommendations for selection of patients on the
basis of the currently available evidence:
●

Confirmed diagnosis of malignancy

●

Patients with less than five metastases in
less than three organs

●

Oligometastatic status confirmed with
imaging—ideally PET-CT within the 2
months preceding the treatment
Patients oligometastatic at initial diagnosis or presenting metachronous oligometastatic progression
Unsuitable for surgical resection of
metastasis/metastases
Good performance status KPS >70% or
ECOG 0–1

●

●

●

23/08/18 5:49 PM

298

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

Exclusion Criteria
●

●
●
●

●

Widespread metastatic disease (although
SBRT in the setting of oligoprogression
may prove to be an exception to this
recommendation)
Short disease-free interval
Short life expectancy (i.e., <6 months)
Unable to achieve DVCs required because
of the position or size of the lesion(s);
these patients may be eligible for definitive conventionally fractionated dosing of
radiation therapy
Noncompliant patients

SBRT TECHNIQUE IN
OLIGOMETASTATIC DISEASE
Although the advantage of SBRT is a steep dose
gradient, allowing delivery of high biological
effective dose (BED) to the target, this gradient
represents a challenge with respect to setup errors,
intrafraction motion, and respiratory motion of the
target, any of which can lead to unwanted irradiation of normal tissues (and therefore high risk of significant unwanted toxicity) and/or underdosing of
the target (and therefore risk of tumor recurrence).
Concern about normal tissue exposure is especially
critical for targets situated near the spinal cord,
small bowel/stomach, or central lung structures.
Therefore, all efforts should be made to reduce these
uncertainties, while maintaining patient comfort.
Although the patients included in the published series of SBRT for oligometastatic disease
comprise mostly those with a single metastasis,
the definition of oligometastatic disease is inconsistent, and in some reports is considered to be
up to three or five lesions, either in the same or in
different organs.
Oligometastatic patients are most likely to progress
with additional metastases in the same organ (48),
outside the target. Some of these patients with oligorecurrences will receive further SBRT. Therefore,
in patients with multiple concurrent oligometastases and in patients with oligorecurrences following
previous local ablative treatments, some factors are
essential when considering SBRT:
●

Knowledge of each target’s motion and
respiratory management

●

Minimization of setup errors

●

Interpretation of composite plans

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 298

●

In patients with oligorecurrences treated
earlier by SBRT:
● Ideally, same immobilization and same
respiratory management should be used.
● Analysis of new treatment plan, taking into account previous radiation
dose, especially when different dose
fractionation is used, is difficult and
currently empirical.

General principles of treatment planning and
delivery are presented in the subsequent sections,
so also the specific cases of multiple targets in the
same organ, oligorecurrence, and reirradiation.

Immobilization
Comfortable immobilization of the patient reduces
the risk of inter- and intrafraction errors. Patients
are set up in a dorsal decubitus position, with their
arms above the head. Although this position allows
for more flexibility in the choice of beam directions, it can be associated with patient discomfort
(because of positional pain in the shoulders), especially in the context of long treatment times (as in
the case of gated or breath-hold SBRT). Patient
discomfort can be associated with patient motion
during treatment, therefore risk of errors in dose
delivered. Several immobilization devices available
are commercially available, with reported repositioning accuracy between 0.3 and 5.6 mm (34).
Body frames usually use vacuum cushions to physically immobilize the patients, while maintaining
comfort. In addition, some teams use abdominal compression to reduce the motion of the targets/organs
at risk (OARs) in areas with known large motion
(lower lungs, upper abdomen). Although abdominal
compression reduces the motion, it is often uncomfortable and has been shown to deform anatomy,
depending on the positioning and the pressure applied
(Figure 19.3). Some groups advocate no immobilization, favoring patient comfort. However, although
current imaging systems allow for detection and correction in patient positioning, they cannot replace
proper immobilization of the patients. Therefore,
our recommendation is to use a vacuum-based body
frame, with the patient’s arms above the head.
Special situations are the following:
●

For tumors situated in the upper lobes of
the lung, a head–neck–shoulder mask can
be used (Figure 19.4). In this situation, the
arms are situated along the body, and a customized neck support might be necessary,
especially in patients with a large curvature
of the cervical spine. Although the position

23/08/18 5:49 PM

19: SBRT FOR OLIGOMETASTATIC DISEASE

299

(A)

(B)
FIGURE 19.3 Immobilization using body frame without (A) and with (B) abdominal compression. (www.qfix.com).

of the targets unless the patient is simulated with breath-hold techniques.
• S-frame Orfit

●

If 4DCT is not available, slow acquisition CT, CT at extremes of respiration,
or even fluoroscopy can be used to determine the extent of the respiratory motion
of the target.

●

If available, 4D PET-CT should be used,
as it allows better identification of the
target, and the registration-related issues
are diminished. In addition to the structural information and motion information, 4D PET-CT provides metabolic data.

Face cut out for
comfort—ensure pulled
down over thorax

FIGURE 19.4 Head–neck–shoulder mask used for patients
with apical lung tumors treated by SBRT.
SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

of the arms along the body is more comfortable, the use of noncoplanar beams in
these cases is usually necessary, especially
for tumors near the brachial plexus.
●

For tumors of the pelvis, immobilization with
a vacuum cushion device may be sufficient.

Simulation
All patients should undergo CT simulation, with a
recommended CT slice thickness of 1.25 mm at the
level of the tumor, 2.5 mm remaining of the scan.
The recommended length of the scan is at least
10 cm above and below the target (34):
●

If available, four-dimensional CT (4DCT)
should be performed for treatment
planning and respiratory motion analysis

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 299

The advantages and disadvantages of each imaging modality are detailed in Table 19.1A.
In patients with liver metastases, fiducial markers can be helpful as the tumor is less well visualized on CT. Placement of fiducial markers is
recommended to be done 7 to 10 days before the
actual CT simulation is performed. As the target
delineation is difficult on CT alone, MRI simulation and/or MRI registration to CT is usually
required. Ideally, the MRI would be performed in
the same or similar position as simulation (i.e., flat
board); deformable registration of the MRI and CT
will also improve target delineation.

Respiratory Motion and Its Management
Respiratory motion is an important component
of the geometric uncertainty. It is patient specific
and individual respiratory characteristics can vary

23/08/18 5:49 PM

300

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

TABLE 19.1A Advantages and Disadvantages of Respiration-Correlated CTs
Type

Advantages

CT slow

●

Disadvantages

Ability to capture tumor motion

Motion artifacts—blurring of the images
Loss of resolution
● Errors in delineation
●
●

CT at extreme phase of
respiratory cycle

●
●

Theoretically captures the entire range of motion
Lower workload

Captures respiratory motion over few respiratory
cycles
● Information about the shape and mobility of
tumor is acquired synchronously

4DCT—gold standard

●

Breath-hold CT

●
●

Smallest GTV
Lung protection (DIBH)

●

Unreliable for small tumors with wide
range of motion

Does not take into account the daily
variations in breathing pattern
● Requires regular breathing pattern/ability
of the patient to be coached
●

●

Patient compliance

DIBH, deep inspiration breath-hold; GTV, gross tumor volume.

in amplitude, period, and regularity during and
between SBRT fractions (intrafraction, interfraction). In addition, it was shown that over the course
of treatment, tumors may change in size, shape,
and mobility. AAPM TG-76 (49) and -101 (34)
recommend assessment of respiratory motion in
all patients treated for moving targets, whereas the
respiratory management should be individualized.
Respiratory management is recommended for all
tumors moving more than 5 mm in any direction.
Several types of management of respiratory
motion have been described in the literature. They
can be grouped into two main categories:
●

●

Passive management (motion encompassing techniques) takes into account
the total range of motion and requires
knowledge of the motion extent. 4DCT is
typically used to determine the magnitude
of motion. Although it is a valid option
to manage respiration, this method is
usually associated with larger volumes
(especially for patients with tumors in
the lower lobes of the lung, liver, etc.),
and therefore a greater dose–volume
radiation exposure of the neighboring
normal structures (Figure 19.5).
Active management involves either
limitation of the respiratory motion
(breath-hold techniques, abdominal compression) or tracking (gating; Calypso,
Synchrony, ExacTrac, Vero, ViewRay,
Vision/Align RT). Treatment is delivered
while observing either an external or an
internal marker of motion, or the actual
tumor. Different correlations between

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 300

external markers and internal tumor
motion are reported in the literature.
Although active management usually
results in smaller target volumes, and
therefore lesser irradiation of neighboring normal structures, it is also associated with increased treatment time;
therefore, comfort and optimization of
the patient before the treatment is mandatory (Figure 19.5).

Determination of Required
Respiratory Management
●

For targets moving less than 5 mm in
any direction—free-breathing nongated
treatment can be delivered. This is the
most widely used technique and the
easiest to implement.

●

For targets presenting motion over 5 mm
in any direction—the following can be
implemented:
● Gating assumes a regular respiratory pattern. It minimizes the effect of
respiratory motion by limiting the
delivery of the treatment beam during
specific portions (“gate”) of the respiratory cycle. It allows minimization
of the respiratory motion and reduction of the volume of the neighboring
OAR receiving unnecessary irradiation. It increases treatment time by a
factor of 3. If the respiratory gate is
too narrow, then it becomes impractical and another method should be

23/08/18 5:49 PM

19: SBRT FOR OLIGOMETASTATIC DISEASE

301

FIGURE 19.5 Example of the impact on the size of the target volume when 3D versus 4D solutions for management are

used. 3D solution (encompassing the entire range of motion [A]) results in significantly larger treatment volumes compared
with the volumes defined using respiratory-managed solution (B). The 3D solution will also result in larger volumes of normal structures (e.g., lung) irradiated, higher risk of radiation-induced toxicity, and possible limitation of the dose delivered.
Orange contour corresponds to GTV, and the red contour to the PTV.
GTV, gross tumor volume; PTV, planning target volume.
Source: Courtesy Dwight E. Heron.

●

used (e.g., 3D-SBRT in free-breathing or breath-hold techniques). It
requires almost real-time monitoring
of patient respiration.
Breath-hold is a variation of gated
treatment, with the treatment beam
being delivered only when the patient
is holding breath in deep inspiration,
deep expiration, or relaxed expiration.
It is highly dependent on patient compliance and ability (i.e., his or her baseline respiratory function). It allows
significant reduction of the PTV, and
of the unnecessary irradiation of the
OARs. However, it requires a stable
baseline and the ability of the patients
to hold their breath for at least 15 to
20 seconds, otherwise treatment times
increase significantly. Residual motion
can be present; therefore, it requires
imaging-based treatment verification
(i.e., fluoroscopy during breath-hold).
As many patients with oligometastatic
disease will eventually experience
disease progression, it is suitable to
reproduce the same positioning and
respiratory management if subsequent
radiation therapy is required. Deep inspiration breath-hold (DIBH) or end
expiration breath-hold (EEBH) can
be used. EEBH is reported as more
reproducible and more stable; however, DIBH can be used as long as the
respiratory cycle baseline (point from
which the respiratory cycle starts) is
stable and the patient is compliant and

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 301

●

●

able to reproduce the same amplitude
of inspiration (within ±3 mm).
If a patient is unable to comply with
breath-hold and exhibits an irregular
respiratory cycle pattern, monophasic
or biphasic coaching of the patient
might be required. This is highly
dependent on patient compliance
and the ability of the patient to follow
commands. Coaching allows regular
breathing and subsequent respiratory
gating; however, the amplitude of
motion increases, and quality of the
acquired imaging is decreased (more
motion artifacts).
For patients with irregular breathing,
unable to hold their breath or follow
commands, a 3D-SBRT free-breathing
approach should be used .

In addition, for tumors situated near sensitive critical structures, the motion of the OARs
should be analyzed and considered. For tumors in
the upper abdomen, in addition to the respiratory
motion, other factors to be considered are stomach
fullness and peristalsis. For tumors situated in the
proximity of the stomach, treatment with empty
stomach is recommended (Figure 19.6).

Target Delineation
SBRT is usually used in patients with relatively
small targets, for which large, ablative doses
are delivered. Therefore, accurate identification
and localization before and during treatment are
essential. AAPM TG-101 lists several factors

23/08/18 5:49 PM

302

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

No

Regular breathing
pattern?

Coach patient

Yes
4DCT-RPM monitoring
4DCT acquisition
Regular cycle?

<5 mm

>5 mm

Motion analysis

Adapt PTV =
GTV + motion + 3–5 mm

Select gating
window

FIGURE 19.6 Example of algorithm of analysis and determination of respiratory management of target (this particular
case—Varian RPM system is used for respiratory motion monitoring). (A) Passive management; (B) active management.

that impact the geometrical error, including
variability in contouring of the GTV (both interand intraobserver) related to type of imaging
used and motion artifacts (induced by both
tumor and normal tissues surrounding the
tumor, e.g., heart).
Although most of the groups agree that highresolution multimodality imaging should be used
for target delineation, there is no standardization
of the type of imaging to be used. The majority of
radiation oncologists, however, use both anatomical and metabolic imaging for target delineation.
If multimodality imaging is used, we recommend
dedicated scans acquired in treatment position, thin
slice thickness (<3 mm), respiratory correlation, and
ideally using the same respiratory management as
for treatment. When multimodality imaging is used
for target delineation, the accuracy of coregistration
should be checked near the target, using natural
landmarks or implanted fiducials (if available).
Table 19.1B presents the characteristics of the
most commonly used imaging modalities for target
delineation.
Although different imaging modalities can be used
for target delineation, the CT planning remains the
main modality used for delineation and dose calculation:
●

For lung oligometastatic disease
(Figure 19.7): The tumor should be
contoured on the lung windows, whereas a mediastinal setting might be more
useful for the OARs. Several caveats
have to be taken into account.

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 302

TABLE 19.1B Imaging Modalities Used for Target
Delineation
CT

MRI

Accurate geometry, good delineation of
bone, lung
● Tissue density information
● 4DCT available for moving targets
● Need for 1.5-mm slicing or less
● Windowing can impact on GTV delineation
●

Better soft-tissue contrast
T1–T2 sequences with contrast usually used
● Special sequences might be required
● Image spacing—1.5 mm or less (special request)
● Images might have geometric distortion
● Ideally scan on flat couch
●

●

PET-CT

Metabolic imaging not visible on CT/MRI
PET-CT images automatically coregistered
● Windowing level setting may strongly affect
apparent size of the tumor
●
●

GTV, gross tumor volume.

FIGURE 19.7 CT50 and MIP CT image of lung lesion—

MIP image shows extent of motion of dense lesion in lung.

MIP, maximum intensity projection.

23/08/18 5:49 PM

19: SBRT FOR OLIGOMETASTATIC DISEASE

303

FIGURE 19.8 View of GTV: smooth contouring that “makes sense in all planes.”
GTV, gross tumor volume.

●

●

If 4D-CT scans are used, the images
corresponding to the end-expiration
phase (usually 50% phase) should be
used for contouring.
When maximum intensity projection
(MIP) CT images are used, the delineated target will include the entire
extent of motion (GTV = internal
gross tumor volume [iGTV]).
The contours should be smooth
and “make sense” in all planes
(Figure 19.8).
There are guidelines regarding the
inclusion of tumor spiculations seen
on CT; most radiation oncologists
do include only the proximal portion and not the entire extent of
spiculations.
Windowing and leveling of the planning CT scan impacts the accuracy of
target delineation (e.g., window and
level changes affect the apparent size
of the tumor; Figure 19.9).

extremes of expiration and extreme
inspiration is not recommended for
target delineation because there is a
high chance that these are inaccurate in the presence of significant
motion.
●

For liver oligometastatic disease
(Figure 19.5): The liver is a hypodense
organ, so hypodense tumors are usually difficult to identify, even when
contrast is used. For the contouring of
a hypodense liver target, usually minimum intensity projection (MinIP)
images should be used for contouring
of the GTV (Figure 19.10). However,
CT planning is not usually enough for
accurate identification of the tumor,
and dedicated multiphase MRI liver
is recommended (Figure 19.11). The
MRI sequences to be used are not
standardized.

●

For small tumors presenting significant motion, the CT imaging at

For other abdominal targets (adrenal
tumor, lymph nodes), the GTV should
be delineated on a postcontrast CT
scan (ideally both intravenous and oral
contrast).

FIGURE 19.9 Impact of window level on the GTV delin-

FIGURE 19.10 MinIP images allow identification of hypo-

GTV, gross tumor volume.

MinIP, minimum intensity projection.

●

●

●

●

eation.

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 303

dense liver lesion.

23/08/18 5:49 PM

304

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

FIGURE 19.11 Example of GTV contouring using CT–MRI registration. Both CT and multiphase MRI were acquired in
treatment position, in end-expiration breath-hold.
GTV, gross tumor volume.

Treatment Planning

Organs at Risk

Volume Definitions

Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) atlases
can be used to guide the delineation of OARs. Planning organ at risk volume (PRV) = OAR + 3 to 5 mm
should be used, especially when the target is situated
in the immediate vicinity of an OAR (International
Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements
[ICRU] 52). Figure 19.13 presents definition of PRV
esophagus, for a patient treated with spine stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS).

GTV: As described earlier
iGTV = GTV + margin for motion
●

Adapted margins as determined during
the analysis of motion are recommended
unless breath-hold techniques used

●

Population-based margins not recommended, as respiratory motion is patient
and tumor dependent

●

PTV = iGTV + margins for setup errors
●

Lung Tumors (50):

Setup error is institution-specific (ability of
the onboard imaging to detect tumor)—
usually between 3 and 5 mm (Figure 19.12)

Lungs (target volume)—whole organ; although there has been inconsistency in published data on whether to subtract the GTV,
iGTV, or PTV, we recommend subtracting
the GTV as recommended by the RTOG

CT 50 (end expiration)

MIP

Extreme

All phases

GTV 50

Not for planning use
needs coregistration

Not for small
tumors with
large motion

Workload

Generate iGTV:
adapted margin based on
magnitude of motion
Generate iGTV

PTV = iGTV + setup error

FIGURE 19.12 Algorithm for target volume definition in patients with lung oligometastases.
GTV, gross tumor volume; iGTV, internal gross tumor volume; MIP, maximum intensity projection; PTV, planning target volume.

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 304

23/08/18 5:49 PM

19: SBRT FOR OLIGOMETASTATIC DISEASE

305

If cervical spine, add:
●

Larynx

●

Parotids

●

Upper esophagus

●

Brachial plexus

If thoracic spine, add:

FIGURE 19.13 Definition of the PRV esophagus for spine
SRS.

PRV, Planning organ at risk volume; SRS, spine stereotactic radiosurgery.

●

Lungs

●

Esophagus

●

Airways

●

Heart

If low thoracic spine or lumbar spine, add:
●

Adjacent bowel

●

Esophagus

●

Nonadjacent bowel

●

Brachial plexus (for upper lobe tumors)

●

Kidneys

●

Airways—major airways and seconddegree ramifications

●

Stomach

●

Chest wall

●

Heart—whole organ (include pericardium); delineation of cardiac substructure
will likely be recommended in the near
future

●

Adjacent bowel

●

Rectum

●

Bladder

Pelvic

●

Large vessels

Dose Prescription and Dose–Volume Constraints

●

Skin—10 cm above and below the target
(except if noncoplanar beams are used,
when the length contours might be larger)

Although SBRT is increasingly used for patients
with oligometastatic disease, there is significant
variability in the dose fractionation, dose calculation algorithm and prescription, as well as
the acceptable DVCs used. The following tables
describe the most commonly used dose fractionation schedules and DVC for the most common
sites of oligometastatic disease (lung, liver, adrenal, abdominal nodes, pelvic recurrences). The
choice of dose fractionation is driven mainly by
the position of the tumor relative to critical organs
nearby, with steep dose gradients required. Documentation of the dose received, normal tissue dose
exposure, and technique used (including type of
respiratory management) is essential, especially if
reirradiation will potentially be necessary, which
is a common scenario for oligometastatic disease
patients as described earlier (Table 19.2).

Upper Abdominal Tumors
●

Liver—whole organ

●

Stomach

●

Duodenum

●

Adjacent bowel (loops of bowel in the
immediate vicinity of the target)

●

Kidneys

●

Other bowel (nonadjacent)

●

Skin

Spine
In all patients:
●

Spinal cord (should be contoured on
the MRI)

●

Cord PRV—spinal cord + 3 mm
circumferential

●

Skin

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 305

Lung Oligometastases
Dose fractionation schedules used for lung oligometastases mirror the ones used for treating early
stage lung cancer (Table 19.3). In the literature,
use of single or multiple fractions (3–4–5–8) is
described, with no current standardization of

23/08/18 5:49 PM

306

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

TABLE 19.2 Most Commonly Used Dose Fractionation Schedules for Lung SBRT
Dose Fractionation

BED10

Indication

25–34 Gy per one fraction

81–149.6 Gy

Small peripheral tumors (<2 cm)
More than 1 cm outside chest wall

60 Gy per three fractions

180 Gy

Peripheric tumors (>2 cm from main airways
and >1 cm from the chest wall)

48 Gy per four fractions

105 Gy

Central tumors or situated near critical
organs

60 Gy per eight fractions
50 Gy per five fractions

100 Gy

60 Gy per five fractions
45 Gy per three fractions

132 Gy
112 Gy

Comments

This corresponds to 54 Gy per
three fractions when heterogeneity corrections are used

Peripheral tumors near chest wall (<1 cm)

BED, biological equivalent dose; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

TABLE 19.3 Dose–Volume Constraints for Lung SBRT
OAR

1 Fraction

3 Fractions

4 Fractions

5 Fractions

8 Fractions

Spinal cord

14 Gy

18 Gy (6 Gy per
fraction)

26 Gy (6.5 Gy per
fraction)

-Dmax = 30 Gy
-<.25 mL less than
22.5 Gy (4.5 Gy per
fraction)
-<.5 mL less than
13.5 Gy (2.7 Gy per
fraction)

-.01 mL: 25 Gy
-Accepted deviation : 25–28 Gy

Esophagus

15.4 Gy

27 Gy (9 Gy per
fraction)

30 Gy (6.8 Gy per
fraction)

-Dmax = 32 Gy (nonadjacent wall)
-<5 mL less than
27.5 Gy
-No more than
105% PD

-0.1 mL <27 Gy
-Minor deviation = 27–28.5 Gy

Brachial
plexus

17.5 Gy

24 Gy (8 G y per
fraction)

27.2 Gy (6.8 Gy
per fraction)

-Dmax = 32 mL
-<3 mL less than
30 Gy

-0.1 mL <27 Gy
-Minor deviation = 27–29 Gy

Heart

22 Gy

30 Gy (10 Gy per
fraction)

34 Gy (8.5 Gy per
fraction)

-Dmax <105% PD
-<15 mL less than
32 Gy

-0.1 mL <50 Gy
-Minor deviation = 50–60 Gy

Great
vessels

37 Gy

NS

49 Gy (12.25 Gy
per fraction)

-Dmax <105% PD
(nonadjacent wall)
-<10 mL less than
47 Gy

Trachea
and PBT

20.2 Gy

30 Gy (10 Gy per
fraction)

34.8 Gy (8.7 Gy
per fraction)

-Dmax <105% PD
-<4 mL less than
18 Gy

Rib

30 Gy

30 Gy (10 Gy per
fraction)

40 Gy (10 Gy per
fraction)

NS

Skin

26 Gy

24 Gy (8 Gy per
fraction)

36 Gy (9 G y per
fraction)

-Dmax = 32 Gy
-<10 mL less than
30 Gy

Stomach

12.4 Gy

NS

27.2 (6.8 Gy per
fraction)

NS

-0.1 mL <32 Gy
-Minor deviation = 32–35

Dmax, maximum dose; NS, not specified; OAR, organ at risk; PBT, proximal bronchial tree; PD, prescription dose; SBRT, stereotactic body
radiation therapy.
Source: Adapted from NCCN and RTOG protocols.

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 306

23/08/18 5:49 PM

19: SBRT FOR OLIGOMETASTATIC DISEASE

the dose fractionation. The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines
(51) and NRG BR001 (BR001; NCT02206334)
can be used as guidelines for dose fractionation
schedules. Although no current standard exists,
RTOG 0236 (52) clarified that fractional doses
on the order of 18 to 20 Gy are unsafe for central
tumors. NRG/RTOG 0813 dose escalation study
will hopefully clarify the maximum tolerated
dose to be used for these central and ultracentral
tumors. Preliminary data reported two grade 5

307

cardiopulmonary toxic events in the 11.5- to
12-Gy groups (53).

Dose–Volume Constraints for Lung SBRT
Although there is no standardization widely acceptable for DVC for SBRT, guidelines for DVCs
used for lung SBRT are currently provided by the
NCCN or RTOG protocols. They are dependent on
the dose fractionation schedule used (3 vs. 4 vs.
5 vs. 8). Table 19.4 provides the most commonly
used DVCs for lung SBRT.

TABLE 19.4 Most Commonly Used Dose Fractionation Schedules for Liver SBRT in Prospective Randomized Trials
Dose (Gy)/
No. of
Fractions

Median
Follow-Up(Months)

Mixed

8–66/1–4
fractions

1.5–3.8

37

NR

14–26/1
fraction

1–6
(<6 cm)

44

Mostly
CRC

1–3
(<6 cm)

47

Lee et al. (57) Variable
Ambrosino
et al. (92)
Goodman
et al. (93)

No. of
Lesions

No. of
Patients

Primary

Blomgren
et al. (90)

Variable

31

Herfart
et al. (91)

1–3

Hoyer
et al. (59)
Rusthoven
et al. (58)

Study

Local
Control

Survival

2—hemorrhagic
gastritis

80%

NR

Mean—14.9

NR

18 months—
67%

1 year—76%
2 years—55%

45/3
fractions

52

1—liver failure
2—severe late
GI

2 years—86%

1 year—67%
2 years—38%

Mostly
CRC

60/3
fractions

16

<2% late G3

2 years—92%
<3 cm—100%

Median—17.6

68

Mostly
CRC

28–60/3
fractions

10.8

8—acute G3
1—G4

1 year—71%

18 months—
47%

1–3
(<5 cm)

27

Mostly
CRC

25–60/3
fractions

13

NR

74%

NR

– (<6 cm)

81

Mostly
CRC

54/3
fractions

33

G3—5%–4.4%

94%
4 years—
90.5%

Median—33.6
OS—28%

61

Mostly
CRC

75/3
fractions

12

No RILD
1—G3 chest
wall pain

1 year—94%

1 year—83.5%

Median duration of LC—52
months
2 years LC
BED10 >100—
77.2%
BED <100—
59%

Median
OS—22

Scorsetti
et al. (94)

Toxicity

RSSearch
Patient
Registry
(2018)
25 academic +
communitybased
institutions
(95)

Variable
(mostly 1)

457

Mostly
CRC,
breast,
GI, and
lung
cancers

Median: 45/3
fractions
(12–60/1–5)

14

Fatigue
Nausea
No >G3

DEGRO
(2018)
17 centres
from
Germany
and
Switzerland
(96)

1–4
(mostly 1)

474
1997–
2015

CRC,
mostly
breast
cancer,
and
others

Median:
1 fraction
(1–13)
d/fraction—
18.5
(3–37.5)

15

G3 acute—1;
If BED10 >
gastric ulcer G3 150 Gy (at
isocenter):
chronic—1.4%
1 year
LC—77%
2 years
LC—64%

Median
OS—24

CRC, colorectal cancer; GI, gastrointestinal tract; LC, local control; OS, overall survival; RILD, Radiation-induced liver disease; SBRT, stereotactic
body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 307

23/08/18 5:49 PM

308

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

Liver Oligometastases

Adrenal Oligometastases

There are no randomized phase III trials in the literature comparing dose fractionation schedules for
liver metastases. Retrospective and prospective
phase I to II trials describe the use of 10 to 26 Gy
per fraction in one to six treatments (Table 19.5)
(54–59). However, there is significant variation in
patient selection, histology, treated tumor volumes,
and the number of treated lesions and dosimetric
parameters used. Dose escalation seems to be associated with better outcomes; however, the maximum dose required to treat oligometastases is not
yet defined. In addition, patients with colorectal
oligometastases seem to have more radioresistant
tumors and dose escalation might improve their
outcomes (60). Yet, so far there is no recommendation of what dose should be used for these patients.
The tumor volumes reported in the literature are
generally small; however, a threshold for ineligibility for SBRT has not been yet defined. Invasion of
the portal vein is rare in patients with metastatic
disease; nonetheless, caution should be used when
treating these patients. For metastases of the left
lobe situated near the stomach and for tumors near
the duodenum, the dose near these critical organs
should be limited to 35 Gy per five fractions or
less than 7 Gy per fraction; dose painting and treatment with empty stomach are usually necessary. In
our experience, the most important parameters
that drive the choice for treatment and dose fractionation remain the functional reserve of the liver
(at least 700 mL liver should receive less than 15
Gy) and the position relative to sensitive structures
such as duodenum/stomach.

Although adrenal metastases are common, especially in patients with NSCLC, the SBRT literature
is scarce. The data come mainly from retrospective,
and few prospective, studies, including usually
a small number of patients, presenting adrenal
metastases mainly from a NSCLC.
Similar to other oligometastatic disease sites, there
is no standardization of the prescribed doses or DVC
used (Table 19.5) (44,61–67). Doses between 4 and
15 Gy per fraction have been used, in three to 10 treatments. The most commonly used dose fractionations
are 24 to 45 Gy per three fractions and 40 to 45 Gy
per five fractions. In a recent study from MD Anderson Cancer Center (67), no local recurrence was
observed when a BED higher than 100 Gy was used.
The limiting factor for dose prescribed is the dose
received by the bowel, which should be limited to
35 Gy per five fractions (or less than 7 Gy per
fraction). Compromise of the dose received by the
PTV might be necessary to achieve the DVC. Usually,
the dose is prescribed at an isodose covering 95%
of the PTV; however, if compromise of the
PTV coverage is required, at least 95% of the
iGTV should be covered by the prescription dose.

Isolated Lymph Nodes
Few published data address the issue of SBRT in
the context of isolated lymph node metastases
(Table 19.6) (47,68–73). Most of the data come from
studies reporting in patients with recurrent prostate
cancer. Most of the studies report the clinical target
volume (CTV) defined as the macroscopic and
microscopic diseases as defined on CT ± PET CT;

TABLE 19.5 Selected Studies of Adrenal Metastases
Study

No. of
Patients

Median Prescribed
Dose (Range)

No. of
Fractions

Median BED
(α/β= 10)

Prescription
Isodose

Chawla et al. (97)

30

40 Gy (16–50)

10 (5–16)

56

100%

Casamassima et al. (65)

48
8—single
fraction

36 Gy (21–54)
23 Gy

3
1

79.2
75.9

70% IDL

Holy et al. (66)

18

38 Gy (15–40)

5 (3–12)

65.62

100%

Scorsetti et al. (63)

34

32 Gy (20–45)

4 (4–18)

57.6

Isocenter

Ahmed et al. (44)

13

45 Gy (33.75–60)

5

85.5

NR

Desai et al. (64)

14
1—single
fraction

21–30 Gy
13 Gy

3–5
1

35.7–60
29.9

NR

Chance et al. (67)

43

60 Gy (40–70)

10 (4–15)

96

95%

IDL, isodose line; NR, not reported.

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 308

23/08/18 5:49 PM

19: SBRT FOR OLIGOMETASTATIC DISEASE

309

TABLE 19.6 Selected Studies of SBRT for Isolated Lymph Node Metastases—Reported Dose Fractionation
Study

No . of Patients

Median Prescribed
Dose/ Range

No . of
Fractions

Median BED (α/β = 10)

Kim et al. (68)

7

36 or 51 Gy

3

79.2 or 137.7

Jereczek-Fossa et al. (69)

34

30 Gy

4–5

38.4–52.5

Bignardi et al. (47)

19

45 Gy

6

78.75

Alongi et al. (70)

34

45 Gy

6 (daily)

78.75

Detti et al. (71)

30

24–36
Most commonly used:
30 Gy per three fractions and 36 Gy per
three fractions

1–3

79.2–81.6

Ponti et al. (72)

16

12–35

1–5

26.4–59.5

Ingrosso et al. (73)

40

35 or 40

5

59.5–72

SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

the margins added to define the PTV are usually
1 to 1.5 cm in the craniocaudal direction and 0.5 to
0.8 cm in other directions. The majority report use of
abdominal compression to reduce abdominal motion.
In addition, 3-hour fasting is recommended before
CT simulation and any treatment to reduce anatomical changes related to fullness of stomach and bowel.
Although there is variability in the dose fractionations reported, most of the studies prescribe the
dose to the isodose covering 95% of the PTV. It is
also agreed that if the dose constraints to OARs cannot be achieved, then the prescription dose should
cover 95% of the iGTV, whereas the PTV should be
covered by 80% of the prescription dose (Table 19.7).

DVC for Abdominal SBRT
Although significant variations exist in dose fractionations schedules, the majority of the teams
used similar DVCs, as seen in Table 19.7.

Multiple Lesions Treated Concurrently
Although same dose fractionations and DVCs as
mentioned earlier apply, the evaluation of dose
conformality should be done on each individual
lesion’s plan (if separate plans are used) or lesion
(if one plan encompasses both lesions). When separate plans are used, the analysis of dose–volume
histogram (DVH) parameters should be done on
the composite plan (plan sum of individual treatment plans). This allows evaluation of the dose
contribution of each plan to the OARs. In addition,
if targets are situated in close proximity, analysis of
composite plan indicates the dose contribution of
each plan to the final dose received by each PTV.
In some instances, for these closely positioned targets, creation of a single PTV might be necessary.
If situated in the same organ, we recommend use
of the same respiratory management for the treatment of all lesions (Figure 19.14).

TABLE 19.7 Commonly Used Dose–Volume Constraints for Abdominal SBRT
OAR

5 Fractions

10 Fractions

Liver

>700 mL to receive <15 Gy

>700 mL to receive <20 Gy
Mean D <20 Gy

Stomach/small bowel

Dmax <35 Gy (any point)
D0.5 mL <30 Gy
V36 Gy <3%
No hot spots within the stomach or bowel

Dmax <50 Gy

Kidney

V15 Gy <35% (combined)

V15 <20% ipsilateral kidney

Spinal cord

D0.1 mL <18 Gy

Dmax <30 Gy

Dmax, maximum dose; OAR, organ at risk; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 309

23/08/18 5:49 PM

310

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

FIGURE 19.14 IMRT-based SBRT plan for a patient with concurrent T7 and ninth-rib oligometastases: Prescription dose

for T7 was 18 Gy per three fractions to the whole vertebral body with simultaneous integrated boost delivering 24 Gy per
three fractions to the GTV + 2 mm (PTV T7-SIB). The ninth-rib metastasis was prescribed 24 Gy per three fractions. For both
lesions, the dose was prescribed at 98% isodose cloud. Dose conformality should be assessed on each separate plan,
whereas the OARs should be assessed on the composite plan (axial, frontal, sagittal planes, as well as using the composite
dose–volume histograms).

GTV, gross tumor volume; IMRT, intensity-modulated radiation therapy; OAR, organ at risk; PTV, planning target volume; SBRT, stereotactic
body radiation therapy.

Treatment of Oligorecurrences Following Previous SBRT
In patients treated for oligorecurrence following
previous SBRT:
●

Whenever possible, use similar setup and
respiratory management as for the initial
SBRT.

●

When available, use deformable registration (both structures and dose) to
register the two different plans for further analysis. If deformable registration
is not available, reproduce the previous
plan and create isodose “structures”
(50% of the dose prescribed earlier,
100%, or isodose levels significant for
a clinical end point of an OAR, e.g.,
myelitis, pneumonitis).

●

If the oligorecurrence is situated at a distance from the previously irradiated target, use the same dose fractionation and
dose–volume constrains as given earlier.

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 310

●

If the oligorecurrence is situated in
the vicinity of a previously irradiated
target:
● Assess eligibility for reirradiation—
tolerance of the OARs and risk of
toxicity should be the main criteria in
the treatment choice.
● Dose fractionations and DVC should
be adapted for the reirradiation
situation.
● The dose received earlier by the
OARs can be difficult to estimate,
especially in the presence of the respiratory motion and if the respiratory management is not the same.
● There is no widely accepted model to calculate the cumulative
dose received, especially in the
extreme hypofractionation or
when doses higher than 10 Gy
are used. However, the BED remains the most commonly used

23/08/18 5:49 PM

19: SBRT FOR OLIGOMETASTATIC DISEASE

model for the estimation of the
doses received (74):
BED2 =

D⫻[d ⫹( / )]
2⫹( / )

Regardless, if a 3D-CRT or IMRT technique
is used, it is recommended that at least seven
beams be used, avoiding beam entry through
an OAR.
1. 3D SBRT technique (Figure 19.15)
●

where D is the total dose, d is the dose per
fraction, and ␣/␤ = 3 for OAR and 10 for tumor

●

●

∑ Dmax course 1 ⫹ Dmax course 2

●

Data on reirradiation using SBRT
are relatively scarce, especially for
abdominal recurrences; Table 19.8
gives some indications about dose
fractionations and DVCs in the setting of reirradiation in abdominal
region.

●

Dose OAR =

Use at least seven noncoplanar, nonopposing fields.
Isocenter usually corresponds to the
intersection of the beams.
Static multileaf collimator (MLC)
field aperture and shape should correspond almost identically to the projection of PTV along the beam-eye view
(BEV).
Avoid entrance dose through OAR.

2. 3D dynamic conformal arc—SBRT technique
●
●

Field Arrangements and Dose Calculation
With high dose per fraction delivered, high conformity of the dose is required, with rapid dose falloff
outside the target. Therefore, the beam margins
used in SBRT are small, usually between 0 and
2 mm. In addition, multiple static (>6) beams or
arcing (>2) should be used to spread the dose and
avoid significant toxicities. RTOG protocols offer
a succinct and clear description of the planning
requirements for SBRT.

311

●

●

Use at least two noncoplanar, nonopposing arcing beams.
The isocenter usually corresponds to the
intersection of the beams.
Dynamic MLC field aperture and shape
should correspond almost identically
to the projection of PTV along the BEV,
which changes through the arc of the
beam.
Avoid entrance dose through OAR.

3. IMRT-based SBRT technique (Figure 19.15)
●

Use up to 10 coplanar/noncoplanar, nonopposing fields.

TABLE 19.8 Dose Fractionation and Dose–Volume Constraints Reported for Abdominal Reirradiation Using SBRT
Study

Dose

DVC

Lomiska et al. (98)
Dagagoglu et al. (99)

22.5 Gy per seven fractions (20–30 per
four to eight fractions)

Duodenum/stomach
Dmax <prescription dose

Wild et al. (100)

25 Gy per five fractions (20–27 Gy)

Duodenum:
● V
15 Gy <9 mL
● V
Gy <3 mL
20
● V
Gy <1 mL
33
Liver:
● D50% <12 Gy
Stomach
● D50% <12 Gy
● V
<1 mL
33
Cord:
● V Gy <1 mL
8

Abusaris et al. (74)

34 Gy per one to
10 fractions

Rectum/bowel: Cumulative maximum
dose <110 Gy3 <10 mL to receive >110 Gy
Bladder: Cumulative maximum dose =120 Gy3
<10 mL to receive >120 Gy

Dmax, maximum dose; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 311

23/08/18 5:49 PM

312

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

(A)

(B)

(C)
FIGURE 19.15 Beam arrangements for IMRT, 3D or RapidArc in patients with lung oligometastasis: Multiple,
nonopposing, noncoplanar beams are necessary to spread the radiation dose. Avoid entry through an OAR.

IMRT, intensity-modulated radiation therapy; OAR, organ at risk.

●

●
●

If the step and shoot technique is used,
limitation of the number of segments
per field is recommended (two to three
segments per field).
Inverse planning with dynamic MLC is
preferable.
Dose painting around the OARs is
possible.

4. Volumetric-modulated arc therapy (VMAT)`

technique (Figures 19.15 and 19.16)
● Two coplanar arcs
● Dynamic MLC
● Partial avoidance sectors

Dose Calculation
Although some teams report use of pencil beam
algorithm for dose calculations, it is now widely
accepted that as a minimum, superposition/
convolution with heterogeneity correction should

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 312

be used or ideally a particle transport equation
such as Monte Carlo–based dose calculations
or linear Boltzmann transport equations should
be used.

Dose Prescription
Dose prescription for SBRT is not standardized,
but usually the dose is prescribed at an isodose
covering 95% of the PTV, and normalized at a
point near the center of the PTV.
When 3D conformal technique is used,
because the dose buildup at the edges of the MLC
is small, the periphery of the PTV is colder than
the one usually seen in conventionally fractionated
radiation therapy. Usually, the PTV is covered by
the 60% to 90% isodose line. It is recommended
that the hot spots should be manipulated such
that they will be within the target volume, ideally
within the GTV and away from the OARs.

23/08/18 5:49 PM

19: SBRT FOR OLIGOMETASTATIC DISEASE
Dose distribution IMRT

3D

313

RapidArc

RapidArc

Dose volume histograms 3D vs IMRT based SBRT

FIGURE 19.16 Dose distribution and dose–volume histograms for IMRT versus 3D versus RapidArc in a patient with a
lung oligometastasis from a CRC primary.

CRC, colo-rectal cancer; IMRT, intensity-modulated radiation therapy.

When IMRT technique is used, the same principles apply—dose should be prescribed at the isodose cloud covering the PTV. Most of the studies
describing use of IMRT-based SBRT prescribed the
dose such that 95% of the PTV receives 95% of
the dose, whereas 99% of the PTV received at least
90% of the prescribed PTV dose. Although hot
spots are usually lower when IMRT is used, they
should be manipulated such that they are not near/
within an OAR. In some instances (e.g., abdominal
SBRT), underdosing of the PTV might be necessary to achieve the DVCs of a nearby OAR (e.g.,
small bowel). In these cases, the aim should be to
cover 95% of the PTV by 80% of the prescription
dose, whereas the iGTV/GTV should receive at
least the prescription dose.

3. Dose distribution

Plan Evaluation

4. DVCs: See Tables 19.3, 19.7, and 19.8

When analyzing the quality of an SBRT plan, the
following criteria should be achieved:
1. Normalization: Dose Description
2. Dose prescription to an isodose line: 95% of

the PTV should be covered by the prescription
isodose, and 99% of the PTV covered by 90%
of the prescription. This isodose should be at
least 60% of the dose at the center of the PTV.

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 313

●

●

Conformality (as per RTOG 0813
and 0915): Evaluation of conformality
(conformality index) is a well-accepted
approach to assess target coverage conformality and described in two RTOG
protocols.
Heterogeneity of the dose:
The hot spots (>105% of the prescribed
dose) should occur within the PTV.
● No hot spot should be allowed within
an OAR—part of the OAR adjacent
to the PTV will receive the prescription dose; however, the volume of the
OAR receiving 105% of the prescription dose should be minimized.
●

OUTCOMES OF SBRT IN PATIENTS
WITH OLIGOMETASTATIC DISEASE
Outcome and Toxicity
In patients with oligometastatic disease, local control of the oligometastatic sites might result in
long-term survival with limited toxicities. However,
most of the published studies revealed that patients

23/08/18 5:49 PM

314

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

usually progress after a median of 6 to 8 months from
SBRT (21,48,75). Most of the time, the first failure
develops in the same organ, outside the target (21).
A small percentage of patients develop recurrences
amenable to further local treatments. Although the
majority of the patients in currently published studies received prior chemotherapy, it is not known
whether the outcome of patients with SBRT at the
first diagnosis of oligometastatic disease (no chemotherapy) follows the same pattern. Currently, ongoing phase II to III trials address this question.
The reported local control in patients with oligometastatic disease is usually higher than 80% regardless of the treated site or primary. Lower local control
has been reported in patients with a colorectal cancer
primary; yet, it is still above 75%. For these patients,
dose escalation might be necessary; however, not
enough data are available in the literature to define
the dose threshold to be used in these patients.
The reported toxicity of SBRT is low, usually
below 10%, regardless of the site treated. Acute
toxicity is usually delayed (weeks after SBRT completion), mild and self-limited, whereas the chronic
toxicity usually develops more than 6 months from
SBRT and can be debilitated. The most common
reported side effect is fatigue.
1. In patients with lung oligometastasis, SBRT

is associated with a low risk of pulmonary
toxicity, especially for small-volume disease.
However, caution should be used when treating centrally located tumors, with recommended dose per fraction less than 20 Gy (52).
SBRT related mortality is low, seen mostly
in patients with central lung tumors treated
either with a 20 Gy × 3 fraction regimen or
using daily treatments, from most of the data
from the primary NSCLC experience. Significant pulmonary and bronchial toxicity can
include bronchial stenosis, fistula and hemorrhage, and pulmonary fibrosis and atelectasis,
which can develop 6 to 20 months post-SBRT
although the DVCs are not well defined,
toxicity has been seen mostly in patients receiving greater than 34 Gy per four fractions
to the proximal bronchial tree or greater than
37.5 Gy per five fractions on the trachea (76).
Chest wall/rib pain toxicity can also occur as
a late complication, and is usually mild and
self-limited. Although many DVC parameters have been described for chest wall/rib
toxicity risks, a V30 Gy less than 30 mL is a
commonly accepted constraint. Esophagitis

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 314

is uncommon with esophageal DVCs of maximal dose less than 27 Gy per three fractions
or less than 9 Gy per fraction is achieved.
Brachial plexopathy (neuropathic pain developing months after the treatment, can be
associated with motor deficits in severe cases) has been described in patients receiving
SBRT for apical tumors, when dose received
by this structure was more than 26 Gy per
three to four fractions (77).
2. In patients with abdominal/pelvic oligore-

currences: In patients receiving liver SBRT,
the incidence of radiation induced liver disease is rare if at least 700 mL normal liver are
spared (V15 Gy < 700 mL), and if liver function pre-SBRT is normal (Child-Pugh class
A–B). Nausea and vomiting can be prevented
by the use of antiemetics before treatment.
Caution should be used for tumors situated in the vicinity of the stomach/duodenum
and small bowel, as dose tolerance for these
organs is 35 Gy per five fractions or 7 Gy
per fraction. Radiation-induced ulceration/
necrosis has been described when these DVCs
are not respected.

Follow-Up After SBRT
There are no guidelines regarding the follow-up
and type of imaging to be used. Furthermore, the
changes after SBRT are poorly understood; further refinement and standardization are required.
On the basis of follow-up schedules commonly
reported in published studies, we recommend clinical follow-up every 3 months for the first 1 to 2 years,
every 6 months for the following 3 years, and yearly
thereafter. The most commonly used imaging
modality is CT scanning following the same schedule as the clinical evaluation. On CT, the response
of the target lesion(s) and status of extratarget
disease (if any) are evaluated. The Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) should
be used when assessing the response. Figure 19.17
depicts an example of response to SBRT as seen
on CT TAP performed 6 months posttreatment.
PET-CT is generally performed at the time of
suspected progression, especially in patients for
whom it is unclear whether changes on CT are
related to radiation-induced changes or progression. Although the assessment of metabolic
response is important, and shown to be correlated with the outcome, the timing of PET-CT
post-SBRT is not clearly defined. A study from

23/08/18 5:49 PM

19: SBRT FOR OLIGOMETASTATIC DISEASE

University of Pittsburgh (78) showed, however,
that specificity of PET-CT increases at 100% if
the time from SBRT is longer than 5 months. If
PET-CT is used in response assessment, positron
emission tomography response criteria in solid
tumors (PERCIST) criteria should be applied.
In patients with liver oligometastases, MRI liver
and CT triphase should be used to assess response post-SBRT. Still, the criteria for response
assessment are not standardized. Changes on
imaging post-SBRT are poorly defined and
reading by a radiologist with expertise in liver
pathology is recommended.

Quality of Life (QOL) After SBRT
Although SBRT achieves high rates of local control with very limited toxicity, the validation of
patient-reported QOL outcomes was sought. This
is extremely important especially in patients with
metastatic and oligometastatic disease: Most of
the reported series included patients who received
several lines of treatments, including chemo or
targeted therapies, and might present with poorer
performance status if they present a symptomatic
oligorecurrence.
Most of the data on QOL after SBRT come
from early stage lung cancer (79–83) and prostate
cancer (84–87) literature, showing little significant change of the health-related QOL parameters

315

after SBRT, and reinforcing the appropriateness
of this treatment modality in patients with inoperable lung cancers. In 2015, Louie et al. reported
the patient-reported outcomes following SBRT or
surgery for stage I lung cancer (88). Three validated
EORTC QOL tools were used. The only factor significantly worse for surgical patients was the global
health status (in univariate analysis). Although
the sample size was small, the follow-up was long
(median 42 months), and the results are consistent
with the data reported earlier in patients undergoing SBRT or surgery. A recent systemic review
(79) of nine studies reporting QOL after SBRT for
early stage lung cancer confirmed no significant
change in the QOL scores, with deterioration of
fatigue and dyspnea following SBRT reported in
only two studies.
In a large prospective study from the University
of Toronto (89), including 222 patients treated
by SBRT for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC),
liver metastases, or intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, temporary worsening of fatigue and appetite loss was observed, with no significant impact
on the overall QOL of these patients. In addition,
the authors report no difference in the baseline
scores for QOL between patients with HCC, liver
metastases, or intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.
Higher baseline scores in both EORTC QLQ-C30
and FACT-Hep were associated with improved
survival.

6 months after completion of SBRT

FIGURE 19.17 Dose distribution for a patient treated for three concurrent lung oligometastases from a CRC primary. The patient received 50 Gy in 5 fraction on each lesion. Dose of prescribed at 95% IDL for the right tumors, and
at 100% IDL for the left one. Treatment was delivered using Varian Trilogy Tx with dynamic HD-MLC and 1,000 MU/min.
Six months after completion of SBRT, CT thorax reveals radiation changes only (lower three panels).
CRC, colo-rectal cancer; IDL, isodose line; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 315

23/08/18 5:49 PM

316

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

SUMMARY OF DOSE CONSTRAINTS
(TABLE 19.9)
TABLE 19.9 Dose Constraints for Oligometastasis Using SBRT
Nonosseous Structures

30, 40, 50 Gy in One, Three, Five Fractions, Respectively

Osseous Structures

20, 30, 35 Gy in One, Three, Five Fractions, Respectively

Lung

18, 12, 10 Gy in Three, Four, Five Fractions, Respectively

Critical Structures

Suggested Dose Limits

Liver

≥700 mL ≤15 Gy

Skin

Dmax 32 Gy

Esophagus

Dmax 27 Gy

Heart

Dmax 30 Gy

Bronchus

Dmax 30 Gy

Chest wall

V 30 ≤70 mL

Kidney (bilateral)

V 15 Gy ≤200 mL

Kidney (ipsilateral)

V 12.3 Gy ≤130 mL

Spinal cord (canal)

Dmax <15 Gy (three fractions)

Trachea/bronchus

Dmax 30 Gy (three fractions)

Stomach

Dmax 30 Gy (three fractions)

Dmax, maximum dose; SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

REFERENCES
1. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell.
2000;100:57-70. PubMed PMID: 10647931.
2. Fidler IJ. The pathogenesis of cancer metastasis: the ‘seed and
soil’ hypothesis revisited. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003;3:453-458.
doi:10.1038/nrc1098
3. Correa RJ, Salama JK, Milano MT, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy for oligometastasis: opportunities for biology
to guide clinical management. Cancer J. 2016;22:247-256.
doi:10.1097/PPO.0000000000000202
4. Fisher B. From Halsted to prevention and beyond: advances in
the management of breast cancer during the twentieth century.
Eur J Cancer. 1999;35:1963-1973. PubMed PMID: 10711239.
5. Hellman S. Karnofsky Memorial Lecture. Natural history
of small breast cancers. J Clin Oncol. 1994;12:2229-2234.
doi:10.1200/JCO.1994.12.10.2229
6. Fisher B. Laboratory and clinical research in breast cancer: a
personal adventure: the David A. Karnofsky memorial lecture.
Cancer Res. 1980;40:3863-3874. PubMed PMID: 7008932.
7. Fisher B, Redmond C, Fisher ER. The contribution of recent
NSABP clinical trials of primary breast cancer therapy to an
understanding of tumor biology: an overview of findings. Cancer. 1980;46:1009-1025. PubMed PMID: 6994873.
8. Hellman S, Weichselbaum RR. Oligometastases. J Clin Oncol.
1995;13:8-10. doi:10.1200/JCO.1995.13.1.8
9. Hellman S. Evolving paradigms and perceptions of cancer. Nat
Clin Pract Oncol. 2005;2:618-624. doi:10.1038/ncponc0377

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 316

10. Rosenberg SA. Surgical treatment of metastatic cancer.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 1987.
11. Rubin P, Green J. Solitary metastases. Springfield, IL: C.C.
Thomas; 1968.
12. Rubin P. Comment: are metastases curable? JAMA. 1968;
204:612-613. PubMed PMID: 5694489.
13. Peters LJ, Milas L, Fletcher GH. The role of radiation therapy
in the curative treatment of metastatic disease. Symp Fundam
Cancer Res. 1983;36:411-420. PubMed PMID: 6382517.
14. Milano MT, Constine LS, Okunieff P. Normal tissue toxicity
after small field hypofractionated stereotactic body radiation.
Radiat Oncol. 2008;3:36. doi:10.1186/1748-717X-3-36
15. Patel PR, Yoo DS, Niibe Y, et al. A call for the aggressive treatment
of oligometastatic and oligo-recurrent non-small cell lung cancer. Pulm Med. 2012;2012:480961. doi:10.1155/2012/480961
16. Ahmed KA, Fulp WJ, Berglund AE, et al. Differences between
colon cancer primaries and metastases using a molecular
assay for tumor radiation sensitivity suggest implications for
potential oligometastatic SBRT patient selection. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2015;92(4):837-842. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2015.01.036
17. Ahmed KA, Berglund AE, Welsh EA, et al. Differences in
the radiosensitivity index (RSI) between lung metastases
based upon primary histology. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2016;96:S68. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2016.06.173
18. Uppal A, Ferguson MK, Posner MC, et al. Towards a molecular basis of oligometastatic disease: potential role of microRNAs. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2014;31:735-748. doi:10.1007/
s10585-014-9664-3

23/08/18 5:49 PM

19: SBRT FOR OLIGOMETASTATIC DISEASE
19. Lussier YA, Xing HR, Salama JK, et al. MicroRNA expression
characterizes oligometastasis(es). PloS One. 2011;6:e28650.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0028650
20. Lussier YA, Khodarev NN, Regan K, et al. Oligo- and polymetastatic progression in lung metastasis(es) patients is associated with specific microRNAs. PloS One. 2012;7:e50141.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0050141
21. Milano MT, Katz AW, Zhang H, et al. Oligometastases treated
with stereotactic body radiotherapy: long-term follow-up of
prospective study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;83:
878-886. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.08.036
22. Salama JK, Hasselle MD, Chmura SJ, et al. Stereotactic
body radiotherapy for multisite extracranial oligometastases:
final report of a dose escalation trial in patients with 1 to
5 sites of metastatic disease. Cancer. 2012;118:2962-2970.
doi:10.1002/cncr.26611
23. Rieber J, Streblow J, Uhlmann L, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for medically inoperable lung metastases: a
pooled analysis of the German working group “stereotactic
radiotherapy”. Lung Cancer. 2016;97:51-58. doi:10.1016/
j.lungcan.2016.04.012
24. Ashworth AB, Senan S, Palma DA, et al. An individual patient
data metaanalysis of outcomes and prognostic factors after
treatment of oligometastatic non-small-cell lung cancer. Clin
Lung Cancer. 2014;15:346-355. doi:10.1016/j.cllc.2014.04.003
25. Palma DA, Louie AV, Rodrigues GB. New strategies in stereotactic radiotherapy for oligometastases. Clin Cancer Res.
2015;21:5198-5204. doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-0822
26. McCammon R, Schefter TE, Gaspar LE, et al. Observation
of a dose-control relationship for lung and liver tumors after
stereotactic body radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2009;73:112-118. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.03.062
27. Glatstein E. The omega on alpha and beta. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys. 2011;81:319-320. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.01.011
28. Glatstein E. Hypofractionation, long-term effects, and the
alpha/beta ratio. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008;72:
11-12. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.07.006
29. Shuryak I, Carlson DJ, Brown JM, et al. High-dose and fractionation effects in stereotactic radiation therapy: analysis
of tumor control data from 2965 patients. Radiother Oncol.
2015;115:327-334. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2015.05.013
30. Park C, Papiez L, Zhang S, et al. Universal survival
curve and single fraction equivalent dose: useful tools
in understanding potency of ablative radiotherapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008;70:847-852. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2007.10.059
31. Potters L, Kavanagh B, Galvin JM, et al. American Society for
Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology (ASTRO) and American
College of Radiology (ACR) practice guideline for the performance of stereotactic body radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys. 2010;76:326-332. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.09.042
32. Timmerman RD. An overview of hypofractionation and
introduction to this issue of seminars in radiation oncology. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2008;18:215-222. doi:10.1016/
j.semradonc.2008.04.001
33. Grimm J, LaCouture T, Croce R, et al. Dose tolerance limits
and dose volume histogram evaluation for stereotactic body
radiotherapy. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2011;12:3368. PubMed
PMID: 21587185.
34. Benedict SH, Yenice KM, Followill D, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy: the report of AAPM Task Group 101. Med
Phys. 2010;37:4078-4101. doi:10.1118/1.3438081
35. Siegel R, Desantis C, Jemal A. Colorectal cancer statistics, 2014.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2014;64:104-117. doi:10.3322/caac.21220
36. Welter S, Jacobs J, Krbek T, et al. Long-term survival after
repeated resection of pulmonary metastases from colorectal

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 317

317

cancer. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;84:203-210. doi:10.1016/
j.athoracsur.2007.03.028
37. Salah S, Watanabe K, Park JS, et al. Repeated resection
of colorectal cancer pulmonary oligometastases: pooled
analysis and prognostic assessment. Ann Surg Oncol.
2013;20:1955-1961. doi:10.1245/s10434-012-2860-y
38. Hirosawa T, Itabashi M, Ohnuki T, et al. Prognostic factors in
patients undergoing complete resection of pulmonary metastases of colorectal cancer: a multi-institutional cumulative
follow-up study. Surg Today. 2013;43:494-499. doi:10.1007/
s00595-012-0373-8
39. Nozawa H, Sunami E, Nakajima J, et al. Synchronous and
metachronous lung metastases in patients with colorectal
cancer: a 20-year monocentric experience. Exp Ther Med.
2012;3:449-456. doi:10.3892/etm.2011.443
40. Gonzalez M, Gervaz P. Risk factors for survival after lung
metastasectomy in colorectal cancer patients: systematic
review and meta-analysis. Future Oncol. 2015;11:31-33.
doi:10.2217/fon.14.259
41. Ahmed KA, Barney BM, Davis BJ, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy in the treatment of oligometastatic prostate
cancer. Front Oncol. 2013;2:215. doi:10.3389/fonc.2012.00215
42. Aitken KL, Hawkins MA. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for
liver metastases. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 2015;27:307-315.
doi:10.1016/j.clon.2015.01.032
43. Alongi F, Arcangeli S, Filippi AR, et al. Review and uses of stereotactic body radiation therapy for oligometastases. Oncologist.
2012;17:1100-1107. doi:10.1634/theoncologist.2012-0092
44. Ahmed KA, Barney BM, Macdonald OK, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy in the treatment of adrenal metastases. Am J Clin Oncol. 2013;36:509-513. doi:10.1097/
COC.0b013e3182569189
45. Anand AK, Punnakal AU, Chaudhoory AR, et al. Stereotactic
body radiation therapy (SBRT) for lung and liver tumours.
J Indian Med. Assoc. 2012;110:462-464. PubMed PMID:
23520671.
46. Andratschke NH, Nieder C, Heppt F, et al. Stereotactic radiation therapy for liver metastases: factors affecting local control and survival. Radiat Oncol. 2015;10:69. doi:10.1186/
s13014-015-0369-9
47. Bignardi M, Navarria P, Mancosu P, et al. Clinical outcome
of hypofractionated stereotactic radiotherapy for abdominal lymph node metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2011;81:831-838. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.05.032
48. Milano MT, Katz AW, Okunieff P. Patterns of recurrence
after curative-intent radiation for oligometastases confined to
one organ. Am J Clin Oncol. 2010;33:157-163. doi:10.1097/
COC.0b013e3181979238
49. Keall PJ, Mageras GS, Balter JM, et al. The management of respiratory motion in radiation oncology report of AAPM Task Group
76. Med Phys. 2006;33:3874-3900. doi:10.1118/1.2349696
50. Kong FM, Ritter T, Quint DJ, et al. Consideration of dose limits for organs at risk of thoracic radiotherapy: atlas for lung,
proximal bronchial tree, esophagus, spinal cord, ribs, and
brachial plexus. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;81:14421457. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.07.1977
51. Anon. NCCN Guidelines 2016. 2018. Available at: https://www
.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/nscl.pdf version 5.
Accessed June 27, 2018.
52. Timmerman R, McGarry R, Yiannoutsos C, et al. Excessive
toxicity when treating central tumors in a phase II study of
stereotactic body radiation therapy for medically inoperable
early-stage lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:4833-4839.
doi:10.1200/JCO.2006.07.5937
53. Bezjak A, Paulus R, Gaspar LE, et al. Efficacy and toxicity
analysis of NRG oncology/RTOG 0813 trial of stereotactic

23/08/18 5:49 PM

318

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

body radiation therapy (SBRT) for centrally located nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2016;96:S8. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2016.06.035
54. Scorsetti M, Clerici E, Comito T. Stereotactic body radiation therapy for liver metastases. J Gastrointest Oncol.
2014;5:190-197. doi:10.3978/j.issn.2078-6891.2014.039
55. Rule W, Timmerman R, Tong L, et al. Phase I dose-escalation
study of stereotactic body radiotherapy in patients with hepatic
metastases. Ann Surg Oncol. 2011;18:1081-1087. doi:10.1245/
s10434-010-1405-5
56. Goodman KA, Wiegner EA, Maturen KE, et al. Doseescalation study of single-fraction stereotactic body radiotherapy for liver malignancies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2010;78:486-493. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.08.020
57. Lee MT, Kim JJ, Dinniwell R, et al. Phase I study of individualized stereotactic body radiotherapy of liver metastases. J Clin
Oncol. 2009;27:1585-1591. doi:10.1200/JCO.2008.20.0600
58. Rusthoven KE, Kavanagh BD, Cardenes H, et al. Multiinstitutional phase I/II trial of stereotactic body radiation therapy for liver metastases. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:1572-1578.
doi:10.1200/JCO.2008.19.6329
59. Hoyer M, Roed H, Traberg Hansen A, et al. Phase II study on
stereotactic body radiotherapy of colorectal metastases. Acta
Oncol. 2006;45:823-830. doi:10.1080/02841860600904854
60. Chang DT, Swaminath A, Kozak M, et al. Stereotactic body
radiotherapy for colorectal liver metastases: a pooled analysis.
Cancer. 2011;117:4060-4069. doi:10.1002/cncr.25997
61. Park J, Chen YJ, Lu WP, et al. The evolution of liver-directed
treatments for hepatic colorectal metastases. Oncology (Williston
Park). 2014;28(11):991-1003. PubMed PMID: 25403632.
62. Rudra S, Malik R, Ranck MC, et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy for curative treatment of adrenal metastases.
Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2013;12:217-224. doi:10.7785/
tcrt.2012.500320
63. Scorsetti M, Alongi F, Filippi AR, et al. Long-term local control achieved after hypofractionated stereotactic body radiotherapy for adrenal gland metastases: a retrospective analysis
of 34 patients. Acta Oncol. 2012;51:618-623. doi:10.3109/
0284186X.2011.652738
64. Desai A, Rai H, Haas J, et al. A retrospective review of
cyberknife stereotactic body radiotherapy for adrenal tumors
(primary and metastatic): Winthrop University Hospital experience. Front Oncol. 2015;5:185. doi:10.3389/fonc.2015.00185
65. Casamassima F, Livi L, Masciullo S, et al. Stereotactic radiotherapy for adrenal gland metastases: University of Florence
experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;82:919-923.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.11.060
66. Holy R, Piroth M, Pinkawa M, et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) for treatment of adrenal gland metastases from non-small cell lung cancer. Strahlenther Onkol.
2011;187:245-251. doi:10.1007/s00066-011-2192-z
67. Chance WW, Nguyen QN, Mehran R, et al. Stereotactic
ablative radiotherapy for adrenal gland metastases: factors
influencing outcomes, patterns of failure, and dosimetric thresholds for toxicity. Pract Radiat Oncol. 2017;7(3):
e195-e203. doi:10.1016/j.prro.2016.09.005
68. Kim MS, Cho CK, Yang KM, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for isolated paraaortic lymph node recurrence from
colorectal cancer. World J Gastroenterol. 2009;15:6091-6095.
PubMed PMID: 20027683.
69. Jereczek-Fossa BA, Piperno G, Ronchi S, et al. Linac-based
stereotactic body radiotherapy for oligometastatic patients with
single abdominal lymph node recurrent cancer. Am J Clin Oncol.
2014;37:227-233. doi:10.1097/COC.0b013e3182610878
70. Alongi F, Fogliata A, Clerici E, et al. Volumetric modulated arc
therapy with flattening filter free beams for isolated abdominal/

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 318

pelvic lymph nodes: report of dosimetric and early clinical
results in oligometastatic patients. Radiat Oncol. 2012;7:204.
doi:10.1186/1748-717X-7-204
71. Detti B, Bonomo P, Masi L, et al. Stereotactic radiotherapy
for isolated nodal recurrence of prostate cancer. World J Urol.
2015;33:1197-1203. doi:10.1007/s00345-014-1427-x
72. Ponti E, Ingrosso G, Carosi A, et al. Salvage stereotactic
body radiotherapy for patients with prostate cancer with
isolated lymph node metastasis: a single-center experience.
Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2015;13:e279-e284. doi:10.1016/
j.clgc.2014.12.014
73. Ingrosso G, Trippa F, Maranzano E, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy in oligometastatic prostate cancer patients with isolated
lymph nodes involvement: a two-institution experience. World
J Urol. 2017;35(1):45-49. doi:10.1007/s00345-016-1860-0
74. Abusaris H, Hoogeman M, Nuyttens JJ. Re-irradiation: outcome, cumulative dose and toxicity in patients retreated with
stereotactic radiotherapy in the abdominal or pelvic region.
Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2012;11:591-597. doi:10.7785/
tcrt.2012.500261
75. Binkley MS, Trakul N, Jacobs LR, et al. Colorectal histology is
associated with an increased risk of local failure in lung metastases treated with stereotactic ablative radiation therapy. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015;92:1044-1052. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2015.04.004
76. Karlsson K, Nyman J, Baumann P, et al. Retrospective cohort
study of bronchial doses and radiation-induced atelectasis after stereotactic body radiation therapy of lung tumors
located close to the bronchial tree. Int J Radiat Oncol.
2013;87:590-595. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.06.2055
77. Forquer JA, Fakiris AJ, Timmerman RD, et al. Brachial plexopathy from stereotactic body radiotherapy in early-stage
NSCLC: dose-limiting toxicity in apical tumor sites. Radiother
Oncol. 2009;93:408-413. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2009.04.018
78. Andrade RS, Heron DE, Degirmenci B, et al. Posttreatment
assessment of response using FDG-PET/CT for patients
treated with definitive radiation therapy for head and neck
cancers. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2006;65:1315-1322.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2006.03.015
79. Chen H, Louie AV, Boldt RG, et al. Quality of life after stereotactic ablative radiotherapy for early-stage lung cancer:
a systematic review. Clin Lung Cancer. 2016;17:e141-e149.
doi:10.1016/j.cllc.2015.12.009
80. Ubels RJ, Mokhles S, Andrinopoulou ER, et al. Quality of
life during 5 years after stereotactic radiotherapy in stage
I non-small cell lung cancer. Radiat Oncol. 2015;10:98.
doi:10.1186/s13014-015-0405-9
81. Lagerwaard FJ, Verstegen NE, Haasbeek CJ, et al. Outcomes of stereotactic ablative radiotherapy in patients with
potentially operable stage I non-small cell lung cancer. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;83:348-353. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2011.06.2003
82. Videtic GM, Reddy CA, Sorenson L. A prospective study of
quality of life including fatigue and pulmonary function after
stereotactic body radiotherapy for medically inoperable earlystage lung cancer. Support Care Cancer. 2013;21:211-218.
doi:10.1007/s00520-012-1513-9
83. van der Voort van , Prévost JB, van der Holt B , et al. Quality
of life after stereotactic radiotherapy for stage I non-small-cell
lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;77:31-37.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.04.080
84. Rucinska M, Kieszkowska-Grudny A, Nawrocki S. SHARP
hypofractionated stereotactic radiotherapy is well tolerated
in prostate cancer: toxicity and quality of life assessment.
Strahlenther Onkol. 2016;192:449-457. doi:10.1007/s00066016-0971-2

23/08/18 5:49 PM

19: SBRT FOR OLIGOMETASTATIC DISEASE
85. Johnson SB, Soulos PR, Shafman TD, et al. Patient-reported
quality of life after stereotactic body radiation therapy versus
moderate hypofractionation for clinically localized prostate
cancer. Radiother Oncol. 2016;121:294-298. doi:10.1016/
j.radonc.2016.10.013
86. Azzam G, Lanciano R, Arrigo S, et al. SBRT: an opportunity
to improve quality of life for oligometastatic prostate cancer.
Front Oncol. 2015;5:101. doi:10.3389/fonc.2015.00101
87. Dess RT, Jackson WC, Suy S, et al. Predictors of multidomain
decline in health-related quality of life after stereotactic
body radiation therapy (SBRT) for prostate cancer. Cancer.
2017;123(9):1635-1642. doi:10.1002/cncr.30519
88. Louie AV, van Werkhoven E, Chen H, et al. Patient reported
outcomes following stereotactic ablative radiotherapy or
surgery for stage IA non-small-cell lung cancer: results from
the ROSEL multicenter randomized trial. Radiother Oncol.
2015;117:44-48. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2015.08.011
89. Klein J, Dawson LA, Jiang H, et al. Prospective longitudinal
assessment of quality of life for liver cancer patients treated
with stereotactic body radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys. 2015;93:16-25. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.04.016
90. Blomgren H, Lax I, Näslund I, et al. Stereotactic high dose
fraction radiation therapy of extracranial tumors using an
accelerator. Clinical experience of the first thirty-one patients.
Acta Oncol. 1995;34:861-870. PubMed PMID: 7576756.
91. Herfarth KK, Debus J, Wannenmacher M. Stereotactic radiation therapy of liver metastases: update of the initial phase-I/
II trial. Front Radiat Ther Oncol. 2004;38:100-105. PubMed
PMID: 15458194.
92. Ambrosino G, Polistina F, Costantin G, et al. Image-guided
robotic stereotactic radiosurgery for unresectable liver metastases: preliminary results. Anticancer Res. 2009;29:33813384. PubMed PMID: 19661360.
93. Goodman BD, Mannina EM, Althouse SK, et al. Long-term
safety and efficacy of stereotactic body radiation therapy for
hepatic oligometastases. Pract Radiat Oncol. 2016;6:86-95.
doi:10.1016/j.prro.2015.10.011

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 319

319

94. Scorsetti M, Arcangeli S, Tozzi A, et al. Is stereotactic body
radiation therapy an attractive option for unresectable liver
metastases? A preliminary report from a phase 2 trial. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013;86:336-342. doi:10.1016/j.
ijrobp.2012.12.021
95. Mahadevan A, Blanck O, Lanciano R, et al. Stereotactic
Body Radiotherapy (SBRT) for liver metastasis - clinical outcomes from the international multi-institutional RSSearch®
Patient Registry. Radiat Oncol. 2018;13:26. doi:10.1186/
s13014-018-0969-2
96. Andratschke N, Alheid H, Allgäuer M, et al. The SBRT
database initiative of the German Society for Radiation
Oncology (DEGRO): patterns of care and outcome analysis
of stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for liver oligometastases in 474 patients with 623 metastases. BMC Cancer.
2018;18:283. doi:10.1186/s12885-018-4191-2
97. Chawla S, Chen Y, Katz AW, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for treatment of adrenal metastases. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2009;75:71-75. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.
10.079
98. Lominska CE, Unger K, Nasr NM, et al. Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for reirradiation of localized adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Radiat Oncol. 2012;7:74. doi:10.
1186/1748-717X-7-74
99. Dagoglu N, Nedea E, Poylin V, et al. Post operative stereotactic radiosurgery for positive or close margins after
preoperative chemoradiation and surgery for rectal cancer. J Gastrointest Oncol. 2016;7:315-320. doi:10.21037/
jgo.2015.11.03
100. Wild AT, Hiniker SM, Chang DT, et al. Re-irradiation with
stereotactic body radiation therapy as a novel treatment
option for isolated local recurrence of pancreatic cancer
after multimodality therapy: experience from two institutions. J. Gastrointest Oncol. 2013;4:343-351. doi:10.3978/
j.issn.2078-6891.2013.044

23/08/18 5:49 PM

Heron_68566_PTR_19_293-320_08-23-18.indd 320

23/08/18 5:49 PM

C H A P T E R

20

Immunoradiosurgery:
The Convergence of SBRT
and the Immune Response
Uzoma K. Iheagwara, David A. Clump, and Dwight E. Heron

Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) provides an opportunity for harnessing technological
advancements (i.e., physical and geometric) to
improve upon tumor control by delivering ablative
doses of highly conformal ionizing radiation in a
reproducible manner to a limited target volume.
It has proven effective in the treatment of patients
with a wide spectrum of malignancies and is now
integrated into all phases of the oncologic treatment paradigm including definitive therapy and
palliation, as well as into the curative treatment
of patients with a limited burden of metastatic
or oligometastatic disease (1–3). It is in this setting that the least volume of data exists but the
greatest opportunity for not only the expansion of
indications for SBRT but also an increased understanding of the radiobiology of SBRT. Therefore,
opportunity exists to exploit and integrate SBRY
in combination with novel systemic therapies to
offer potentially curative therapy and an expanded
approach with the integration of immune therapies, especially the introduction of modulators of
the checkpoint signaling cascade (4,5).
Immunotherapy, although used for over 30 years
in diseases such as malignant melanoma, has
renewed clinical interest with introduction and
subsequent Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
approval of novel checkpoint inhibitors into the

management of a variety of malignancies including
non–small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) (6). Despite
the optimism surrounding immune-checkpoint
blockade, the vast majority of patients will eventually progress secondary to immune exhaustion and
succumb to their disease (7–10). The mechanism
of immune escape and strategies to circumvent this
process are not well understood at the moment
and are being explored but one option includes the
use of radiation therapy (RT). Ionizing radiation
and its effects on DNA damage are a proposed
mechanism in which the immune response is
manipulated by increasing tumor antigen release,
activating innate immunity, increasing T-cell infiltration, and modifying the tumor microenvironment (11,12). The manipulation of the immune
response with ionizing radiation, especially as a
minimally-invasive technique, along with the use
of novel imaging agents is of great interest when
combining SBRT and immunotherapies as treatments could be modified and optimized based on
immune response.

CLINICAL RATIONALE
The immune system is made up of both innate
and adaptive immune cells. Both branches play
an integral role in forming and shaping the tumor
321

Heron_68566_PTR_20_321-330_08-23-18.indd 321

23/08/18 4:47 PM

322

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

microenvironment. When a cancer cell expresses
or releases antigens, they are commonly released
into the lymphatics. These tumor-associated
antigens (TAAs) are then taken up by antigenpresenting cells (APCs) such as dendritic cells
(DCs) (Figure 20.1). The antigens are processed by
antigen-processing machinery and placed on major
histocompatibility complex I and complex II (MHC-I
and MHC-II) molecules (13). These peptide–MHC
complexes are then available for antigen presentation: MHC-I to CD8+ T lymphocytes and MHC-II
to CD4+ T lymphocytes. Secondary signaling
through costimulatory molecule interactions such
as CD80/86 with CD28 as well as tertiary cytokine signals is used for optimal effector cell activity. Once activated, CD8+ T lymphocytes become
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) and hone to the
tumor to release cytolytic molecules such as granzyme B and perforin for cell kill. CTL activity
is enhanced by CD4+ T-helper lymphocyte differentiation to T-helper 1 (Th1) phenotype-releasing

cytokines such as interferon-␥ (IFN-␥) to create a
proimmunogenic environment. Throughout this
activation and effector process, immune memory
toward the antigen is formed. Normally the immune
system is able to survey the body and aid as an
extrinsic mechanism to eliminate cancer cells. This
is otherwise known as “immunosurveillance.” The
three hallmarks or stages of immunosurveillance
are known as the 3Es: Elimination, Equilibrium,
and Escape (Figure 20.2) (14,15). The mechanism
of cell-killing mentioned earlier is the elimination
phase. Within the equilibrium phase, there is homeostasis of immune cells recognizing and keeping
cancer cells at bay, whereas the current cancer cells
undergo intrinsic changes to prevent detection and
outright elimination. However, once a cancer develops subsequent mutation or the microenvironment
becomes one of immune suppression, cancer cells
can “escape” immune control and continue to grow
and become clinically apparent. These intrinsic
changes are the target of modern immune therapies

Systemic/local immune enhancement
• Vaccine
• Checkpoint inhibitors
• Anti-CTLA-4
• Anti-PD-L1
• Anti-PD-1
• Anti-TIM3
• Co-stimulatory agonists
• Anti-OX40
• Anti-CD27
• Anti-4-1BB
• Anti-CD40
• Anti-GITR
• Exogenous cytokines
• IL-2
• IL-15
• IL-7
• IL-21
• IL-12
• GM-CSF

SBRT
≥ 5 Gy

Damage of tumorsupporting stroma

• Cell death
• Necrosis

Radiation

Distant tumor

TAA-specific
T cells

Primary tumor

Vascular
normalization

Immunogenic
modulation

Immune
induction

• Apoptotic bodies
• Debris
• Danger signals
• DAMPs
• TAAs
• Cytokines

Dendritic cell
cross-presentation
of TAAs

Immunotherapy

Phenotype changes
↑ MHC
↑ TAA
↑ T-cell killing

Lymph node

Polyclonal
antigen-specific
T cells

FIGURE 20.1 SBRT targets the primary tumor and ultimately causes cell death. Tumor antigens are released into circulation and taken up by dendritic cells. Dendritic cells traffic back to lymph nodes and activate antigen specific T cells. Immunotherapeutic agents can also be used to enhance immune responses in conjunction with SBRT.

SBRT, stereotactic body radiation therapy.

Heron_68566_PTR_20_321-330_08-23-18.indd 322

23/08/18 4:47 PM

20: IMMUNORADIOSURGERY: THE CONVERGENCE OF SBRT AND THE IMMUNE RESPONSE

Transformed
cells

323

Intrinsic tumor suppression
“Danger”
(senescence, repair,
signals Tumor NKR
Normal
and/or apoptosis)
antigens ligands
tissue
Carcinogens
Radiation
Viral infections
Chronic inflammation
Inherited genetic mutations

Elimination
CD8+
T cell

CD8+
T cell

Escape

Equilibrium
IL-12

NKT
cell

NK

CD8+
T cell

CD4+
T cell

CD8+
T cell

IFN-γ

CD4+
T cell
CD4+
T cell

NK

IL-6, IL-10
PD-L1 Galectin-1

Mφ

TGF-β
IDO

Antigen loss
MHC loss

Mφ

γδ T
cell

DC
IFN-γ
IFN-α/β

Tumor dormancy
and editing

Innate and IL-12
TNF
adaptive
immunity NKG2D

CD8+
T cell

CTLA-4
PD-1

TRAIL
Perforin

CD8+
MDSC
T cell

CTLA-4
PD-1
Treg

Tumor growth
promotion

Normal cell
Highly immunogenic
transformed cell

Extrinsic tumor
suppression

Poorly immunogenic
and immunoevasive
transformed cells

Cancer Immunoediting

FIGURE 20.2 The cancer immunoediting concept. The 3 E’s of immune surveillance include Elimination, Equilibrium, and
Escape. The immune system can control tumor growth with various immune mediators. However, tumor suppressor cells
and immunosuppressive cytokines can permit tumor escape.

Source: From Schreiber RD, Old LJ, Smyth MJ. Cancer immunoediting: integrating immunity’s roles in cancer suppression and promotion. Science. 2011;331(6024):1565–1570. doi:10.1126/science.1203486

and SBRT can be used as a therapeutic strategy to
optimize treatment response.
RT has a mechanism of action that extends
well beyond that of DNA damage. Preclinical
data demonstrate that ionizing radiation results
in effects beyond that of DNA damage including
the release of tumor antigen and increase in the
cell surface expression of antigen and receptors
that influence T-cell response and subsequent
T-cell trafficking and as antitumor activity (16–19).
Successful integration of radiation and immunotherapies may serve to optimize the influx of T
effector cells, while overcoming extrinsic immunosuppressive cells such as regulatory T cells (Tregs),
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), and
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) (20–22).
Selective dose and fractionation optimization
with SBRT is of great interest in both preclinical and
ongoing clinical trials. Data from murine models
suggest that fractionated regimens (8 Gy × 3, 6 Gy
× 5) in combination with anti-CTLA-4 antibody are
more effective in maximization of tumor control as
well as off-target, abscopal effects than single radiation doses (20 Gy × 1) (23). This is in contrast to
manipulation of programmed death-1/programmed
death-ligand 1 (PD-1/PD-L1) pathway blockade
where single fraction data have both antitumor

Heron_68566_PTR_20_321-330_08-23-18.indd 323

and abscopal effects (Figure 20.3) (11). Current
clinical trials are exploring optimal combination of
checkpoint blockade with radiation dose, fractionations, as well as the volume of tumor targeted.

CLINICAL EXPERIENCE
SBRT has revolutionized RT. Its use and indications
have grown dramatically since its inception. This
includes primary treatment of inoperable early stage
NSCLC, metastatic disease, as well as reirradiation
such as in recurrent head and neck cancer. Interestingly, in preclinical models, high dose per fraction
of radiation such as ones with SBRT or hypofractionation in general is increasingly immunogenic
when compared with a lower dose per fraction
regimens. In addition, less of the circulating lymphocyte pool in blood is exposed to radiation when
compared with standard fractionation. For these
reasons, the role of SBRT with immunotherapies is
being explored. For example, Seung et al. in 2012
reported a phase I clinical trial looking at patients
with metastatic melanoma or renal cell carcinoma
and treated with Interleukin-2 (IL-2) and SBRT
20 Gy in one to three fractions (24). Notably, they
found a 67% partial or complete response rate
(N = 12). In addition, there was a significant increase

23/08/18 4:47 PM

324

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

SBRT

Immunogenic cell death
DAMP

MHC

Dying
tumor

Tumor
Type I
IFN

Dendritic cell

MHC

Anti-PD-L1 MHC

PD-L1

TCR

TCR

PD-1

Anti-PD-1
MHC

CD80/CD86

–

CD28
TCR

Reinvigorated
T cell

Exhausted
T cell

AntiCTLA-4

MHC

CD80/CD86

TCR

CTLA-4

+
Tumor-specific
cytotoxicity

–

T-cell
activation

CD28

T-cell
inhibition
T-cell priming

FIGURE 20.3 SBRT can cause immunogenic cell death and T-cell priming. However, over time, T-cells can take on an
exhausted phenotype. With PD-1 and PD-L1 inhibitors, exhausted T cells can regain effector function.

PD-1, programmed death-1; PD-L1, programmed death-ligand 1.
Source: From Walshaw RC, Honeychurch J, Illidge TM. Stereotactic ablative radiotherapy and immunotherapy combinations: turning the
future into systemic therapy? Br J Radiol. 2016;89(1066):20160472. doi:10.1259/bjr.20160472

in the number of proliferating activated CD4+ T
cells in treatment-responsive patients. The excellent response rate in this trial was surprising given
historical response rates using conventional radiation treatment and IL-2 were lower. Overall the
trial was suggestive that SBRT improved immunogenicity and therefore improved response rates.
One of the other first experiences of SBRT with
immunotherapy can be seen in recurrent head and
neck cancer patients. Here, patients previously
treated with RT were enrolled and treated with
44 Gy in five fractions with concurrent cetuximab
(25). Cetuximab is an anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) monoclonal antibody shown
to improve local regional control in head and
neck cancers. It not only is a molecular therapy
used in blocking ligand-mediated EGFR signaling
but is also in fact an immunotherapeutic agent
that kills tumors through natural killer (NK) cell
antibody-mediated cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC).
NK cells recognize the Fc␥IIIa of the antibody and
thus can lead to ADCC (26–28). Furthermore,
cetuximab promotes DC cross-priming and CTL
responses (29,30). At the time of initial dose escalation, cetuximab was not included in the phase
I trial at the University of Pittsburgh Medical

Heron_68566_PTR_20_321-330_08-23-18.indd 324

Center (UPMC) Hillman Cancer Center (31). This
explains the lower than initially anticipated median
survival and response rate seen in the phase I trial.
Around the same time period, Bonner et al., in
their study of head and neck cancer with cetuximab and concurrent conventional external beam
RT, demonstrated improved locoregional control
(32). This prompted a retrospective cohort study
of SBRT with cetuximab; that study suggested a
10-month improvement in overall survival (OS)
without increase in toxicity (33). Given the potential benefit of cetuximab, subsequent clinical trials
have included this therapy. On the basis of phase II
data from the UPMC, 1-year local progression-free
survival (PFS) improved to 60% and locoregional
control was 37%. Median survival was 10 months
and 1-year OS was 40%. This represented a substantial improvement over SBRT alone. The grade
3 toxicity rate was 6% for both acute and chronic
side effects. These results compared favorably with
chemotherapy and reirradiation data in which 2-year
OS was approximately 20%, G3+ acute toxicity of
approximately 70%, and late G3 toxicity of about
30% (34,35). Clearly cetuximab helped to mediate
the benefit seen in the phase II trial without reporting the same high toxicity seen in the chemotherapy

23/08/18 4:47 PM

20: IMMUNORADIOSURGERY: THE CONVERGENCE OF SBRT AND THE IMMUNE RESPONSE

and reirradiation setting. Currently, most trials using
cetuximab with other immunotherapies such as ipilimumab exist in the standard fraction testing. The
UPMC does have a trial open investigating outcomes
of cetuximab and SBRT with and without docetaxel
in recurrent head and neck cancer setting.
Checkpoint inhibitors have become the main
focus of recent studies. PD-1 and PD-L1 inhibitors are some of the most well known and studied. The initial use of checkpoint inhibitors used
anti-CTLA-4 antibodies in the setting of malignant
melanoma. The first phase III trial demonstrated
a 4-month survival benefit when ipilimumab was
added to gp100 peptide vaccine versus peptide
vaccine alone (36). Since establishing the benefit
of ipilimumab, numerous case reports and studies have demonstrated when combined with RT
substantial partial and distant response to distant
tumors away from the primary radiated area (3).
The aforementioned abscopal effect gives credence to the important role RT plays in inducing
an enhanced and robust immune response. Recurrent head and neck cancers have been shown to
demonstrate a benefit in platinum-refractory recurrence setting. Specifically, the Checkmate 141
trial showed that when patients were treated with
nivolumab versus standard-of-care methotrexate,
docetaxel, or cetuximab, there was an improvement in median survival from 5 to 8 months,
improvement in 1-year OS from 17% to 26%, and
improved response rate from 6% to 13% without
an increase in G3 to 4 toxicity (37). Ninety-one percent of patients had received RT earlier. With the
success from Checkmate 141, the next question to
ask was whether checkpoint inhibitors when added
to SBRT treatment would improve outcomes. The
KEYSTROKE trial (Radiation Therapy Oncology
Group [RTOG] foundation 3507) is randomizing
head and neck cancer patients with unresectable,
recurrent, or second primary to SBRT plus or
minus pembrolizumab. Pembrolizumab has earlier
been shown to have overall response rate of 18%,
6-month PFS of 23%, and a 6-month OS of 59%
(38). Other current ongoing studies looking at the
use of SBRT and immune checkpoint inhibitors
include NCT03446911 that is enrolling patients
with early stage NSCLC treated with SBRT with
and without pembrolizumab (39). The Belgium
MOESM1 trial (NCT02826564) is seeking to
evaluate the role of SBRT and pembrolizumab in
the metastatic urothelial carcinoma setting (40).
Current standard of care with patients with metastatic urothelial cancer is the use of cisplatin-based
chemotherapy. Unfortunately, many cannot tolerate

Heron_68566_PTR_20_321-330_08-23-18.indd 325

325

cisplatin and are subjected to less potent carboplatin in this setting. Their trial is designed to
deliver pembrolizumab in four cycles 200 mg every
3 weeks. Phase I will randomize patients to receive
hypofractionated RT to the largest lesion with the
dose of 24 Gy in three fractions to either weeks 1
or 3. Primary end points will be dose-limiting toxicity, response rates, and immune responses on
the basis of flow cytometry analysis. Another trial
using an anti-PD-1 inhibitor (REGN2810) under
NCT02383212 will investigate responses when
including SBRT (41). Preliminary phase I findings
from the trial looked at cyclophosphamide with
PD-1 inhibitor of varying doses versus cyclophosphamide, PD-1 inhibitor, and hypofractionation
with 27 Gy in three fractions or 30 Gy in five fractions. Initial results demonstrated an improvement
in partial response from 10% with monotherapy
to 41% with combined therapy. Johns Hopkins
has two ongoing trials each with either pembrolizumab or nivolumab in borderline-resectable
pancreatic cancer patients with 33 Gy in five fractions and the addition of cellular-based vaccines
(42,43). Additional work on a rarer but extremely
aggressive metastatic anaplastic thyroid cancer
is being studied at the Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center (MSKCC) using combination of
durvalumab (anti-PD-L1) and (anti-CTLA-4) with
9 Gy × 3 of SBRT (44).
Investigational work with other potentiators of
the immune system includes LAG3, OX40, 4-1BB.
An ongoing trial of patients with prostate metastatic
prostate cancer to bone treated with OX40 agonist
and 8 Gy × 1 resulted in the increased proliferative
and functional activity of NK cell, and CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells (45). Another trial with metastatic
breast cancer to liver and lung with OX40 agonist
and one to two fractions of SBRT (10–25 Gy) from
Providence Health and Services (NCT01862900)
is accruing (46). On the basis of preclinical work,
single agent anti-LAG3 and anti-4-1BB are being
tested alone in current trials. The next progression
of trial investigation for these two agents is likely
to include the use of hypofractionation or SBRT.
The role of SBRT and other immunomodulatory factors such as cytokines, cancer vaccines, and DC-based vaccines is an active area
of research. For example, the SBRT-ATAC trial
(NCT02581787) out of Stanford University is
seeking to establish the maximal tolerate dose
and rate of radiation-induced pulmonary fibrosis in early stage NSCLC with fresolimumab,
an anti-TGF-␤ antibody (47). It is believed that
lowering the “levels” of TGF-␤ will lead to a less

23/08/18 4:47 PM

326

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

immunosuppressive environment and improve
efficacy of SBRT by changing the suppressive
tumor microenvironment. Galunisertib is a TGF␤-RI kinase inhibitor that downregulates the
expression of SMAD2 and that ultimately leads
to decreased levels of the cytokine, making the
microenvironment less immunosuppressive (48).
This drug with SBRT is subject to a study at the
University of Pennsylvania with hepatocellular
carcinoma delivering 18 Gy × 1 fraction between
cycle 1, day 15 and cycle 1, day 28 with or without
galunisertib (NCT02906397) (49). Ongoing studies with IL-2 and SBRT continue to accrue patients
with metastatic melanoma or metastatic renal cell
carcinoma. On the basis of Portland Providence
Medical Center, SBRT (20 Gy in two fractions)
was combined with IL-2 (50). A similar trial is
being run at the University of Texas Southwestern
(UTSW) Medical Center using 8 to 20 Gy in one to
three fractions with 14 doses of IL-2 administered
in a similar fashion as the trial mentioned earlier (51). It is presumed that creating an immunogenic microenvironment will allow for increased
immune responses. DCs, as mentioned earlier, are
important to the immune response. The research
team at Albert Einstein and Celldex Therapeutics have initiated a trial (NCT02839265) for
patients with advanced NSCLC who have progressed through prior treatment and treated them
with FLT-3 ligand (CDX-301) to stimulate DCs
and treating patients with 34 Gy × 1, 10 Gy × 5,
or 18 Gy × 3. Primary end point is 4- month PFS
(52). The C4-MOSART trial at the University of
Chicago Medical Center in conjunction with Bristol
Myers Squibb is targeting immunosuppressive
cells such as TAMs with their approach with immunotherapy and SBRT (53). Here they combine
nivolumab with either cabiralizumab, which inhibits CSF-1R and blocks TAMs, or nivolumab with
urelumab, which binds to costimulatory molecule
4-1BB, against individuals with metastatic disease
of any histology. SBRT that is to be delivered in the
trial is between 30 and 50 Gy. The optimal timing
of SBRT when using in conjunction with immunotherapies is also undergoing investigation. The
University of Chicago has the COSINR trial recruiting individuals with metastatic lung cancer with
either concurrent or sequential nivolumab and ipilimumab after three to five fractions of SBRT (54).
As we enter an era of new combinatorial
treatment with SBRT and immunotherapies, an
important new question is raised: How are we to
measure outcomes and response to treatment?

Heron_68566_PTR_20_321-330_08-23-18.indd 326

SBRT requires precision and accuracy to deliver
such high doses of radiation. Treatment immobilization is critical to that success. Furthermore, daily
cone-beam CT (CBCT) is routinely used to ensure
pretreatment planning scan and online imaging.
Other than avoiding geographical target miss, this
does not provide further information about current treatment-related effects on the tumor. Currently, there is a wave of new technology aimed at
tracking tumor responses in real time rather than
with static imaging used in image-guided radiation therapy (IGRT). Two particular studies have
examined monitoring dynamic changes within
tumors during treatment. Our group has reported
on the use of immune-PET/CT in murine models
of melanoma (B16F10) and p16+ head and neck
cancer (MEER) with 89Zr-labeled PD-L1 antibody to visualize radiation-induced changes in the
tumor microenvironment in vivo with respect to
PD-L1 (55). In our study, we demonstrated differential expression of radiation-induced PD-L1 on
the different tumor cell lines with a single fraction of radiation (2 or 10 Gy). B16F10 tended
to have higher levels of PD-L1 at earlier time
points. In another experiment comparing nonirradiated (non-IR) with irradiated (IR, 2 Gy ×
4 fractions) tumors, there was a statistically significant difference in SUVmean demonstrating
higher PDL1 expression in the irradiated tumor
than in the non-IR tumor. Replicating the same
experiment but this time with the MEER cell line
using 2 Gy × 10 fractions ± anti-PD-1 inhibitor,
there was increased SUVmean from 0.56 to 0.94
comparing non-IR with IR-treated tumors. These
findings were confirmed with ex vivo flow cytometry staining and analysis. In addition, CD45+
tumor-infiltrating leukocytes also were shown to
express higher levels of PD-L1 compared with the
CD45-negative population. Overall, our preclinical model represented one of the first reporting
of dynamic change in PD-L1 expression postradiation treatment using PET imaging. A study from
Vrije University in Amsterdam in conjunction
with Bristol Myers Squibb aimed to characterize
PD-1 and PD-L1 expression in the clinical setting
in patients with NSCLC treated with nivolumab
using PET imaging (56) or labeling; this group
used 89Zirconium-labeled nivolumab (89Zr-nivo)
and 18F-labeled BMS-986192 (18F-PD-L1).
Response was measured in SUVpeak after 6 weeks
of treatment with nivolumab. Seven patients with
11 total lesions were evaluated. Each radiolabeled
compound was safe and well tolerated, and could

23/08/18 4:47 PM

20: IMMUNORADIOSURGERY: THE CONVERGENCE OF SBRT AND THE IMMUNE RESPONSE

label lesions of varying PD-1 and PD-L1 expressions. Most importantly, this study showed that in
five patients who were appropriate for response
evaluation, one patient who had a partial response
to treatment also had the highest 18F-PD-L1 SUV
uptake value of 14.4. Although this represents
an exceedingly small sample size, it is suggestive
that safe in vivo tracking of tumor response to
immunotherapy is possible and might predict for
responders to immunotherapy. Taking these two
studies and others into account, we are moving
toward a major paradigm shift. Indeed, instead of
solely relying on static IGRT, we are approaching
an era of dynamic biology-guided radiation treatment (BGRT). BGRT represents three core functions: anatomic guidance, biology guidance, and
biological adaptation. With this emerging technique, CBCTs can be used for alignment and live
treatment planning. PET tracer–labeled immune
markers can hone directly to the tumors that
express these markers and act as a biological fiducial sparing normal uninvolved tissue surrounding it. Lastly, using BGRT, immunotherapy can
be administered and used in patients who are
more likely to respond to treatment. Those whose
tumors do not express PD-L1 could be routed
toward another treatment modality. Moreover,
optimal radiation dosing and timing can be individually tailored to individual patients.

CONCLUSIONS
With the proliferation of combined SBRT and immunotherapy of various approaches, we anxiously await
outcomes of these exciting new therapeutic trials
and treatment paradigms as we usher in a new era of
cancer treatment. Some have suggested that the classic four Rs of radiobiology—reoxygenation, repopulation, repair, and reassortment—actually can have
a fifth R for immune-mediated rejection (48). This
line of thinking is very much in line with the theory of immunosurveillance and one of the 3Es core
concepts of elimination, thus further reinforcing the
integral and additive role of immunotherapy and RT.
Radiosurgery and stereotactic body radiation
therapy is on the precipice of major change. The
potential benefits of fewer fractions, fewer toxicities
and the possible enhancement of response rates by
exploiting the immunomodulatory effects is tremendous. The need for novel clinical trials to test these
interactions and formulate the optimal combination
is essential as we look toward a future where the
burden of cancer is reduced if not eliminated.

Heron_68566_PTR_20_321-330_08-23-18.indd 327

327

REFERENCES
1. Flickinger JC, Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD, et al. A multiinstitutional experience with stereotactic radiosurgery for
solitary brain metastasis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
1994;28(4):797-802. PubMed PMID: 8138431.
2. Salama JK, Chmura SJ, Mehta N, et al. An initial report of
a radiation dose-escalation trial in patients with one to five
sites of metastatic disease. Clin Cancer Res. 2008;14(16):
5255-5259. doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0358
3. Milano MT, Katz AW, Muhs AG, et al. A prospective pilot
study of curative intent stereotactic body radiation therapy
in patients with 5 or fewer oligometastatic lesions. Cancer.
2008;112(3):650-658. doi:10.1002/cncr.23209
4. Balar AV, Weber JS. PD-1 and PD-L1 antibodies in cancer:
current status and future directions. Cancer Immunol
Immunother. 2017;66(5):551-564. doi:10.1007/s00262017-1954-6
5. Ahmadzadeh M, Johnson LA, Heemskerk B, et al. Tumor
antigen–specific CD8 T cells infiltrating the tumor express
high levels of PD-1 and are functionally impaired. Blood.
2009;114(8):1537-1544. doi:10.1182/blood-2008-12-195792
6. Topalian SL, Hodi FS, Brahmer JR, et al. Safety, activity,
and immune correlates of anti–PD-1 antibody in cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2012;366(26):2443-2454. doi:10.1056/
NEJMoa1200690
7. Kansy BA, Concha-Benavente F, Srivastava RM, et al.
PD-1 status in CD8+ T cells associates with survival and
anti-PD-1 therapeutic outcomes in head and neck cancer.
Cancer Res. 2017;77(22):6353-6364. doi:10.1158/00085472.CAN-16-3167
8. Concha-Benavente F, Srivastava RM, Trivedi S, et al. Identification of the cell-intrinsic and-extrinsic pathways downstream of EGFR and IFN that induce PD-L1 expression in
head and neck cancer. Cancer Res. 2016;76(5):1031-1043.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-2001
9. Blackburn SD, Shin H, Freeman GJ, et al. Selective expansion of a subset of exhausted CD8 T cells by ␣PD-L1 blockade. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;105(39):15016-15021.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0801497105
10. Gros A, Robbins PF, Yao X, et al. PD-1 identifies the
patient-specific CD8+ tumor-reactive repertoire infiltrating human tumors. J Clin Invest. 2014;124(5):2246-2259.
doi:10.1172/JCI73639
11. Deng L, Liang H, Burnette B, et al. Irradiation and anti–
PD-L1 treatment synergistically promote antitumor
immunity in mice. J Clin Invest. 2014;124(2):687-695.
doi:10.1172/JCI67313
12. Demaria S, Formenti SC. Radiation as an immunological
adjuvant: current evidence on dose and fractionation. Front
Oncol. 2012;2:153. doi:10.3389/fonc.2012.00153
13. Joffre OP, Segura E, Savina A, et al. Cross-presentation
by dendritic cells. Nat Rev Immunol. 2012;12(8):557.
doi:10.1038/nri3254
14. Dunn GP, Old LJ, Schreiber RD. The immunobiology of
cancer immunosurveillance and immunoediting. Immunity. 2004;21(2):137-148. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2004.
07.017
15. Dunn GP, Bruce AT, Ikeda H, et al. Cancer immunoediting:
from immunosurveillance to tumor escape. Nat Immunol.
2002;3(11):991. doi:10.1038/ni1102-991
16. Ferrara TA, Hodge JW, Gulley JL. Combining radiation
and immunotherapy for synergistic antitumor therapy.
Curr Opin Mol Ther. 2009;11(1):37. PubMed PMID:
19169958.

23/08/18 4:47 PM

328

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

17. McFarland HI, Puig M, Grajkowska LT, et al. Regulatory T
cells in irradiation-induced immune suppression. PLoS One.
2012;7(6):e39092. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0039092
18. Kershaw MH, Devaud C, John LB, et al. Enhancing
immunotherapy using chemotherapy and radiation to
modify the tumor microenvironment. Oncoimmunology.
2013;2(9):e25962. doi:10.4161/onci.25962
19. Hellevik T, Martinez-Zubiaurre I. Radiotherapy and the
tumor stroma: the importance of dose and fractionation.
Front Oncol. 2014;4:1. doi:10.3389/fonc.2014.00001
20. Vatner RE, Formenti SC. Myeloid-derived cells in tumors:
effects of radiation. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2015;25(1):18-27.
doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.2014.07.008
21. Liang H, Deng L, Hou Y, et al. Host STING-dependent MDSC
mobilization drives extrinsic radiation resistance. Nat Commun. 2017;8(1):1736. doi:10.1038/s41467-017-01566-5
22. Vatner RE, Cooper BT, Vanpouille-Box C, et al. Combinations of immunotherapy and radiation in cancer therapy.
Front Oncol. 2014;4:325. doi:10.3389/fonc.2014.00325
23. Dewan MZ, Galloway AE, Kawashima N, et al. Fractionated
but not single-dose radiotherapy induces an immune-mediated abscopal effect when combined with anti–CTLA-4
antibody. Clin Cancer Res. 2009;15(17):5379-5388.
doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-0265
24. Seung SK, Curti BD, Crittenden M, et al. Phase 1 study
of stereotactic body radiotherapy and interleukin-2—
tumor and immunological responses. Sci Transl Med.
2012;4(137):137ra74. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.3003649
25. Vargo JA, Ferris RL, Ohr J, et al. A prospective phase 2 trial
of reirradiation with stereotactic body radiation therapy plus
cetuximab in patients with previously irradiated recurrent
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2015;91(3):480-488. doi:10.1016/j.
ijrobp.2014.11.023
26. López-Albaitero A, Ferris RL. Immune activation by epidermal growth factor receptor–specific monoclonal antibody therapy for head and neck cancer. Arch Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg. 2007;133(12):1277-1281. doi:10.1001/
archotol.133.12.1277
27. Ferris RL, Lenz HJ, Trotta AM, et al. Rationale for combination of therapeutic antibodies targeting tumor cells and
immune checkpoint receptors: harnessing innate and adaptive immunity through IgG1 isotype immune effector stimulation. Cancer Treat Rev. 2018;63:48-60. doi:10.1016/j.
ctrv.2017.11.008
28. Schoppy DW, Sunwoo JB. Immunotherapy for head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am.
2015;29(6):1033-1043. doi:10.1016/j.hoc.2015.07.009
29. Srivastava RM, Lee SC, Andrade Filho PA, et al.
Cetuximab-activated natural killer and dendritic cells collaborate to trigger tumor antigen–specific T-cell immunity in head
and neck cancer patients. Clin Cancer Res. 2013;19(7):
1858-1872. doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2426
30. Andrade Filho PA, López-Albaitero A, Gooding W, et al.
Novel immunogenic HLA-A* 0201-restricted epidermal
growth factor receptor-specific T-cell epitope in head and
neck cancer patients. J Immunother. 2010;33(1):83. doi:10.
1097/CJI.0b013e3181b8f421
31. Heron DE, Ferris RL, Karamouzis M, et al. Stereotactic
body radiotherapy for recurrent squamous cell carcinoma
of the head and neck: results of a phase I dose-escalation
trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2009;75(5):1493-1500.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.12.075
32. Bonner JA, Harari PM, Giralt J, et al. Radiotherapy plus
cetuximab for squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and

Heron_68566_PTR_20_321-330_08-23-18.indd 328

neck. N Engl J Med. 2006;354(6):567-578. doi:10.1056/
NEJMoa053422
33. Heron DE, Rwigema JC, Gibson MK, et al. Concurrent
cetuximab with stereotactic body radiotherapy for recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: a single institution matched case-control study. Am J Clin Oncol.
2011;34(2):165-172. doi:10.1097/COC.0b013e3181dbb73e
34. Spencer SA, Harris J, Wheeler RH, et al. Final report of
RTOG 9610, a multi institutional trial of reirradiation
and chemotherapy for unresectable recurrent squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Head Neck. 2008;
30(3):281-288. doi:10.1002/hed.20697
35. Langer CJ, Harris J, Horwitz EM, et al. Phase II study of lowdose paclitaxel and cisplatin in combination with split-course
concomitant twice-daily reirradiation in recurrent squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck: results of Radiation
Therapy Oncology Group Protocol 9911. J Clin Oncol.
2007;25:4800-4805. doi:10.1200/JCO.2006.07.9194
36. Hodi FS, O’day SJ, McDermott DF, et al. Improved survival with ipilimumab in patients with metastatic melanoma. N Engl J Med. 2010;363(8):711-723. doi:10.1056/
NEJMoa1003466
37. Ferris RL, Blumenschein Jr G, Fayette J, et al. Nivolumab
for recurrent squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and
neck. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(19):1856-1867. doi:10.1056/
NEJMoa1602252
38. Chow LQM, Haddad R, Gupta S, et al. Antitumor activity of pembrolizumab in biomarker-unselected patients
with recurrent and/or metastatic head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma: results from the phase Ib KEYNOTE-012
expansion cohort. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(32):3838-3845.
doi:10.1200/JCO.2016.68.1478
39. Smit EF, de Langen AJ. Combining SBRT and Immunotherapy in Early Stage NSCLC Patients Planned for Surgery. ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. Bethesda, MD: National
Library of Medicine (US). Identifier NCT03446911
40. Sundahl N, De Wolf K, Rottey S, et al. A phase I/II trial
of fixed-dose stereotactic body radiotherapy with sequential or concurrent pembrolizumab in metastatic urothelial
carcinoma: evaluation of safety and clinical and immunologic response. J Transl Med. 2017;15(1):150. doi:10.1186/
s12967-017-1251-3
41. Papadopoulos KP, Crittenden MR, Johnson ML, et al. A
First-in-human Study of REGN2810, a Monoclonal, Fully
Human Antibody to Programmed Death-1 (PD-1), in Combination with Immunomodulators Including Hypofractionated Radiotherapy (hfRT). ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet].
Bethesda, MD: National Library of Medicine (US). Identifier NCT02383212
42. Zheng L. Study with CY, Pembrolizumab, GVAX, and SBRT
in Patients with Locally Advanced Pancreatic Cancer. ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. Bethesda, MD: National Library of
Medicine (US). Identifier NCT02648282
43. Azad N. Phase 2 GVAX Pancreas Vaccine (with CY) in
Combination with Nivolumab and SBRT for Patients with
Borderline Resectable Pancreatic Cancer. ClinicalTrials.gov
[Internet]. Bethesda, MD: National Library of Medicine
(US). Identifier NCT03161379
44. Lee N. Immunotherapy and Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy (SBRT) for Metastatic Anaplastic Thyroid Cancer.
ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. Bethesda, MD: National
Library of Medicine (US). Identifier NCT03122496
45. Kovacsovics-Bankowski M, Chisholm L, Vercellini J, et al.
Phase I/II clinical trial of anti-OX40, radiation and cyclophosphamide in patients with prostate cancer: immunological

23/08/18 4:47 PM

20: IMMUNORADIOSURGERY: THE CONVERGENCE OF SBRT AND THE IMMUNE RESPONSE
analysis. J Immunother Cancer. 2013;1(1):P255. doi:10.
1186/2051-1426-1-S1-P255
46. Crittenden MR, Curti B, Seung S, et al. Stereotactic Body
Radiation and Monoclonal Antibody to OX40 (MEDI6469)
in Breast Cancer Patients with Metastatic Lesions (OX40
Breast). ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. Bethesda, MD: National
Library of Medicine (US). Identifier NCT01862900
47. Diehn M, Loo B, Neal J. SABR-ATAC: A Trial of TGF-beta
Inhibition and Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy for Early
Stage Non-small Cell Lung Cancer. ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. Bethesda, MD: National Library of Medicine (US).
Identifier NCT02581787
48. Kang J, Demaria S, Formenti S. Current clinical trials testing the combination of immunotherapy with radiotherapy.
J Immunother Cancer. 2016;4(1):51. doi:10.1186/s40425016-0156-7
49. Binder KR. Galunisertib (LY2157299) Plus Stereotactic Body
Radiotherapy (SBRT) in Advanced Hepatocellular Carcinoma
(HCC). ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. Bethesda, MD: National
Library of Medicine (US). Identifier NCT02906397
50. Curti B. Study of High Dose Interleukin-2 (IL-2) and Stereotactic Body Radiation (SBRT) in Patients with Metastatic
Renal Cancer. ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. Bethesda, MD:
National Library of Medicine (US). Identifier NCT02306954
51. Hannan R. High Dose IL-2 and Stereotactic Ablative
Body Radiation Therapy for Metastatic Renal Cancer.

Heron_68566_PTR_20_321-330_08-23-18.indd 329

329

ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. Bethesda, MD: National
Library of Medicine (US). Identifier NCT01896271
52. Ohri N. FLT3 Ligand Immunotherapy and Stereotactic
Radiotherapy for Advanced Non-small Cell Lung Cancer
(FLT3). ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. Bethesda, MD: National
Library of Medicine (US). Identifier NCT02839265
53. Luke J. Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy (SBRT) Plus Immunotherapy for Cancer (C4-MOSART). ClinicalTrials.gov
[Internet]. Bethesda, MD: National Library of Medicine
(US). Identifier NCT03431948
54. Patel J. Concurrent or Sequential Immunotherapy and Radiation Therapy in Patients with Metastatic Lung Cancer
(COSINR). ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. Bethesda, MD:
National Library of Medicine (US). Identifier NCT03223155
55. Kikuchi M, Clump DA, Srivastava RM, et al. Preclinical
immunoPET/CT imaging using Zr-89-labeled anti-PD-L1
monoclonal antibody for assessing radiation-induced PD-L1
upregulation in head and neck cancer and melanoma. OncoImmunology. 2017;6(7):e1329071. doi:10.1080/21624
02X.2017.1329071
56. Niemeijer AL, Smit EF, Dongen GV, Windhorst AD,
Huisman MC, Hendrikse NH, Leung DK, Smith RA,
Hayes W, Velasquez LM, Bonacorsi SJ. Whole body PD-1 and
PD-L1 PET with 89Zr-nivolumab and 18F- BMS-986192
in pts with NSCLC. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35(suppl 15):e20047.
doi:10.1200/JCO.2017.35.15_suppl.e20047

23/08/18 4:47 PM

Heron_68566_PTR_20_321-330_08-23-18.indd 330

23/08/18 4:47 PM

C H A P T E R

21

Stereotactic Radiosurgery
and Stereotactic Body Radiation
Therapy Case Videos
John C. Flickinger, Drew Moghanaki, Joseph M. Herman, Yushen Qian, Beant S. Gill,
John A. Vargo, and Alina Mihai

INTRODUCTION
The administration of stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) and stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) can be complex and sometimes difficult to master. This
chapter provides a compilation of videos where radiation oncology experts provide
short summaries on how they personally simulate and plan their patients for various disease sites. These seven videos (approximately 15 minutes in length) serve
as a quick refresher for established faculty and an initial guide for residents and
fellows. Each video succinctly reviews anatomy, staging, and current management
for select disease sites. Most videos include a case presentation where experts
review the anatomy and provide instruction on how to contour the gross tumor
volume including clinical and treatment set-up expansions and define organs at
risk. Also included are “pearls” and best practices related to treatment planning,
treatment delivery, and current accepted dose constraints.

CASE VIDEOS
Video 10.1 Repeat Radiosurgery of a Brain Metastasis
John C. Flickinger, MD, FACR
Professor of Radiation Oncology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine

331

Heron_68566_PTR_21_331-332_08-23-18.indd 331

22/08/18 10:23 AM

332

II: CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF SRS AND SBRT

Video 12.1 Treatment Simulation and Planning for Lung Cancer
Drew Moghanaki, MD, MPH
Radiation Oncology Service, Hunter Holmes McGuire Veterans Affairs Medical Center

Video 13.1 Treatment Simulation and Planning for Locally Advanced
Pancreatic Cancer
Joseph M. Herman, MD, MSc, MHCM, FACR
Professor and Division Head ad Interim, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center

Video 15.1 Treatment Simulation and Planning for Liver Cancer
Yushen Qian, MD
Associate Physician, Southern California Permanente Medical Group

Video 16.1 Treatment Simulation and Planning for Advanced Prostate
Cancer
Beant S. Gill, MD
Assistant Professor of Radiation Oncology, UPMC Hillman Cancer Center

Video 18.1 Treatment Simulation and Planning for
Spine Stereotactic Radiosurgery
John A. Vargo, MD
Assistant Professor of Radiation Oncology, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute,
Children’s Hospital of UPMC

Video 19.1 Treatment Simulation and Planning for Oligometastatic Disease
Alina Mihai, MD, MS
Consultant Radiation Oncologist, Beacon Hospital, Dublin, Ireland

Heron_68566_PTR_21_331-332_08-23-18.indd 332

22/08/18 10:23 AM

INDEX
AANS. See American Association of
Neurological Surgeons
AAPM. See American Association of
Physicists in Medicine
ABC. See active breathing coordinator
system
abdominalSABR, dose–volume
constraints for, 309
Accreditation Council for Graduate
Medical Education (ACGME), 8
Accredited Dosimetry Calibration
Laboratory (ADCL), 117
ACEi. See angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors
ACGME. See Accreditation Council for
Graduate Medical Education
ACOSOG. See American College of
Surgeons Oncology Group
acoustic neuroma, 145–147
outcomes, 145–146
patient-reported symptoms, 145
treatment planning, 146–147
ACR. See American College of
Radiology
active breathing coordinator (ABC)
system, 51
ADCL. See Accredited Dosimetry
Calibration Laboratory
adrenal lesions, 216–218
adrenal metastases, 218, 308
adrenal oligometastases, 308
adrenal SBRT
dose constraints for, 224
indications for, 215–216
motion management, 218–219
outcomes using, 216
planning and delivery consideration,
218–219
selection criteria for, 216
target volume, 219
treatment planning, 222–223
AlignRT (Vision RT), 90
American Association of Neurological
Surgeons (AANS), 5
American Association of Physicists in
Medicine (AAPM), 59, 103
American Board of Radiology, 8
American College of Radiology (ACR),
296

American College of Surgeons Oncology
Group (ACOSOG), 185, 188
American Registry of Radiologic
Technologists (ARRT), 8
American Society for Radiation
Oncology (ASTRO), 296
American Society for Therapeutic
Radiology and Oncology
(ASTRO), 5
ancillary systems, 88–90
AlignRT (Vision RT), 90
ExacTrac (Brainlab AG) system,
89–90
external surface tracking with surface
imaging systems, 89
angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors (ACEi), 195
APS. See automatic positioning system
ARRT. See American Registry of
Radiologic Technologists
arteriovenous malformation (AVM), 3,
39, 141–145
ASTRO. See American Society for
Therapeutic Radiology and
Oncology
automatic positioning system (APS),
74, 75
AVM. See arteriovenous malformation

beam-shaping device, 110
BEDs. See biologically effective doses
BGRT. See biology-guided radiation
treatment
biologically effective doses, 19–20,
232
biology-guided radiation treatment
(BGRT), 327
BodyFix frame, 50
BodyFix immobilization system, 87
bowel/rectal toxicities, 262–263, 289
Bragg–Gray cavity theory, 114
Brainlab, 79
brain metastasis, 152–153
evaluation/prognosis, 152–153
multiple tools, 153
treatment modalities/outcomes,
153
brain necrosis, 173

brain radiosurgery
arteriovenous malformation, 141–145
AVM management algorithm, 143
outcomes, 144

Calypso 4D Localization System, 260
Canadian Association of Radiation
Oncology-Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy (CAROSBRT), 5
cancer immunoediting, 323
cancer metastasis, 293
CARO-SBRT. See Canadian Association
of Radiation OncologyStereotactic Body Radiation
Therapy
carotid blowout syndrome, 172, 177
CBCT. See cone-beam CT
Cetuximab, 324
chest wall pain (CWP), in lung cancer
SBRT, 33–35
CIR. See cumulative incidence rate
clinical target volume (CTV), 66, 219
Code of Practice (CoP), 114
Common Terminology Criteria for
Adverse Events (CTCAE), 27
cone-beam CT (CBCT), 58
conical cones, 112
Continuous Learning, 136
contouring, 65–68
nonpatient structures, 68
of organs at risk, 67
target volume, 66–67
tuning structures, 67–68
contrast-to-noise ratio, 121
CoP. See code of practice
CTCAE. See Common Terminology
Criteria for Adverse Events
CT scan, 53–55, 54, 55
artifact from dental fillings, 54
cone-beam, 58
internal target volume, 54–55
maximum intensity projection
function, 55
minimum intensity projection
function, 55
planning target volume, 54
sorting images to generate, 55
333

Heron_68566_PTR_Index_333-338_08-23-18.indd 333

21/08/18 2:12 PM

334

INDEX

CTV. See clinical target volume
cumulative incidence rate (CIR), 205
CWP. See chest wall pain
CyberKnife, 39, 81–83
fiducial marker tracking, 83
robotic radiosurgery, 256
skull tracking, 82
X-band waveguide design, 81–82
Xsight Lung, 82–83

deep inspiration breath-hold (DIBH), 301
DIBH. See deep inspiration breath-hold
DICOM. See Digital Imaging
Communication in Medicine
Digital Imaging Communication in
Medicine (DICOM), 12
DKFZ. See German Cancer Research
Center
DLG. See dynamic leaf gap
dose–volume histogram (DVH)
parameters, 309
dosimetric tests, 116
DTT. See dynamic tumor tracking
DVH. See dose-volume histogram
parameters
DWA. See dynamic wave arc
dynamic leaf gap (DLG), 111
dynamic tumor tracking (DTT), 87
dynamic wave arc (DWA), 88

Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
(ECOG), 216, 272
EBRT. See external beam radiation
therapy
ECOG. See Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group
Edge radiosurgery system, 80
EEBH. See end expiration
breath-hold
Effective Safety Communication, 135
EGD. See esophagogastroduodenoscopy
EGFR. See epidermal growth factor
receptor mutations
electromagnetic transponders, 60–61
electronic portal imaging detector
(EPID), 87
Elekta Active Breathing Coordinator, 79
Elekta body frame, 49
Elekta XVI, spatial resolution data for, 121
end expiration breath-hold (EEBH), 301
end-to-end tests, 126
Environment for Raising Concerns, 135
EPIC bowel scores, 263
EPID. See electronic portal imaging
detector
epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) mutations, 187
equivalent uniform dose (EUD), 26–27
generalized, 32–33
ESMO. See European Society for
Medical Oncology

Heron_68566_PTR_Index_333-338_08-23-18.indd 334

esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD),
205
ESTRO. See European Society for
Radiotherapy and Oncology
EUD. See equivalent uniform dose
European Society for Medical Oncology
(ESMO), 186, 224
European Society for Radiotherapy and
Oncology (ESTRO), 186
ExacTrac system, 79, 89–90
external beam radiation therapy
(EBRT), 6–7, 65, 227
extracranial immobilization, 49–50

failure modes, and effects analysis
(FMEA), 104
fault tree, 107
fault tree analysis (FTA), 106–107, 137
Fédération Francophone de
Cancérologie Digestive (FFCD),
201
FFCD. See Fédération Francophone de
Cancérologie Digestive
FFF. See flattening filter-free beams
FFLP. See freedom from local
progression
flattening filter-free (FFF) beams, 78,
79–80
FMEA. See failure modes, and effects
analysis
forced shallow breathing (FSB), 219
fractionation schemes, 257
freedom from local progression (FFLP),
202
FTA. See fault tree analysis

Gamma Knife, 3–4, 39
imaging for, 58
gamma-ray–based delivery systems, 73–77
Leksell Gamma Knife Icon, 77
Leksell Gamma Knife Perfexion,
74–76
models U, B, and C/4C, 74
gantry-based delivery systems, 236
Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group
(GITSG), 201
Gated treatment delivery, 51
generalized equivalent uniform dose
(gEUD), 32–33
geometric distortion assessment,
123–126
German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), 4, 5
German Society of Radiation Oncology,
5, 188
gEUD. See generalized equivalent
uniform dose
GITSG. See Gastrointestinal Tumor
Study Group
gross tumor volume (GTV), 65, 66,
143, 189, 219

GTV. See gross tumor volume
gynecologic oncology group, 232
gynecologic SBRT, 271
dose fractionation, 274
outcomes, 275
patient selection, 272
platforms, 274
simulation, 272
target delineation, 273
treatment indications for, 271
treatment plan evaluation, 273
treatment safety, 276

Harvard Cyclotron Lab, 3
Harvard Cyclotron Laboratory
(HCL), 94
HCL. See Harvard Cyclotron Laboratory
HDMLC. See high-definition MLC
HDMM system. See high-definition
motion management system
HDR brachytherapy, 261
head and neck SBRT
case study, 175–176
dose constraints for, 179
dose fractionation schemes, 168–171
dose to critical structures, 171–175
follow-up, 176–177
imaging and target definition,
167–168
for newly diagnosed head and neck
cancers, 171
outcome data, 176
overview, 165
plan evaluation, 175–176
quality of life outcomes, 176–177
safety considerations, 177–178
selection criteria, 166–167
toxicity profile, 171–175
treatment planning, 175–176
hepatocellular carcinoma, 239–241
gantry-based delivery systems, 236
robotic arm–based delivery systems,
236–237
high-definition MLC (HDMLC), 79
high-definition motion management
(HDMM) system, 4
high-grade gliomas, 155
patient selection/management,
155–156
Hounsfield unit accuracy, 121–122
Hounsfield units (HU), 189
HU. See Hounsfield units
hypofractionated particle therapy,
studies outcomes of, 240

IAEA. See International Atomic Energy
Agency
IASLC. See International Association
for the Study of Lung Cancer
ICVI. See Integrated Conical Collinator
Verification and Interlock system

21/08/18 2:12 PM

INDEX
IFFM. See intrafraction motion system
IGRT. See image-guided radiation
therapy
ILD. See interstitial lung disease
image-guided radiation therapy (IGRT),
41, 58, 326
image quality tests, 119–120
image registration, 58–59
automated, 58
for IGRT, 59
monomodality registration, 58–59
multiple modality registration, 59
rigid registration, 59
imaging, for SRS and SBRT, 53–63
3D and 4D CT imaging, 53–55, 54, 55
for Gamma Knife, 58
image registration, 58–59
magnetic resonance imaging, 56–58
overview, 53
positron emission tomography, 55–56
process map of, 54
for treatment assessment, 62–63
for treatment setup and verification,
59–62
immobilization. See patient
immobilization
immunoradiosurgery
clinical experience, 323–327
clinical rationale, 321–323
IMRT. See intensity-modulated radiation
therapy
IMRT-based SBRT plan, 310
beam arrangements for, 312
dose distribution and dose–volume
histograms for, 313
IMRT process tree, 105
incident learning systems, 136
InCise MLC, 83
Integrated Conical Collimator
Verification and Interlock (ICVI)
system, 78
intensity-modulated radiation therapy
(IMRT), 28, 40, 65, 103, 202, 222
internal target volume (ITV), 189, 219
International Association for the Study
of Lung Cancer (IASLC), 187
International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), 8, 114, 138
International Consensus Pain Response
Endpoint Guidelines, 287
International Journal of Radiation
Oncology Biology Physics, 27
International Radiology Surgery
Association (IRSA), 143
International Registry for Lung
Metastases (IRLM), 186
interstitial lung disease (ILD), 189
intracranial immobilization, 47–49
intrafraction motion management
(IFMM) system, 77
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma,
241–242
ionization chamber, 117

Heron_68566_PTR_Index_333-338_08-23-18.indd 335

ionizing radiation, 321
IRLM. See International Registry for
Lung Metastases
IROC Houston phantoms, 127, 128
IRSA. See International Radiology
Surgery Association
ITV. See internal target volume

JCAHO. See Joint Commission on the
Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations
Joint Commission on the Accreditation
of Healthcare Organizations
(JCAHO), 103

kilovoltage cone-beam computed
tomography (kV-CBCT), 4
Kroos staging system, 145
kV-CBCT. See kilovoltage cone-beam
computed tomography
kVCT scan, 85, 86, 87

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
(LBNL), 94
LBNL. See Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory
leaf transmission, 111
Leksell Gamma Knife Icon, 77
Leksell Gamma Knife (LGK) Perfexion,
74–76
collimator, 75
extend frame for, 75
source-to-focus distance, 74
Leksell head frame, 48
LGK. See Leksell Gamma Knife
Perfexion
linear accelerator-based delivery
systems, 77–87
CyberKnife, 81–83
Elekta, 80–81
multileaf collimator, 78
tomotherapy system, 83–87
Varian systems, 79–80
liver metastases, 242
liver SBRT
gantry-based delivery, 236
high-quality imaging, 230
indications, 228–229
outcomes, 239–242
patient selection, 229–230
patient selection factors for, 229
quality of life, 242–243
response assessment and surveillance,
237–239
robotic arm–based delivery system,
236–237
safety considerations, 243
treatment planning, 233–236
liver stereotactic body radiation therapy,
studies outcomes of, 240

335

lung cancer SBRT
chest wall pain in, 33–35
complications in early days of, 33
dose fractionation schedules for, 306
dose–volume constraints for, 306–307
rib fracture in, 33–35
studies for isolated lymph node
metastases, 309
lung oligometastases, 305
lung SBRT
adjuvant treatment, 189
chest wall pain in, 33–35
concomitant treatment, 189
dose constraints, 196
follow-up after treatment, 196
indications and results, 184–187
non–small-cell lung cancer, 183–190,
195
overview, 183–184
patient characteristics and
consideration, 189
quality of life, 195–196
toxicities, 195
treatment planning, 189–195
tumor characteristics, consideration
of, 187–188
tumor heterogeneity and, 193–194
tumor motion, management of,
194–195
lungs tumor, 304
Lyman model, 31–32

magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
56–58, 218
challenges in, 57–58
dynamic contrast-enhanced, 56
images fused with CT images, 56–57
of metastatic prostate cancer, 57
MASCC. See Multinational Association
of Supportive Care in Cancer
meningioma, 147–149
patient selection, 148
radiation safety and planning, 149
radiosurgical management, 148
metastatic lesions, 238
MinIP images, 303
MLCs. See multileaf collimators
modulation transfer function (MTF), 120
motion management, 40–41, 50–51
MRI. See magnetic resonance imaging
MTF. See mediation transfer function
multileaf collimators (MLCs), 78,
110–112, 144
Multinational Association of Supportive
Care in Cancer (MASCC), 224
MVCT scan, 85–87

National Comprehensive Cancer
Network (NCCN), 186
National Comprehensive Cancer
Network (NCCN) guidelines, 307

21/08/18 2:12 PM

336

INDEX

NCCN. See National Comprehensive
Cancer Network
nondosimetric tests, 116
noninvasive bite-block frame, 48
non–small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
183, 321
advanced, 186
early stage, 184–186
SBRT of, 183–190, 195
normal tissue complication probability
(NTCP), 27–35
dose–volume effects, 28–29
generalized EUD, 32–33
Lyman model, 31–32
mathematical models, 29–30
model functions to predict, 30–31
relative seriality model, 32
unexpected normal tissue responses
to SBRT treatments, 33–35
normalized total dose (NTD), 19
Novalis Tx™ system, 79
NRC. See Nuclear Regulatory
Commission
NSCLC. See non–small-cell lung cancer
NTCP. See normal tissue complication
probability
NTD. See normalized total dose
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC),
134

OBI. See On-Board Imager system
OER. See oxygen enhancement ratio
oligometastases, 186
On-Board Imager (OBI) system, 89
optical image guidance, 61
Optical Surface Monitoring System
(OSMS), 80
organ dysfunction, 178
OSMS. See Optical Surface Monitoring
System
oxygen enhancement ratio (OER), 17–18

PACE. See Prostate Advances in
Comparative Evidence
PACS. See picture archiving and
communication system
pancreas SBRT, 201–212
evolution of dose escalation, 201–202
follow-up imaging, 211
outcome data, 211
overview, 201
in pancreatic cancer, 202–209
quality of life, 211–212
role of radiation therapy in pancreatic
cancer, 201–202
treatment follow-up, 211–212
treatment planning, 209–211
pancreatic cancer. See also pancreas
SBRT
role of radiation therapy in, 201–202
stereotactic body radiation therapy in,
202–209

Heron_68566_PTR_Index_333-338_08-23-18.indd 336

parapharyngeal space
patient selection/evaluation, 151–152
radiation treatment, 152
Parkinson’s disease, 158
Patient Control Unit (PCU), 75
patient immobilization, for SRS/SBRT,
47–51
extracranial immobilization, 49–50
intracranial immobilization, 47–49
motion management, 50–51
overview, 47
process map of, 48
patient positioning system (PPS), 75
PCU. See Patient Control Unit
PET. See positron emission tomography
phantoms, 118–119
picture archiving and communication
system (PACS), 12
pituitary adenoma, 150–151
outcomes, 151
workup and management, 150
planning target volume (PTV), 21, 24,
66–67, 189, 219, 231
planning techniques, 222–223
positron emission tomography (PET),
55–56, 216
Power Distance Index, 135
PPS. See patient positioning system
Problem Identification and Resolution, 136
process mapping, 137
program audits, 108
Prostate Advances in Comparative
Evidence (PACE), 264
prostate SBRT
dose, 252
dose constraints for, 258
exclusion criteria for, 253–255
indications for, 249–252
randomized trials for, 264
toxicities, 261–263
treatment process, 255–261
proton beams, 93–95
relative-linear stopping powers, 94
single-fraction and hypofractionated
treatments with, 94
PTV. See planning target volume

QA. See quality assurance program
QM. See quality management
QOL. See quality of life
quality assurance (QA) program, 103
quality management (QM)
development, 110
of imaging systems, 119
program audits, 108
program design and goals, 107–108
prospective approaches, 109
risk assessment, 104–107
risk-based program, 107
risk-based quality management
program, 104–109
TG-100 methodology, 108
tools, 107

quality of life (QOL)
head and neck SBRT, 176–177
lung SBRT, 195–196
pancreas SBRT, 211–212
QUANTEC. See Quantitative Analyses
of Normal Tissue Effects in the
Clinic
Quantitative Analyses of Normal
Tissue Effects in the Clinic
(QUANTEC), 173

radiation-induced cell killing,
mechanisms of, 16–19
bath and shower effects in normal
tissues, 18
immunogenic effects, 18
linear–quadratic model for, 17–18
other DNA damage models, 18
radiation-induced vascular
damage, 18
radiation-induced liver disease (RILD),
243
radiation-induced lung injury (RILI),
62, 63
radiation therapy (RT), 227
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group
(RTOG), 67, 91, 165, 190, 304
radiobiology principles, for SBRT
biologically effective dose, 19–20
normal tissue complication
probability, 27–35
radiation-induced cell killing,
mechanisms of, 16–19
5R’s of, 15–16
tumor control probability, 20–27
radiochromic film, 118
radiosurgery, 3, 141
RCT. See Repositioning Check Tool
real-time position management (RPM)
system, 51, 79
RECIST. See Response Evaluation
Criteria in Solid Tumors
recursive partitioning analysis (RPA),
153
relative seriality model, 32
Repositioning Check Tool (RCT), 75
Respectful Work Environment, 135
respiration-correlated CTs
advantages, 300
disadvantages of, 300
respiratory motion management,
299–301
active, 300
passive, 300
Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid
Tumors (RECIST), 196, 287, 314
rib fracture, in lung cancer SBRT,
33–35
RILD. See radiation-induced liver
disease
RILD syndrome, 233
RILI. See radiation-induced lung injury
Risk Priority Number (RPN), 105, 137

21/08/18 2:12 PM

INDEX
robotic arm–based delivery systems,
236–237
room-fixed kV imaging, 60
RPA. See recursive partitioning analysis
RPM. See real-time position
management system
RPN. See Risk Priority Number
RT. See radiation therapy
RTOG. See Radiation Therapy
Oncology Group

Safety Committee, 134, 136
safety culture, 134, 138
related documents, 134
SBRT. See stereotactic body radiation
therapy
SBRT for oligometastatic disease
cancer metastasis, 293
clinicopathological features, 295
dose constraints for, 316
dose fractionation, 295–296
follow-up, 314–315
oligometastatic state, 293–294
outcome and toxicity, 313–314
quality of life, 315
simulation, 299
target delineation, 301–303
tumor control probability, 296–297
scanning tank, 119
SDD. See source-to-detector distance
semiconductor diodes, 117
sexual toxicities, 263
SFD. See source-to-focus distance
SFRO. See Société Francophone de
Radiothérapie Oncologique
sigmoid dose–response curve, 142
skin ulceration, 178
small-field dosimetry, 113–114
SMF. See streptozocin, mitomycin, 5-FU
Société Francophone de Radiothérapie
Oncologique (SFRO), 201
source-to-detector distance (SDD), 85, 87
source-to-focus distance (SFD), 74
Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG), 27
Spetzler–Martin grading system, 142
Spetzler–Martin scale, 143
spinal cord myelopathy, 172
spine SBRT
decompressive, 280–281
de novo SBRT, 279–280
dose constraints, 286
follow-up and quality of life, 287
postoperative, 280
primary spine tumors, 281
safety considerations, 287–289
spine metastases, 280
treatment plannings, 285–287

Heron_68566_PTR_Index_333-338_08-23-18.indd 337

SRS. See stereotactic radiosurgery
standardized uptake value (SUV), 55–56
stereotactic ablative radiation therapy
(SABR), 227
stereotactic body radiation therapy
(SBRT), 133, 227
application of TG-100 methodology,
108–109
challenges of, 40
clinical outcomes for, 6–7
cohort study of, 324
considerations for, 40
definition of, 5–6
disease sites treated with, 6
equipment selection, 9–10
establishing goals for, 7
establishing infrastructure and
physical plant, 9, 11
exposure to common errors in, 12
gathering right staff for, 10–12
intracranial, 40
IT resources for, 12
launching quality program, 7
linac-based, 4–5
medical physicists in, 8
for metastatic tumors, 6–7
for non–small-cell lung cancer, 6
overview, 3–5
patient population, analysis of, 9
processes, 39–41
radiation oncologists responsible
for, 8
resourcing program, 8–9
role of, 325–326
team and their credentials, 7–8
training needs and requirement in, 11
treatment plan for, 65–71
stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS), 3, 103,
141, 154. See also stereotactic
body radiation therapy
definition of, 5–6
stereotaxy, 3
streaking phenomena, 289
streptozocin, mitomycin, 5-FU (SMF),
201
SUV. See standardized uptake value
SWOG. See Southwest Oncology Group

TAAs. See tumor-associated antigens
target volume, algorithm for, 304
T-cell trafficking, 323
TCP. See tumor control probability
technologies, for SRS and SBRT delivery
ancillary systems, 88–90
future technology, 93
gamma-ray–based delivery systems,
73–77

337

linear accelerator-based delivery
systems, 77–87
overview, 73
performance comparisons, 90–93
Vero, 87–88
3D QA phantom, 126
TJC. See The Joint Commission
The Joint Commission (TJC), 103
TKIs. See tyrosine kinase inhibitors
tomotherapy system, 39, 83–87
TPS. See treatment planning system
transurethral resection of the prostate
(TURP) defect, 254
treatment planning system (TPS), 104
trigeminal neuralgia, 157
TrueBeam™ STx, 79–80
tumor-associated antigens (TAAs), 322
tumor control probability (TCP),
20–27
BED to local control observations,
24–25
equivalent uniform dose, 26–27
fit dose, 24–25
population averaging, 25–26
puzzle, 23–24
simpler dose–response formulas,
21–23
uncertainty in data, 26
TURP. See transurethral resection of the
prostate defect
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), 187

Varian systems, 79–80
spatial resolution data for, 121
vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), 243
VEGF. See vascular endothelial growth
factor
Vero, 87–88
vestibular schwannomas, 145
video-supplemented guides, 272
ViewRay, 88
visual analogue score, 287
VMAT. See volumetric-modulated arc
therapy
volumetric and spatial fidelity, 126
volumetric-modulated arc therapy
(VMAT), 40, 65, 88, 111

whole-brain radiation therapy,
153–154
Winston–Lutz test, 112, 113
Work Process, 137

X-ray imaging, 59–60

21/08/18 2:12 PM

