Medical Radiology
Radiation Oncology

Series Editors
Luther W. Brady
Hans-Peter Heilmann
Michael Molls
Carsten Nieder

For further volumes:
http://www.springer.com/series/4353

Simon S. Lo • Bin S. Teh
Jiade J. Lu • Tracey E. Schefter
Editors

Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy

123

Editors
Simon S. Lo
Department of Radiation Oncology
University Hospitals Seidman Cancer
Center
Case Comprehensive Cancer Center
Case Western Reserve University
Cleveland, OH
USA
Bin S. Teh
Department of Radiation Oncology
Weill Cornell Medical College
The Methodist Hospital Cancer
Center and Research Institute
Houston, TX
USA

Jiade J. Lu
Department of Radiation Oncology
National University Cancer Institute of
Singapore (NCIS)
National University of Singapore
Singapore
Tracey E. Schefter
Department of Radiation Oncology
University of Colorado
Aurora, CO
USA

ISSN 0942-5373
ISBN 978-3-642-25604-2
ISBN 978-3-642-25605-9
DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-25605-9

(eBook)

Springer Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2012947064
Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is
concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting,
reproduction on microfilm or in any other way, and storage in data banks. Duplication of this publication
or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the German Copyright Law of September 9,
1965, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Violations are
liable to prosecution under the German Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, etc. in this publication does not
imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
Product liability: The publishers cannot guarantee the accuracy of any information about dosage and
application contained in this book. In every individual case the user must check such information by
consulting the relevant literature.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

To my parents, my wife, and my children for their support and
encouragement in this project
Simon S. Lo, M.D.
Dedicated to the support and love from my mother, wife, daughter,
and siblings. The chapter on renal cell carcinoma is a special
dedication to my late father who passed away from renal cell
carcinoma. He had great impact on my life and career and motivated
both my brother and I to pursue research and contribute to the
advances in the field of renal cell carcinoma
Bin S. Teh, M.D.
To my family for their support and encouragement in this project and
many others
Jiade J. Lu, M.D.
In loving memory of my mother who lost her short battle with breast
cancer in 1986. Her spirit lives within me
Tracey E. Schefter, M.D.

Foreword

Stereotactic Radiosurgery
In 1980, the National Cancer Institute on the advice of the Committee for
Radiation Oncology Studies proposed an investigation into the feasibility for
the dynamic treatment planning and dynamic treatment delivery which would
allow for the tumor to be in the ﬁeld of treatment throughout the entire course
of the treatment program accommodating for motion of the tumor with respiration or motion of the patient during treatment. A number of institutions in
the United States were involved in this project but the ultimate result indicated
that the technology and computer programs were not adequate to deal with the
issue.
As a consequence of the work being done by Professor Mort Kligerman at
the Los Alamos Pi-Meson project, various devices for immobilization were
developed allowing a much more sophisticated technology for immobilization
than had existed before and these were rapidly incorporated into clinical
practice. This allowed for the development of three-dimensional conformal
treatment programs, leading ultimately to the development of the intensity
modulated radiation therapy in the early 1990s to image guided radiation
therapy in the later 1990s, and ultimately to linear accelerator-based stereotactic radiation therapy technologies, and then to the CyberKnife.
The stereotactic body radiosurgery procedures allowed for focusing on the
tumor throughout the entire course of treatment accommodating for motion
and breathing with the machine operating in synchrony with the table. Without
question, this represented a dramatic advance in terms of the potential for
improvement in control rates for tumors based on the evolution of technology
and imaging studies, and the ability to fuse these imaging studies to more
precisely deﬁne the tumor but also with the reduction in side effects relative to
the treatment program itself.
The results from the stereotactic body radiosurgery programs are now
becoming more widely available, clearly indicating that this is a dramatic step
forward in terms of allowing for maximum control of the tumor with minimum
in the way of complication.

vii

viii

Foreword

The present volume deals in a most effective fashion with all the issues that
are mandated by stereotactic body radiosurgery. It is a document that needs to
be on the shelf of every radiation oncologist in the world because of the clarity,
the comprehensive character, and the signiﬁcance of the data being presented.
7 June 2012

Luther W. Brady
Hans-Peter Heilmann
Michael Molls
Carsten Nieder

Foreword

The Desperate Role of Clinical Science in the Implementation
of Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy/Stereotactic Ablative
Radiotherapy
Most physicians have extensive undergraduate training in science and speciﬁcally
the scientiﬁc method. They also have training in art, history, languages, and other
liberal arts intended to give them balance and social conscience. Subsequent
medical training is almost purely in the realm of science aside from the occasional
class in humanities like courses for developing interviewing skills. Success in the
science courses in medical school allows future physicians to choose from the best
residencies and fellowships to train for their life’s craft. After more than a decade
of medical training and hard work, they reach the point where they are competent
to care for patients...and then, oddly, they abruptly abandon the scientiﬁc
method. Instead, they champion non-scientiﬁc attributes like strong will, emotional fervor, and parochial (even religious) zeal relating to their specialty.
Indeed, the physician products of the most competitive residency programs are
frequently the worst of the anti-science contingency. They continue to work hard
and hone their skills, but unbiased scientiﬁc growth is stiﬂed.
The science of clinical practice that too many physicians abandon is called
clinical science or the science of determining the best management options for
our patients. It is a well developed, serious, and critically important science in
that it is the best pathway to prudent change. Ongoing patient suffering is the
obvious motivation for this change. How could the medical community not be
motivated to change? Patients suffer from their commonly poor health status,
and they will potentially suffer from the course of diseases that they will
develop. Clinical science allows us to make a valid comparison between the
status quo and the various prospects for a changing evaluation or management.
What a shame it is that clinical science and the scientiﬁc method play such a
small role in day-to-day clinical operations where so few patients will ever be
offered a clinical trial as a diagnostic or therapeutic option.
Stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR), also known as stereotactic body
radiation therapy (SBRT), was ﬁrst introduced in the mid-1990s and constituted
a dramatic change in the way radiation had been previously delivered in both
conduct and biology. It primarily exploited modern technological innovations to
achieve geometric avoidance of high dose to normal tissues. Importantly, though,
was the use of oligofractionated (i.e., few fractions) radiation delivery that would

ix

x

undoubtedly result in biological effects very different from conventionally
fractionated radiation. This different biology constituted a potential for a
dramatic change in outcome. While change in therapy outcome for deadly
cancers, like lung cancer, should have been welcomed, it also put a veil of
uncertainty over the use of stereotactic radiation in regard to informing patients
about risks and beneﬁts.
When there is potential for a positive change in the outcome of a previously
dismal disease with simultaneous uncertainty about toxicity, the only rational
course is to apply a legitimate clinical science approach. This involves forming a
hypothesis, deﬁning a clinical model, devising an experiment (i.e., a clinical
trial), testing the hypothesis under controlled circumstances, collecting data,
and reporting the results. The earliest implementation of SABR in the clinic was
mostly uncontrolled, similar to the implementation of too many innovations in
radiation oncology. These early reports were both compelling and, frankly,
frightening. More historical use of such large dose per fraction radiotherapy
brought disaster than promise for patients. Early investigators recognized two
important caveats surrounding stereotactic radiotherapy: (1) Patients deserved
the utmost protection from risk and (2) The potentially paradigm changing
therapy was at risk of being marginalized if the level of evidence was low. Both
of these caveats are best addressed with legitimate clinical testing using validated clinical science.
Early investigators of SABR from across the world met at any chance to
share ideas. A series of clinical trials were developed and performed using
variations of the technology, dosing, and patient selection. Despite the differences, the biology was strikingly similar such that outcomes could be systematically assessed. Phase I and II trials were performed selecting patients who
were properly consented to understand the uncertainties associated with the
therapy. Fortunately, the outcomes have been overall positive. Hence, the
impetus for new textbooks on the subject.
As a case in point, the Indiana University experience in early lung cancer
demonstrates the strength of the scientiﬁc approach. The clinical model chosen
for investigation by the researchers was early lung cancer in patients too frail
for standard surgical resection. The technique for radiation delivery was deﬁned
and used consistently. A logistically attractive 3-fraction regimen was chosen
for comprehensive study. Initially, a phase I dose escalation study was performed trying to hone in on the optimal dose. Patients were consented with full
disclosure that such treatments could lead to previously unobserved toxicity. To
the surprise of all associated with the experiment, dose was escalated to strikingly high dose levels (24 Gy per fraction times 3 fractions, total 72 Gy) before
dose limiting toxicity was ﬁnally observed. This dose dramatically exceeded the
‘‘expectations’’ of the researcher via any logical predictions. Patients enjoyed
very high levels of tumor control at the tolerable high dose levels. In reality,
without the framework of a scientiﬁcally valid clinical approach, patients would
not have been treated at the dose levels affording such impressive tumor
eradication. Clinical science literally saved patients both in this trial and future
trials from dying of lung cancer via treatment with inadequate dose.
The lessons of clinical science from the Indiana experience goes farther. The
phase I study described above was underpowered with regard to patient
subgroups. It enrolled any medically inoperable patient with early lung cancer

Foreword

Foreword

xi

irrespective of the location of the tumor in the lung. By design, a small number
of patients were enrolled to each level of a broad range of dose levels. In the
subsequent phase II study, a larger (more statistically powered) group of
patients was enrolled to the highest tolerable dose level. In the phase II study, a
subtle but important reality was observed that patients with centrally located
tumors had higher risk of severe toxicity as compared to patients with
peripheral tumors. This distinction was critical in both selecting appropriate
patients for the most potent form of the therapy as well as protecting those at
high risk of harm. Again, this important distinction was afforded by an
appreciation of valid clinical science.
The value of legitimate clinical science does not go unnoticed. The best
journals now require that key elements to the scientiﬁc method of discovery,
like statistical power and data safety monitoring, be conveyed in order to
publish. Retrospective reports, so ﬂawed in their approach to reaching valid
conclusions, will increasingly be rejected for publication by good journals.
Ideally, as technologies used in stereotactic radiotherapy delivery are improved
or initially introduced, investigators will perform valid testing in patients to
draw conclusions about the value of the new therapy. The same goes for using
chemical and biological modulators in conjunction with potent stereotactic
radiation.
More than most radiotherapy innovations, the implementation of SABR has
followed a clinically scientiﬁc approach. Even only 15 years after the ﬁrst
extracranial stereotactic radiation treatments, it is clear that the impact will be
paradigm changing. Phase III trials possibly changing the standard of care are
underway. Unfortunately, they are in danger of failing from problems of
accrual. Why? Recall the ﬁrst two paragraphs of this preface describing the
‘‘anti-science’’ perspective of too many clinicians. Nonetheless, we hope that the
success of the therapy will continue as it is implemented in new organ systems
and body sites. Yet hope, as any clinical scientist will tell you, must give way to
prudent evaluations, evidence gathering, and, ultimately, appreciation of
reality.
Dallas, TX, USA

Robert D. Timmerman

Foreword

SBRT: Present and Future Directions
Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a ﬁeld in its formative years
with very promising early results. For example, as reported by Timmerman and
colleagues (JAMA 17:1070–1076, 2010), for inoperable early stage lung cancer,
a 3-year primary tumor control rate of 90.6% was reported which prior to the
advent of SBRT was unheard of. This book on SBRT edited by Drs. Lo, Teh,
Lu, and Schefter is an important comprehensive book that informs practitioners, researchers, trainees, and students, and allied health professionals of
the potential beneﬁts to patients of applying SBRT to a variety of tumor types,
both in the primary and metastatic setting through proper patient selection. The
risk of harms to patients is also present, since much larger fraction sizes are
utilized with few opportunities to make corrections although fortunately there
is a heightened awareness of the importance of safety, and efforts to improve
safety processes and technologies are constantly ongoing. A PubMed search in
2011 reveals approximately 400 publications in the literature. It is expected that
this number will exponentially increase as investigators in oncology continue to
become more focused on minimizing ‘‘collateral damage’’ in the patient through
the use of customized systemic targeted agents, and minimally invasive surgeries. How to integrate these innovate therapies with SBRT will certainly be
the subject of future publications. While normal tissue tolerances have been
fairly well-deﬁned for radiation therapy given in conventional fractionation,
data are sorely lacking at this point in time on normal tissue complication
probabilities to organs at risk when subjected to SBRT-type fractionation
regimens. As such, much work remains to be done in terms of clinical trials, and
subsequent validation studies to deﬁne a comprehensive set of SBRT normal
organ dose tolerance limits. The ﬁrst edition of this book, and subsequent
editions it is hoped, will continue to facilitate the transmission of knowledge to
build a foundation to practice SBRT with ever-increasing safety, sophistication,
and effectiveness for the cancer patient.
Los Angeles, CA, USA

Eric L. Chang

xiii

Preface

In the past 10 years, there has been a very rapid growth in research and clinical
applications of stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) or stereotactic
ablative radiotherapy (SABR) for various body sites. The use of SBRT was
initially limited to lung, liver, and spine, and now its use has been expanded to
include spine, head and neck, kidney, prostate, adrenal gland, and female
reproductive tract, in parallel with the advancement of image-guided technologies. There is an exponential increase in the number of studies, including single
institutional, multi-institutional, and cooperative group prospective trials, on
SBRT for multiple disease conditions such as medically inoperable non-small
cell lung cancer, primary liver cancer, lung metastasis, liver metastasis, oligometastasis, spinal metastasis, renal cell carcinoma, prostate cancer, and
gynecologic malignancies. In addition to the clinical aspects, more is also
known about the radiation and molecular biology of ablative radiation, and
new radiobiological models, such as the University Survival Curve (USC) and
the generalized linear-quadratic (gLQ) models, have been proposed. We feel
that there is a need to put together a textbook that provides all these important
information.
The arrangement of the chapters of this textbook is systematically performed. After the chapters ‘‘Introduction’’ and ‘‘Historical Development of
Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy’’, the technological and biological aspects
of SBRT will be covered. Different treatment delivery systems, treatment
planning, steps to start a treatment program, and radiobiology pertaining to
SBRT will be discussed
Subsequent to these, clinical applications of SBRT in primary tumors will be
covered. These will then be followed by discussions on clinical applications of
SBRT in various settings of metastasis. Case examples are provided in each of
the chapters on clinical applications to facilitate the understanding of the SBRT
process in various disease settings. The ﬁnal two chapters will go over reported
normal tissue toxicities and constraints.

xv

xvi

Preface

We sincerely hope this textbook will serve as a useful resource for radiation
oncologists, clinical oncologists, surgical oncologists, neurosurgeons, medical
residents, medical students, medical physicists, medical dosimetrists, radiation
therapists, and all others who are practicing SBRT, involving in care of patients
treated with SBRT, or dealing with cancer patients.
Simon S. Lo
Bin S. Teh
Jiade J. Lu
Tracey E. Schefter

Contents

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Simon S. Lo, Bin S. Teh, Jiade J. Lu, and Tracey E. Schefter

1

Historical Development of Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy . . . . . . .
Timothy D. Solberg, Robert L. Siddon, and Brian Kavanagh

9

CyberKnife System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jun Yang, John P. Lamond, Jing Feng, Xiaodong Wu, Rachelle Lanciano,
and Luther W. Brady

37

Novalis and Varian Systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Isaac I. Rosen and Ramiro Pino

53

Helical TomoTherapy System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Whitney Warren, Walter H. Grant III, and Bin S. Teh

67

Elekta System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Julian R. Perks, Megan E. Daly, David Schlesinger,
and Stanley H. Benedict

79

Treatment Planning for Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy . . . . . . .
Moyed Miften, Shiva K. Das, Indrin J. Chetty, and David Westerly

91

Launching a Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy Program . . . . . . . . .
Michael Lamba

115

Radiobiology of Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy/Stereotactic
Ablative Radiotherapy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Michael D. Story, Chaitanya Nirodi, and Clinton Park

123

Primary Lung Cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Joe Y. Chang, Shervin M. Shirvani, Billy W. Loo Jr., John P. Lamond,
Ben J. Slotman, and Yasushi Nagata

137

Primary Liver Cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Higinia R. Cárdenes and Foster Lasley

163

xvii

xviii

Contents

Prostate Cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hiromichi Ishiyama, Alan Katz, Angel I. Blanco, Jose Hinojosa,
Simon S. Lo, Rodney J. Ellis, Bo Xu, Robert J. Amato,
E. Brian Butler, and Bin S. Teh

183

Renal Cell Carcinoma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bin S. Teh, Hiromichi Ishiyama, Angel I. Blanco, Lee E. Ponsky,
Simon S. Lo, Bo Xu, E. Brian Butler, Robert J. Amato,
and Rodney J. Ellis

197

Gynecologic Cancer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Charles A. Kunos, Jeffrey Fabien, Yuxia Zhang,
James Brindle, and Nina A. Mayr

211

Pancreatic Cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A. Yuriko Minn, Daniel T. Chang, and Albert C. Koong

227

Benign and Malignant Primary Spinal Tumors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brett Cox, Iris C. Gibbs, and Yoshiya Yamada

239

Non-Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Farzan Siddiqui, David Raben, Sue S. Yom, Jiade J. Lu, and Min Yao

251

Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sue S. Yom, David Raben, Farzan Siddiqui, Jiade J. Lu, and Min Yao

267

Lung Metastasis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Neha Amin, Tracey E. Schefter, Paul Okunieff, Brian Kavanagh,
and Michael T. Milano

285

Liver Metastasis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Michelle Stinauer, Rachelle Lanciano, Tracey E. Schefter, Brian Kavanagh,
Julie A. Carlson, and Alan W. Katz

305

Adrenal Metastasis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mirna Abboud, Simon S. Lo, Arnold C. Paulino,
Daniel E. Lehane, and Bin S. Teh

321

Histology-Specific Metastasis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Michael T. Milano and Joseph K. Salama

331

Bone Metastasis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mirna Abboud, Arnold C. Paulino, Bin S. Teh,
Simon S. Lo, and Rex Marco

345

Spinal Metastasis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Simon S. Lo, Andrew E. Sloan, Mitchell Machtay, Bin S. Teh,
Arjun Sahgal, Samuel T. Chao, and Eric L. Chang

355

Contents

xix

Reported Toxicities Associated with Stereotactic
Body Radiation Therapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Simon S. Lo, Arjun Sahgal, Charles A. Kunos, Bin S. Teh, Min Yao,
Mitchell Machtay, Nina A. Mayr, Zhibin Huang, and Eric L. Chang

373

Normal Tissue Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Simon S. Lo, Arjun Sahgal, Lijun Ma, Ben J. Slotman, Zhibin Huang,
Nina A. Mayr, Charles A. Kunos, Bin S. Teh, Mitchell Machtay,
and Eric L. Chang

393

Erratum: Primary Liver Cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

E1

Erratum: Bone Metastasis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

E3

Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

411

Contributors

Mirna Abboud Department of Radiation Oncology, The Methodist Hospital,
Cancer Center and Research Institute, 6565 Fannin, Houston, TX 77030, USA
Robert J. Amato Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Oncology,
University of Texas Health Sciences Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA
Neha Amin Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Colorado
Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA
Stanley H. Benedict Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
California at Davis Comprehensive Cancer Center, 4501 X Street, Suite 0144,
Sacramento, CA 95817, USA, e-mail: SHB4X@hscmail.mcc.virginia.edu
Angel I. Blanco Department of Radiation Oncology, The Methodist Hospital,
Cancer Center and Research Institute, 6565 Fannin, DB1-077, Houston, TX
77030, USA
Luther W. Brady Drexel University and Philadelphia CyberKnife, 2010 West
Chester Pike, Suite 115, Havertown, PA, USA
E. Brian Butler Department of Radiation Oncology, The Methodist Hospital,
Cancer Center and Research Institute, 6565 Fannin, DB1-077, Houston, TX
77030, USA
James Brindle Department of Radiation Oncology and Case Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center and Case Western
Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
E. Brian Butler Department of Radiation Oncology, The Methodist Hospital,
Cancer Center and Research Institute, 6565 Fannin, DB1-077, Houston, TX
77030, USA
Higinia R. Cárdenes Department of Clinical Radiation Oncology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, 535 Barnhill Dr, RT 041, Indianapolis, IN
46202, USA, e-mail: hcardene@iupui.edu
Julie A. Carlson Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Colorado
Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA
Eric L. Chang Department of Radiation Oncology, Keck School of Medicine
and Norris Cancer Hospital, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
CA, USA

xxi

xxii

Daniel T. Chang Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University
Medical Center, 875 Blake Wilbur Drive MC 5847, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
Joe Y. Chang Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA
Samuel T. Chao Department of Radiation Oncology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH, USA
Indrin J. Chetty Department of Radiation Oncology, Henry Ford Health
System, Detroit, MI, USA
Brett Cox Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA, e-mail:
coxb@mskcc.org
Megan E. Daly University of California at Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA
Shiva K. Das Department of Radiation Oncology, Duke University, Durham,
NC, USA
Rodney J. Ellis Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospitals
Seidman Cancer Center, Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
Jeffrey Fabien Department of Radiation Oncology and Case Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center and Case Western
Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
Jing Feng Drexel University and Philadelphia CyberKnife, 2010 West Chester
Pike, Suite 115, Havertown, PA, USA
Iris C. Gibbs Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
Walter H. Grant III Department of Radiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
BCM 360, Houston, TX 77030, USA, e-mail: wgrant@bcm.edu
Jose Hinojosa ABC Cancer Center, Mexico City, Mexico
Zhibin Huang Department of Radiation Oncology, East Carolina University,
Greenville, NC, USA
Hiromichi Ishiyama Department of Radiation Oncology, The Methodist
Hospital, Cancer Center and Research Institute, 6565 Fannin, DB1-077,
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Radiology and Radiation Oncology,
Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan
Alan W. Katz Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Rochester
Medical Center, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Box 647, Rochester, NY 14642,
USA, e-mail: Alan_Katz@URMC.Rochester.edu
Alan Katz Flushing Radiation Oncology, Flushing, NY, USA
Brian Kavanagh Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Colorado,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA

Contributors

Contributors

xxiii

Albert C. Koong Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University
Medical Center, 875 Blake Wilbur Drive MC 5847, Stanford, CA 94305, USA,
e-mail: akoong@stanford.edu
Charles A. Kunos Department of Radiation Oncology and Case Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center and Case Western
Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA; Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospitals of Cleveland, 11100 Euclid
Avenue, LTR 6068, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA, e-mail: charles.kunos@
UHhospitals.org
Michael Lamba Radiation Oncology, University of Cincinnati, 234 Goodman
St ML 0757, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0757, USA, e-mail: Michael.Lamba@uc.
edu
John P. Lamond Department of Radiation Oncology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19102, USA
Rachelle Lanciano Department of Radiation Oncology, Delaware County
Memorial Hospital, Philadelphia CyberKnife, Drexel Hill, PA 19026, USA;
Drexel University and Philadelphia CyberKnife, 2010 West Chester Pike, Suite
115, Havertown, PA, USA
Foster Lasley Department of Clinical Radiation Oncology, Indiana University
School of Medicine, 535 Barnhill Dr, RT 041, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA
Daniel E. Lehane Department of Academic Medicine, The Methodist Hospital,
Houston, TX 77030, USA
Simon S. Lo Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospitals Seidman
Cancer Center, Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA, e-mail: Simon.Lo@UHhospitals.org
Billy W. Loo Jr. Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305-5847, USA
Jiade J. Lu Department of Radiation Oncology, National University Cancer
Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Lijun Ma Department of Radiation Oncology, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
Mitchell Machtay Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospitals
Seidman Cancer Center, Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
Rex Marco Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Texas Health
Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA
Nina A. Mayr Department of Radiation Oncology, Arthur G. James Cancer
Hospital The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Moyed Miften Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Colorado
School of Medicine, MS F706 1665 Aurora Court, Ste 1032, Aurora, CO 80045,
USA, e-mail: Moyed.Miften@ucdenver.edu

xxiv

Michael T. Milano Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Rochester, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Box 647, Rochester, NY 14642, USA, e-mail:
Michael_milano@urmc.rochester.edu
A. Yuriko Minn Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University
Medical Center, 875 Blake Wilbur Drive MC 5847, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
Yasushi Nagata Department of Radiation Oncology, Hiroshima University
Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan
Chaitanya Nirodi Division of Molecular Radiation Biology, Department of
Radiation Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA
Paul Okunieff Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA
Clinton Park Texas Oncology, Fort Worth, TX 76104, USA
Arnold C. Paulino Department of Radiation Oncology, The Methodist Hospital, Cancer Center and Research Institute, 6565 Fannin, Houston, TX 77030,
USA
Julian R. Perks University of California at Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA
Ramiro Pino Department of Radiation Oncology, The Methodist Hospital,
6565 Fannin St, Houston, TX 77030, USA
Lee E. Ponsky Center for Urologic Oncology and Minimally Invasive Therapies, Urology Institute, University Hospitals Case Medical Center, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
David Raben Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Colorado
Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA
Isaac I. Rosen Department of Radiation Oncology, The Methodist Hospital,
6565 Fannin St, Houston, TX 77030, USA, e-mail: iirosen@tmhs.org
Arjun Sahgal Department of Radiation Oncology, Princess Margaret Hospital
and Toronto Sunnybrook Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada
Joseph K. Salama Department of Radiation Oncology, Duke University, Box
3085, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA
Tracey E. Schefter Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Colorado
Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA
David Schlesinger University of Virginia Health System, 1300 Jefferson Park
Avenue, Charlottesville, VA, USA
Shervin M. Shirvani Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA
Farzan Siddiqui Department of Radiation Oncology, Henry Ford Health
System, 2799 W Grand Blvd, Detroit, MI 48202, USA, e-mail: farzan.
siddiqui@osumc.edu

Contributors

Contributors

xxv

Robert L. Siddon National Naval Medical Center, Bethesda, MD 20899, USA
Andrew E. Sloan Brain Tumor and Neuro-Oncology Center, University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland,
OH 44106, USA
Ben J. Slotman Department of Radiation Oncology, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Timothy D. Solberg Department of Radiation Oncology, Division of Medical
Physics and Engineering, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390,
USA, e-mail: Timothy.Solberg@utsouthwestern.edu
Michelle Stinauer Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Colorado
Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA
Michael D. Story Division of Molecular Radiation Biology, Department of
Radiation Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA, e-mail: Michael.Story@utsouthwestern.edu
Bin S. Teh Department of Radiation Oncology, The Methodist Hospital,
Cancer Center and Research Institute, Weil Cornell Medical College, 6565
Fannin, DB1-077, Houston, TX 77030, USA, e-mail: bteh@tmhs.org
Whitney Warren Department of Radiation Oncology, The Methodist Hospital,
Houston, TX 77070, USA
David Westerly Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Colorado
School of Medicine, MS F706 1665 Aurora Court, Ste 1032, Aurora, CO 80045,
USA
Xiaodong Wu Interterra Medical Technologies, LLC, Naples, FL, USA
Bo Xu Department of Radiation Oncology, The Methodist Hospital, Cancer
Center and Research Institute, 6565 Fannin, DB1-077, Houston, TX 77030,
USA
Yoshiya Yamada Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA
Jun Yang Drexel University and Philadelphia CyberKnife, 2010 West Chester
Pike, Suite 115, Havertown, PA, USA, e-mail: junbme@yahoo.com
Min Yao Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospitals Seidman
Cancer Center, Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
Sue S. Yom Department of Radiation Oncology, University of California, San
Francisco, 1600 Divisadero St. Suite H-1031, San Francisco, CA 94143,
USA, e-mail: yoms@ radonc.ucsf.edu
Yuxia Zhang Department of Radiation Oncology and Case Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center and Case Western
Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA

Introduction
Simon S. Lo, Bin S. Teh, Jiade J. Lu, and Tracey E. Schefter

Contents

Abstract

1

Introduction..............................................................

1

2

History of Development of Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy...................................................

2

Overview of Radiobiology of SBRT ......................

2

4
Overview of Technical Aspects of SBRT..............
4.1 Patient Immobilization and Respiratory Motion
Control .......................................................................
4.2 Physics and Dosimetry ..............................................
4.3 Treatment Delivery Units..........................................

3

5

Overview of Clinical Applications.........................

5

6

Overview of Toxicities.............................................

6

7

Conclusions ...............................................................

6

References..........................................................................

6

3

Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) or
stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR) entails
the precise and focused delivery of a small number
of fractions of radiation in the ablative dose range to
extracranial targets. Advances in technologies have
facilitated safe and effective delivery of SBRT/
SABR to various organ sites. The clinical experience with the use of SBRT/SABR to treat various
extracranial organ sites has exponentially increased
in the past 5–10 years in North America, Europe,
and Asia. This chapter provides an introductory
overview on various aspects of SBRT/ SABR.

3
4
5

1
S. S. Lo (&)
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center,
Case Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
e-mail: Simon.Lo@UHhospitals.org
B. S. Teh
Department of Radiation Oncology,
The Methodist Hospital Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College,
Houston, TX 77030, USA
J. J. Lu
Department of Radiation Oncology,
National University Cancer Institute of Singapore,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
T. E. Schefter
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Colorado Denver,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA

Introduction

Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) or
stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR) entails the
precise and focused delivery of a small number of
fractions of radiation in the ablative dose range to
extracranial targets (Lo et al. 2010a; Timmerman and
Kavanagh 2005). Radiation is typically delivered in
1–5 fractions in most cases, although up to 10 fractions may be used. Very sophisticated treatment
planning is done such that a highly conformal isodose
distribution with a very rapid dose fall-off is generated, rendering it possible to deliver an ablative dose
of radiation to the tumor while sparing the surrounding normal tissue or structures from collateral
damage as much as possible.
SBRT/SABR is a rapidly evolving field and its use
to treat various extracranial organ sites has exponentially increased in the past 5–10 years in North

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2011_457, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

1

2

S. S. Lo et al.

America, Europe, and Asia. With the improvement of
technologies, the planning and delivery of SBRT have
been facilitated. Tremendous experience on the use of
SBRT/SABR in various disease sites has been gained
throughout these years and there have also been
several prospective trials evaluating its utility in
various settings with promising results observed
(Lo et al. 2010a). There have also been studies
comparing SBRT and conventional therapy, showing
that SBRT is noninferior in terms of treatment outcomes (Crabtree et al. 2010; Forquer et al. 2009a;
Grills et al. 2010).
This chapter will provide an introductory overview
of SBRT/SABR.

2

History of Development
of Stereotactic Body Radiation
Therapy

Conventional fractionation has been the standard
approach for radiotherapy for the past several decades. In the 1951, Lars Leksell challenged the
radiobiologic dogma of conventionally fractionated
radiotherapy by pioneering the concept of stereotactic
radiosurgery (SRS), and in 1968, the first prototype of
Gamma Knife unit was installed in Sophiahemet. SRS
entails the delivery of a single high dose of radiation
to a focal tumor in a very conformal fashion with very
steep fall-off of dose beyond the target volume.
Although some normal brain parenchyma is most
likely included in the prescribed isodose line, if the
brain tissue is small in volume and located in a noneloquent area, serious complications are very unlikely
to occur. Since Gamma Knife was invented, it has
been used to treat various intracranial lesions with
promising results.
In the early 1990s, a few groups attempted to
deliver stereotactic treatment to extracranial sites
mimicking intracranial SRS. Hamilton and colleagues
attempted to deliver SRS to spinal tumors with rigid
immobilization by screwing a frame to the spinous
processes (Hamilton et al. 1995). Unlike intracranial
SRS where true rigid fixation is possible, the accuracy
of the set-up was affected by inherent motion. Lax
and Blomgren from Karolinska Institute of Sweden
constructed a stereotactic bodyframe with built-in
fiducial markers that could be visualized on CT and
an abdominal compression device for respiratory

motion (Timmerman and Kavanagh 2005). They have
treated several patients with localized extracranial
tumors with ablative doses of radiation, utilizing
computer plans with isodose distribution similar to
intracranial SRS (Blomgren et al. 1995). Multiple
non-coplanar beams with highly conformal apertures
were used to generate the plans. At around the same
time period, Shirato and colleagues were investigating
strategies to account for respiratory motion during
radiotherapy (Shirato et al. 1999). Later on, Uematsu
and colleagues developed a fusion of CT and LINAC
(FOCAL) treatment system to deliver hypofractionated stereotactic radiotherapy to lung tumors using
multiple non-coplanar arcs, reproducing an isodose
distribution similar to intracranial SRS (Uematsu
et al. 1998). Forty-five patients with 66 lung tumors
(23 primary and 43 metastatic) were treated and there
were only 2 failures observed with minimal toxicities.
Given the promising early results, more centers across
the globe were gradually embracing this treatment
approach and numerous retrospective studies on
SBRT for various organ sites have been reported
(Lo et al. 2010a; Timmerman et al. 2007).
With the sophistication of technology and the gain
of more clinical experience, colleagues from various
centers including University of Heidelberg, Indiana
University, and Kyoto University have started to
test the use of SBRT for lung and liver tumors in a
prospective trial setting and promising outcomes have
been observed (Lo et al. 2010a). Subsequently,
prospective trials of SBRT were being conducted
in a multi-institutional or cooperative group setting
(Lo et al. 2010a; Rusthoven et al. 2009a, b;
Timmerman et al. 2010).
All those studies and trials will be discussed in
detail in chapters on respective disease/organ sites.

3

Overview of Radiobiology of SBRT

As described by Wolbarst and colleagues, normal
tissue is composed of small individual functional
subunits (FSUs), where there are a large population of
well-differentiated functional cells and a much smaller
population of clonogenic cells which can replenish
the former when they die off (Wolbarst et al. 1982).
FSUs can be categorized into structurally defined, as
in lung, liver, and kidney, or structurally undefined, as
in spinal cord, nerve plexus, bronchus, small bowels,

Introduction

and esophagus. The liver and lung are large organs
with ample reserve for hepatic and respiratory functions, respectively, and are made up of numerous
structurally defined FSUs (Lo et al. 2010a; Timmerman et al. 2007). If the liver or lung is exposed to a
radiation dose below the threshold, the radiationdamaged areas can potentially be repaired by the
migration of the clonogenic cells within each FSU.
On the contrary, if the region of the liver or lung
receives a dose above the threshold, all the clonogenic
cells within each FSU in the region will be killed and
the whole region will lose its function. Since the FSUs
in the liver and the lung are structurally defined,
clonogenic cells in the FSUs outside of the region
cannot migrate across to rescue function. Therefore,
the hepatic or pulmonary dysfunction is related to the
loss of liver or lung volume exposed to a suprathreshold dose. However, any additional dose delivered to the same volume will not increase the hepatic
or pulmonary dysfunction for that volume affected
(Timmerman et al. 2007). With this model in mind, it
is possible to deliver radiation in the ablative dose
range to extracranial tumors located in organs with
large redundancy in functional reserve safely with
highly sophisticated techniques that generate a highly
conformal isodose distribution and a very steep
dose gradient beyond the treated region. As a result,
the amount of normal parenchyma exposed to the
threshold dose is limited and so is the risk of organ
dysfunction. It is crucial to ascertain that a ‘‘critical
volume’’ of the organ is spared, such that the basic
organ function can be sustained.
On the other hand, if the target to be treated is close
to serial organs or tissues, such as spinal cord, nerve
plexus, and bronchus, which are composed of structurally undefined FSUs and are responsible for critical
functions by serving as a conduit, it is crucial to limit
the maximum dose delivered to below the threshold as
any damage along the length of those structures can
result in loss of all function distal to the site of damage.
Although the linear quadratic (LQ) model has been
used to predict cell killing by radiation for several
decades, while it has worked well for conventionally
fractionated radiation, the LQ model most likely overestimates cell killing by radiation. Different radiobiologic models have been proposed and the most recent
ones include the universal survival curve (USC) model
by Park and colleagues from University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center and the generalized LQ

3

model by colleagues from Ohio State University (Park
et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2010). The USC model hybridizes the LQ and the multi-target models to analyze the
effect of ablative doses of radiation used in SBRT and
can be used to compare the dose fractionation schemes
of both conventionally fractionated radiotherapy and
SBRT (Park et al. 2008). The generalized LQ model
bridges the radiotherapy regimens from conventional
radiotherapy to hypofractionated high dose rate brachytherapy and radiosurgery (Wang et al. 2010). Further
validation of these models using clinical data is needed
because there are a lot of factors that these mathematical
models cannot completely account for. Radiobiologic
models will be discussed in more details in a subsequent
chapter.
The mechanisms of injury of ablative radiation may
be different from those of conventional radiotherapy at
molecular level. Recent research showed that tissue
microvasculature might have a role in the regulation
of tumor response to radiation. A rapid wave of
endothelial apoptosis occurred in mouse MCA129
fibrosarcoma and B16 melanoma cells 1–6 h after the
delivery of a dose of 15–25 Gy, followed by death of
tumors cells appearing to be intact for 2–3 days, and
this reaction was found to be mediated through the acid
sphingomyelinase (ASMase) pathway, which was
absent in conventionally fractionated radiation (Fuks
and Kolesnick 2005). A significant increase in T-cell
priming in draining lymphoid tissue was observed after
the delivery of 15–25 Gy to the primary tumor,
resulting in reduction or eradication of the primary
tumor or distant metastasis in a CD8+ T-cell dependent
fashion in an animal model (Lee et al. 2009b).

4

Overview of Technical Aspects
of SBRT

There are a few crucial technical components of SBRT
and the details will be covered in the subsequent
chapters. Here, a brief overview of the technical aspects
will be provided.

4.1

Patient Immobilization
and Respiratory Motion Control

Since ablatives doses are delivered in SBRT, to
minimize collateral damage to organs-at-risk (OARs),

4

S. S. Lo et al.

the need to limit the volume of tissue included in the
high dose zone cannot be overemphasized. The
margins of expansion can be reduced if a robust
immobilization is used and if the target motion can be
controlled.
Several immobilization devices are commercially
available or are built in-house. Depending upon the
treatment device used and the body site treated, the
proper immobilization device can be selected. Some
devices, such as the original Elekta stereotactic bodyframe, also have a built-in abdominal compression
device for respiratory motion control (Chang and
Timmerman 2007; Lo et al. 2010a; Timmerman et al.
2007). If CyberKnife (Accuray, Sunnyvale, CA) is used
to deliver SBRT, a body cradle or vacuum bag should
suffice for immobilization since the robotic arm provides real-time adjustments with 6 degrees of freedom.
In organs or targets that are subject to respiratory
motion, measures to account for respiratory motion
are necessary. There are three main categories of
methods of motion control and they include motion
dampening, motion gating, and motion tracking
(Timmerman et al. 2007). Examples of motion
dampening include abdominal compression and
active breathing control. Surrogates are used for
motion gating or tracking. For gating, the fixed radiation beam is activated only at a particular phase
of the respiratory cycle. For tracking, as used in
CyberKnife-based SBRT, the radiation beam tracks
the tumor, implanted with a surrogate such as fiducial
markers, which moves with the respiratory cycle.
If none of the above methods are available, a fourdimensional (4D) computerized tomography (CT) can
be used for evaluation of the individual mobility of
the tumor and can be used to generate an internal
target volume (ITV) for treatment planning (Fig. 1).
If 4D CT capability is not available, a combination of
three sets of CT obtained during free breathing, deep
inspiration, and deep expiration can be used to generate an ITV.

4.2

Physics and Dosimetry

There are several dosimetric characteristics of SBRT.
First, a very tight conformality of the prescribed
isodose line around the planning treatment volume
(PTV) is required (Lo et al. 2010a; Timmerman et al.
2007). Second, a very steep dose gradient is desirable

Fig. 1 Construction of internal target volume (ITV) based on
4D CT; gross tumor volume (GTV) and ITV outlined in light
blue and dark blue shades, respectively; planning treatment
volume (PTV) outlined in red shade

Fig. 2 Isodose plan for SBRT for medically inoperable stage I
non-small-cell lung cancer; a dose of 50 Gy was given in five
fractions; the fall-off of the radiation was isotropic

to minimize spillage of the radiation dose in the
surrounding normal tissue or critical organs allows for
widening of the therapeutic window (Lo et al. 2010a;
Timmerman et al. 2007). Typically, attempts will be
made to achieve even isotropic fall-off in all directions, so that subclinical, microscopic disease tumor
extension is also covered (Fig. 2). However, in the
scenario where a critical organ or structure, such as

Introduction

Fig. 3 Intensity modulated radiation therapy planning for
spinal SBRT delivering 30 Gy in five fractions; efforts were
made to steer the dose away from the spinal cord

spinal cord or esophagus, is immediately adjacent to
the PTV, efforts should be made to steer the radiation
dose away from the OARs.
Depending on the clinical scenario, three-dimensional (3D) conformal or intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) treatment planning is performed.
The latter entails the use of inverse planning. Treatment planning CT enables simultaneous viewing of
patient anatomy and fiducial system for stereotactic
targeting. In a situation where the PTV is very close
to a serial OAR like the spinal cord, the radiation dose
has to be asymmetrically steered away from the OAR,
necessitating the use of IMRT treatment planning.
(Fig. 3). If a CyberKnife (Accuray, Sunnyvale, CA)
unit is used, the associated software can also perform
inverse planning.
Subsequent chapters will cover physics and
dosimetry of SBRT in greater details.

4.3

Treatment Delivery Units

There are various commercially available treatment
delivery units that can be used to deliver SBRT
(Chang and Timmerman 2007; Lo et al. 2008, 2009,
2010a). They all have the capability of image-guided
radiation therapy, enabling tumor or target localization prior to treatment delivery, and treatment set-up
uncertainty can be significantly reduced.
Both the Varian Trilogy and Elekta Synergy-S
units have an integrated gantry mounted kV cone
beam CT and treatment head to allow for nearreal-time image guidance for repositioning prior to
treatment and both have volumetric modulated arc

5

therapy (VMAT) capability. Varian TrueBeam system provides features that facilitate the treatment of
moving targets. The Novalis TX unit also has kV cone
beam CT capability in addition to stereoscopic X-ray.
The Siemens Primaotom unit has a CT-on-rail linked
to a linear accelerator with the same table-top.
The Siemens Primus, Oncor and Artiste utilize an
integrated MV cone beam CT for image guidance.
Siemens Artiste units also provide a kV cone beam
CT option.
The TomoTherapy HiArt System (TomoTherapy,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA) is a special device
delivering IMRT throughout continuous 360o rotations using a binary multileaf collimator, with the
treatment couch moving continuously during the
treatment. Radiation detectors are located opposite
the MLC allowing for megavoltage CT of the index
region prior to treatment delivery (Chang and
Timmerman 2007; Lo et al. 2010a).
The CyberKnife (Accuray, Sunnyvale, CA) unit
utilizes a frameless system to direct a compact linear
accelerator mounted on a robotic arm toward the target
volume with image guidance. There are 6 degrees of
freedom. Two orthogonal X-ray cameras are mounted
on the ceiling providing real-time tracking during
radiation delivery. Reliable bony landmarks or implant
fiducial markers are used for target localization and
real-time radiation delivery (Lo et al. 2010a).
Each treatment delivery system has strengths and
weaknesses. No matter what device is being used to
deliver SBRT, the training and experience of the personnel in the SBRT team as well as the quality assurance
(QA) process are likely more important determining
factor to successful and safe treatment delivery.
Details of different treatment delivery devices will
be discussed in subsequent chapters.

5

Overview of Clinical Applications

When SBRT was first started in the early 1990s, it
was used primarily to treat primary and metastatic
lung and liver tumors (Blomgren et al. 1995; Uematsu
et al. 1998). Hamilton and colleagues first pioneered
the use of SBRT for spinal tumors in the mid-1990s
and reported their results (Hamilton et al. 1995).
Subsequently, numerous centers also started to
use SBRT to treat lung, liver and spinal tumors
and reported their results in retrospective series.

6

S. S. Lo et al.

Promising preliminary results were observed
(Lo et al. 2010a). Later on, various groups from North
America, Europe and Japan, including cooperative
groups, conducted prospective trials of SBRT for
stage I non-small-cell lung cancer, lung metastases,
primary liver cancer, liver metastases, and spinal
metastases (Cardenes et al. 2010; Chang et al. 2007;
Lee et al. 2009a; Lo et al. 2010a; Rusthoven et al.
2009a, b; Timmerman et al. 2010; Tse et al. 2008).
Apart from lung, liver and spine tumors, the use of
SBRT has also been extended to pancreatic cancer,
prostate cancer, head and neck cancer (mainly in
recurrent setting), gynecologic cancer (mainly in recurrent setting), renal cell carcinoma, and adrenal metastases and multiple reports, including those of prospective
trials showed promising results (Ishiyama et al. 2011;
Koong et al. 2004, 2005; Lo et al. 2010b; Mayr et al.
2011; Schellenberg et al. 2008; Siddiqui et al. 2011;
Svedman et al. 2006). There are also reports of retrospective studies as well as prospective trials of SBRT for
oligometastases of any organ sites from any primary
tumor and oligometastases of any organ sites from specific histologies, showing encouraging results (Lo et al.
2009, 2010b; Milano et al. 2008; Salama et al. 2008).
Clinical applications for different organ sites and
diseases will be covered in much greater detail in
subsequent chapters.

6

Overview of Toxicities

When SBRT was first started, the toxicities associated
with ablative radiation doses and dose constraints of
various OARS to highly hypofractionated regimens were
not very well understood. As a result, serious toxicities
were observed in patients treated with SBRT. For
instance, in the phase II trial of SBRT for medically
inoperable non-small-cell lung cancer from Indiana
University, patients with centrally located tumors treated
with a three-fraction regimen of 20–22 9 3 (60–66 Gy)
were at a much higher risk of developing serious complications (Timmerman et al. 2006). Based on the results
of this trial, subsequent cooperative trials separated
patients with centrally and peripherally located tumors
and patients with centrally located tumors are treated
with a five- instead of a three-fraction regimen.
Other serious complications reported included brachial
plexopathy, radiation myelopathy, radiation-induced
liver disease, carotid blowout, and gastric/duodenal

ulceration (Forquer et al. 2009b; Lo et al. 2010a;
Sahgal et al. 2010a, b; Siddiqui et al. 2011; Timmerman
et al. 2006). There are also other less serious complications, such as chest wall pain, rib fractures, vertebral
fractures, and skin toxicities, observed (Dunlap et al.
2010; Hoppe et al. 2008; Rose et al. 2009). Normal
tissue complications and normal tissue constraints will
be discussed in detail in the last 2 chapters.

7

Conclusions

With close to 20 years of development, SBRT is now
regarded as one of the treatment options for several
conditions, such as medically inoperable stage I nonsmall-cell lung cancer, liver or lung oligometastases,
hepatocellular carcinoma, and spinal metastases, in
selected patients. The use of SBRT in renal cell carcinoma, prostate cancer, gynecologic cancer, and head and
neck cancer is emerging. Prospective trials are needed to
better define the role of SBRT in these emerging areas.
So far, only pilot or phase I/II trials have been
reported. The only comparative studies reported are
match-pair analyses and there have not been publications of any phase III trials comparing traditional therapy
and SBRT. Such studies are important to further establish the role of SBRT in the management of various
cancer and oligometastases. Currently, Radiation
Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) is conducting a phase
III randomized trial comparing single dose
SBRT of 16 Gy and single dose external beam radiation
therapy of 8 Gy (http://www.rtog.org/ClinicalTrials/
ProtocolTable/StudyDetails.aspx?study=0631) and the
results of this trial are eagerly awaited.
Although SBRT typically provides favorable
local control for both primary cancer and oligometastases, distant failure remains an important issue.
The strategy of incorporating systemic chemotherapy
or targeted therapy, especially for histology-specific
cancer, should be considered mostly ideally in a
prospective trial setting.

References
Blomgren H, Lax I, Naslund I, Svanstrom R (1995) Stereotactic
high dose fraction radiation therapy of extracranial tumors
using an accelerator. Clinical experience of the first thirtyone patients. Acta Oncol 34(6):861–870

Introduction
Cardenes HR, Price TR, Perkins SM, Maluccio M, Kwo P,
Breen TE, Henderson MA, Schefter TE, Tudor K, Deluca J,
Johnstone PA (2010) Phase I feasibility trial of stereotactic
body radiation therapy for primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Transl Oncol 12(3):218–225
Chang BK, Timmerman RD (2007) Stereotactic body radiation
therapy: a comprehensive review. Am J Clin Oncol 30(6):
637–644
Chang EL, Shiu AS, Mendel E, Mathews LA, Mahajan A,
Allen PK, Weinberg JS, Brown BW, Wang XS, Woo SY,
Cleeland C, Maor MH, Rhines LD (2007) Phase I/II study
of stereotactic body radiotherapy for spinal metastasis and
its pattern of failure. J Neurosurg Spine 7(2):151–160
Crabtree TD, Denlinger CE, Meyers BF, El Naqa I, Zoole J,
Krupnick AS, Kreisel D, Patterson GA, Bradley JD (2010)
Stereotactic body radiation therapy versus surgical resection
for stage I non-small cell lung cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg 140(2):377–386. doi:S0022-5223(10)00261-8[pii]10.
1016/j.jtcvs.2009.12.054
Dunlap NE, Cai J, Biedermann GB, Yang W, Benedict SH,
Sheng K, Schefter TE, Kavanagh BD, Larner JM (2010)
Chest wall volume receiving [30 gy predicts risk of severe
pain and/or rib fracture after lung stereotactic body
radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 76(3):796–801
Forquer JA, Fakiris AJ, McGarry RC, Cheung MK, Watson C,
Harkenrider M, Henderson MA, Lo SS (2009a) Treatment
options for stage I non-small-cell lung carcinoma patients
not suitable for lobectomy. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther
9(10):1443–1453. doi:10.1586/era.09.117
Forquer JA, Fakiris AJ, Timmerman RD, Lo SS, Perkins SM,
McGarry RC, Johnstone PA (2009b) Brachial plexopathy
from stereotactic body radiotherapy in early-stage NSCLC:
dose-limiting toxicity in apical tumor sites. Radiother Oncol
93(3):408–413
Fuks Z, Kolesnick R (2005) Engaging the vascular component
of the tumor response. Cancer Cell 8(2):89–91
Grills IS, Mangona VS, Welsh R, Chmielewski G, McInerney E,
Martin S, Wloch J, Ye H, Kestin LL (2010) Outcomes after
stereotactic lung radiotherapy or wedge resection for stage I
non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 28(6):928–935.
doi:JCO.2009.25.0928[pii]10.1200/JCO.2009.25.0928
Hamilton AJ, Lulu BA, Fosmire H, Stea B, Cassady JR (1995)
Preliminary clinical experience with linear acceleratorbased spinal stereotactic radiosurgery. Neurosurgery 36(2):
311–319
Hoppe BS, Laser B, Kowalski AV, Fontenla SC,
Pena-Greenberg E, Yorke ED, Lovelock DM, Hunt MA,
Rosenzweig KE (2008) Acute skin toxicity following
stereotactic body radiation therapy for stage I non-smallcell lung cancer: who’s at risk? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
72(5):1283–1286
Ishiyama H, Teh BS, Lo SS, Mathews T, Blanco A, Amato R,
Ellis RJ, Mayr NA, Paulino AC, Xu B, Butler BE (2011)
Stereotactic body radiation therapy for prostate cancer.
Future Oncol 7(9):1077–1086. doi:10.2217/fon.11.86
Koong AC, Le QT, Ho A, Fong B, Fisher G, Cho C, Ford J,
Poen J, Gibbs IC, Mehta VK, Kee S, Trueblood W, Yang G,
Bastidas JA (2004) Phase I study of stereotactic radiosurgery in patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 58(4):1017–1021

7
Koong AC, Christofferson E, Le QT, Goodman KA, Ho A,
Kuo T, Ford JM, Fisher GA, Greco R, Norton J, Yang GP
(2005) Phase II study to assess the efficacy of conventionally fractionated radiotherapy followed by a stereotactic
radiosurgery boost in patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 63(2):320–323
Lee MT, Kim JJ, Dinniwell R, Brierley J, Lockwood G,
Wong R, Cummings B, Ringash J, Tse RV, Knox JJ,
Dawson LA (2009a) Phase I study of individualized
stereotactic body radiotherapy of liver metastases. J Clin
Oncol 27(10):1585–1591
Lee Y, Auh SL, Wang Y, Burnette B, Wang Y, Meng Y,
Beckett M, Sharma R, Chin R, Tu T, Weichselbaum RR,
Fu YX (2009b) Therapeutic effects of ablative radiation on
local tumor require CD8+ T cells: changing strategies for
cancer treatment. Blood 114(3):589–595
Lo SS, Cardenes HR, Teh BS, Fakiris AJ, Henderson MA,
Papiez L, McGarry RC, Wang JZ, Li K, Mayr NA,
Timmerman RD (2008) Stereotactic body radiation therapy
for nonpulmonary primary tumors. Expert Rev Anticancer
Ther 8(12):1939–1951
Lo SS, Fakiris AJ, Teh BS, Cardenes HR, Henderson MA,
Forquer JA, Papiez L, McGarry RC, Wang JZ, Li K,
Mayr NA, Timmerman RD (2009) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for oligometastases. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther
9(5):621–635
Lo SS, Fakiris AJ, Chang EL, Mayr NA, Wang JZ, Papiez L,
Teh BS, McGarry RC, Cardenes HR, Timmerman RD
(2010a) Stereotactic body radiation therapy: a novel treatment modality. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 7(1):44–54
Lo SS, Teh BS, Mayr NA, Olencki TE, Wang JZ, Grecula JC,
Lu JJ, Timmerman RD (2010b) Stereotactic body radiation
therapy for oligometastases. Discov Med 10(52):247–254
Mayr NA, Huang Z, Sohn JW, Lo SS, Teh BS, Lu JJ,
Grecula JC, Kunos C (2011) Emerging application of
stereotactic body radiation therapy for gynecologic malignancies. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 11(7):1069–1075.
doi:10.1586/era.11.81
Milano MT, Katz AW, Muhs AG, Philip A, Buchholz DJ,
Schell MC, Okunieff P (2008) A prospective pilot study of
curative-intent stereotactic body radiation therapy in
patients with 5 or fewer oligometastatic lesions. Cancer
112(3):650–658
Park C, Papiez L, Zhang S, Story M, Timmerman RD (2008)
Universal survival curve and single fraction equivalent
dose: useful tools in understanding potency of ablative
radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 70(3):847–852
Rose PS, Laufer I, Boland PJ, Hanover A, Bilsky MH, Yamada J,
Lis E (2009) Risk of fracture after single fraction imageguided intensity-modulated radiation therapy to spinal
metastases. J Clin Oncol 27(30):5075–5079. doi:JCO.2008.
19.3508[pii]10.1200/JCO.2008.19.3508
Rusthoven KE, Kavanagh BD, Cardenes H, Stieber VW,
Burri SH, Feigenberg SJ, Chidel MA, Pugh TJ, Franklin W,
Kane M, Gaspar LE, Schefter TE (2009a) Multi-institutional phase I/II trial of stereotactic body radiation therapy
for liver metastases. J Clin Oncol 27(10):1572–1578
Rusthoven KE, Kavanagh BD, Burri SH, Chen C, Cardenes H,
Chidel MA, Pugh TJ, Kane M, Gaspar LE, Schefter TE
(2009b) Multi-institutional phase I/II trial of stereotactic

8
body radiation therapy for lung metastases. J Clin Oncol
27(10):1579–1584
Sahgal A, Ma L, Gibbs I, Gerszten PC, Ryu S, Soltys S,
Weinberg V, Wong S, Chang E, Fowler J, Larson DA
(2010a) Spinal cord tolerance for stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 77(2):548–553. doi:
S0360-3016(09)00772-X[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.05.023
Sahgal A, Ma L, Weinberg V, Gibbs IC, Chao S, Chang UK,
Werner-Wasik M, Angelov L, Chang EL, Sohn MJ,
Soltys SG, Letourneau D, Ryu S, Gerszten PC, Fowler J,
Wong CS, Larson DA (2010b) Reirradiation HUMAN
spinal cord tolerance for stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. doi: S0360-3016(10)03067-1[pii]
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.08.021
Salama JK, Chmura SJ, Mehta N, Yenice KM, Stadler WM,
Vokes EE, Haraf DJ, Hellman S, Weichselbaum RR (2008)
An initial report of a radiation dose-escalation trial in
patients with one to five sites of metastatic disease. Clin
Cancer Res 14(16):5255–5259
Schellenberg D, Goodman KA, Lee F, Chang S, Kuo T,
Ford JM, Fisher GA, Quon A, Desser TS, Norton J,
Greco R, Yang GP, Koong AC (2008) Gemcitabine
chemotherapy and single-fraction stereotactic body radiotherapy for locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 72(3):678–686
Shirato H, Shimizu S, Shimizu T, Nishioka T, Miyasaka K
(1999) Real-time tumour-tracking radiotherapy. Lancet
353(9161):1331–1332. doi:S0140-6736(99)00700-X[pii]10.
1016/S0140-6736(99)00700-X
Siddiqui F, Raben D, Lu JJ, Grecula JC, Lo SS, Huang Z,
Mayr NA, Teh BS, Yao M (2011) Emerging applications of
stereotactic body radiation therapy for head and neck
cancer. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 11(9):1429–1436.
doi:10.1586/era.11.110
Svedman C, Sandstrom P, Pisa P, Blomgren H, Lax I,
Kalkner KM, Nilsson S, Wersall P (2006) A prospective
Phase II trial of using extracranial stereotactic radiotherapy

S. S. Lo et al.
in primary and metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Acta Oncol
45(7):870–875
Timmerman R, McGarry R, Yiannoutsos C, Papiez L, Tudor K,
DeLuca J, Ewing M, Abdulrahman R, DesRosiers C,
Williams M, Fletcher J (2006) Excessive toxicity when
treating central tumors in a phase II study of stereotactic
body radiation therapy for medically inoperable early-stage
lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 24(30):4833–4839. doi:
24/30/4833[pii]10.1200/JCO.2006.07.5937
Timmerman R, Paulus R, Galvin J, Michalski J, Straube W,
Bradley J, Fakiris A, Bezjak A, Videtic G, Johnstone D, Fowler J,
Gore E, Choy H (2010) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for
inoperable early stage lung cancer. JAMA 303(11):1070–1076.
doi:303/11/1070[pii]10.1001/jama.2010.261
Timmerman RD, Kavanagh BD (2005) Stereotactic body
radiation therapy. Curr Probl Cancer 29(3):120–157
Timmerman RD, Kavanagh BD, Cho LC, Papiez L, Xing L
(2007) Stereotactic body radiation therapy in multiple organ
sites. J Clin Oncol 25(8):947–952
Tse RV, Hawkins M, Lockwood G, Kim JJ, Cummings B,
Knox J, Sherman M, Dawson LA (2008) Phase I study of
individualized stereotactic body radiotherapy for hepatocellular carcinoma and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. J Clin
Oncol 26(4):657–664
Uematsu M, Shioda A, Tahara K, Fukui T, Yamamoto F,
Tsumatori G, Ozeki Y, Aoki T, Watanabe M, Kusano S
(1998) Focal, high dose, and fractionated modified stereotactic radiation therapy for lung carcinoma patients: a
preliminary experience. Cancer 82(6):1062–1070
Wang JZ, Huang Z, Lo SS, Yuh WT, Mayr NA (2010)
A generalized linear-quadratic model for radiosurgery, stereotactic body radiation therapy, and high-dose rate brachytherapy. Sci Transl Med 2(39):39ra48. doi:2/39/39ra48[pii]10.
1126/scitranslmed.3000864
Wolbarst AB, Chin LM, Svensson GK (1982) Optimization of
radiation therapy: integral-response of a model biological
system. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 8(10):1761–1769

Historical Development of Stereotactic
Ablative Radiotherapy
Timothy D. Solberg, Robert L. Siddon, and Brian Kavanagh

Contents
1

Introduction..............................................................

9

2

Early Radiotherapy Experience.............................

10

3
Origin of Stereotaxis ...............................................
3.1 The Stereotactic Method: Horsley and Clarke.........
3.2 Clinical Applications of the Stereotactic Method:
Spiegel and Wycis.....................................................
3.3 Widespread Development of Stereotactic Apparatus
and Techniques ..........................................................

11
12

4
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4

The Development of Stereotactic
Radiosurgery ............................................................
Lars Leksell and the Early Experience
with Stereotactic Radiosurgery .................................
Particle Beam Radiosurgery: Uppsala, Berkeley
and Cambridge...........................................................
The Advent of the Gamma Knife.............................
Linac Radiosurgery ...................................................

The Development of Stereotactic Body Radiation
Therapy.....................................................................
5.1 The Karolinska Experience and the Stereotactic
Body Frame ...............................................................
5.2 The Tucson Experience
with Spinal Radiosurgery ..........................................
5.3 Other Frame-Based Approaches to SBRT ...............

13
13

6
SRS and SBRT in the Era of Image Guidance ...
6.1 Image-Assisted Frame-Based SBRT.........................
6.2 Stereophotogrammetric Methods of Stereotactic
Localization ...............................................................
6.3 Orthogonal kV Localization (X-Ray
Stereophotogrammetry) .............................................
6.4 Volume-Guided Localization ....................................
6.5 Future Developments in Image-Guided SRS
and SBRT ..................................................................

25
25

Conclusions ...............................................................

30

References..........................................................................

30

7

R. L. Siddon
National Naval Medical Center,
Bethesda, MD 20899, USA
B. Kavanagh
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA

28
28
29

13

Abstract
13

Stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) has been an effective modality for the treatment of benign and
malignant cranial disease for over 50 years. Just as
SRS revolutionized the practice of neurosurgery,
stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SAbR) in extracranial sites is now challenging conventional
wisdom with regard to the practice of radiation
oncology. This clinical paradigm change has been
enabled in large part through a century of technological development described in this chapter.

14
14
16

5

T. D. Solberg (&)
Department of Radiation Oncology,
Division of Medical Physics and Engineering,
UT Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA
e-mail: Timothy.Solberg@utsouthwestern.edu

27

22
23
23
24

1

Introduction

The field of stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SAbR),
beginning with stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) and
later applied to extracranial disease sites (often referred
to as stereotactic body radiation therapy—SBRT), has
deep roots, with origins in both the surgical and therapeutic radiology disciplines dating back over a century.
Since the initial development in 1951, SRS has been
well studied through extensive collaboration between

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2012_540,  Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

9

10

T. D. Solberg et al.

physicists, radiation oncologists and neurosurgeons.
SRS has been refined into an important element in the
treatment of brain metastases, cerebral vascular malformations, trigeminal neuralgia and selected primary
brain tumors and functional disorders. Modern cranial
SRS can be performed noninvasively yet with an
extremely high degree of accuracy, and on an outpatient basis. New developments in tumor targeting,
image guidance and patient repositioning technology
have also allowed for the extension of SRS to lesions
outside the central nervous system, including those in
close proximity to the spinal cord, where similar concerns about limiting dose to normal tissues apply.
Image guidance now plays a particularly important role
in the application of SAbR. As a result, recent clinical
results in sites including lung, liver and spine suggest an
accelerating paradigm shift to high dose-per-fraction
delivery in the field of radiation oncology.

2

Early Radiotherapy Experience

The discovery of the ionizing radiation, first observed
emanating from a cathode ray tube by Wilhelm
Roentgen in late 1895, is well known. It is relevant to
note, however, that while this provided the first
conclusive evidence of ‘‘X-rays,’’ it was almost certainly not the first time they were actually produced,
as researchers including Plucker, Crookes and Lenard
had experimented with cathode tubes as early as the
mid-1800s. Motivated in large part the observation
that these invisible ‘‘X-rays’’ were related to fluorescence, Henri Becquerel, followed Roentgen’s work
with the subsequent discovery of naturally occurring
radioactive materials in January 1896. Roentgen
would be recognized with the very first Nobel Prize in
physics in 1901, and Becquerel similarly recognized
(with Marie and Pierre Curie) in 1903.
The significance of these revolutionary breakthroughs
was immediately apparent. It is now widely accepted that
the first therapeutic X-ray application occurred on 29
January 1986, within weeks of Roentgen’s announcement (Grubbé 1933). Interestingly, it is likely that these
first therapeutic applications actually predated those used
for diagnostic purposes. The first diagnostic application
likely occurred on 29 February 1896, when in preparation
for a surgical procedure, physicians attempted to image
the head of a child suffering from an accidental gun
shot (Daniel 1896). The imaging procedure was not

successful, though it is relevant to note that three weeks
later the child lost all hair in the area corresponding to
irradiated region.
The early history of the use of X-rays in therapeutic applications is widely varied and filled with
numerous anecdotal accounts. Conditions ranging
from eczema, psoriasis, acne, ringworm, portwine
stain and hyperthyroidism were common (Tyler
1918). Superficial malignancies were also treated
effectively. A major advancement in ‘‘therapeutic
radiology’’ occurred with the development of the high
vacuum X-ray tube in 1913 by William Coolidge.
Within 10 years, and for continuing through several
decades, tube potentials in excess of 200 kV would
enable therapy of deeper seated tumors. In these early
years of radiotherapy, the lack of penetration of low
energy X-rays was a well-known shortcoming. To
address this, a number of mechanisms were designed
to facilitate multi-beam delivery. Notable efforts
included the concentric cone approach of Kohl (1906)
and Henschke (1938) (Fig. 1a), the pendulum technique of Teschendorf (1953) (Fig. 1b) and the spiral
technique of Bischoff (1950, 1952). Bischoff’s design
was subsequently manufactured and sold by Siemens
Reiniger Werke (Erlangen, Germany) (Fig. 1c).
Without employing stereotactic localization, these
approaches set the foundation for a fundamental
radiosurgery principle, namely, dosimetric compactness achieved by targeting with many intersecting,
non-overlapping beams.
In the early clinical experience, the prevailing
treatment wisdom was that ‘‘… therapeutic doses ought
to be applied with the highest possible intensity in a
short time…’’ (Matoni 1924). It was also well known,
however, that ‘‘doses large enough to destroy all of the
tumor cells cannot be safely given to adequately large,
nonsuperficial areas’’ (Garland 1934). Through the first
three decades of the twentieth century then, the oncologic applications of ionizing radiation were met with
limited success. During this era, little was known of the
response of cells and tissue as a function of basic
radiological characteristics such as time, dose, dose
rate. The development of fractionated delivery beginning in the 1920s would change the field in a most
profound way. The origins of fractionation are universally attributed to Claudius Régaud, a professor at the
Pasteur Institute and director of the radiophysiological
laboratory at the Radium Institute (later renamed the
Curie Institute after founder and director Marie Curie)

Historical Development of Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

11

Fig. 1 Early examples of
converging beam apparatus
designed to compensate
for the poor depth dose
characteristics inherent
in kV X-ray sources.
a The concentric cone
device proposed by Kohl
and Henschke; b the
pendulum approach of
Teschendorf; c Bischosf’s
spiral technique, which was
subsequently manufactured
and sold by Siemens

at the University of Paris. In observing that gross
effects were markedly different when radiation was
given slowly, such as with radium sources, Régaud
began a systematic investigation on the effects of
ionizing radiation on spermatogenic cells in rabbit
testes (Regaud 1922; Regaud and Ferroux 1927). The
resulting observations succinctly stated: ‘‘It is impossible to sterilise a rabbit’s testicle by a very strong dose
of X-rays in a single exposure, without producing a
radio-dermatitis. But it is, on the contrary, easy to
sterilise this organ, without producing any lesion of the
skin, if the same dose is given in five fractions spaced
over five to ten days’’ (Regaud 1929). Régaud extended
these observations to clinical practice, with the subsequent observation that ‘‘The application of this biological technique has made it possible to obtain much
higher percentages of cure, in such cancers as those of
the skin, cervix uteri, mouth, pharynx, larynx, antrum
of Highmore, etc., whilst preserving the integrity of the
normal tissues far more effectually than as formerly

possible’’ (Regaud 1929). The principles of fractionation were subsequently adopted and widely promoted
for clinical practice by Henri Coutard (1932, 1937,
1940). To the current day, the clinical practice of
radiotherapy owes its existence to the work of pioneers
including Régaud and Coutard and others. Yet aside
from the possible exception of tumor reoxygenation,
fractionated radiation delivery is a suboptimal approach
to achieving cure. The ability to safely deliver an
ablative dose, demonstrated initially through stereotactic approaches, may significantly improve efficacy of
the radiation modality.

3

Origin of Stereotaxis

Stereotaxis is a method for locating points within
the brain using an external, three-dimensional (3D)
frame of reference, in order to perform a neurological
procedure in a minimally invasive manner. The origin

12

T. D. Solberg et al.

Fig. 2 Early examples of
stereotactic frames. a The
original device of Horsely and
Clarke (courtesy of the
Science Museum, London);
b the Mussen frame; c an
early Leksell frame; d an
early version of the
Todd–Wells frame

and development of stereotaxis, from initial conception
and evaluation in animal models to use in humans,
share a parallel though independent path with the origin
and development of therapeutic radiation. Both date
from the early twentieth century, and both saw major
progress leading to successful, widespread clinical
application beginning at the mid-century mark. The
convergence of the two fields at this time is the main
subject of this chapter.

3.1

The Stereotactic Method:
Horsley and Clarke

It is well known that stereotactic method is the product of
Robert Clarke, an engineer, physiologist and surgeon,
who, together with neurosurgeon Victor Horsley,
devised an instrument for simulating and making lesions
at exact locations within the brains of experimental
animals. The concept originated with Clarke in 1895, the
original device was constructed in 1905 and first used in
1906 (Clarke and Horsley 1906; Fodstad et al. 1991;

Jensen et al. 1996). The definitive paper was published in
1908 (Horsley and Clarke 1908), after which the two
pioneers ceased further collaboration (Fodstad et al.
1991). Together with other colleagues, Clarke went on to
publish functional atlases of both primates and cats
(Fodstad et al. 1991). The original device, manufactured
by Swift & Son, currently resides in the Science Museum
in London (Fig. 2a). Two subsequent copies of Clarke’s
frame were constructed; one device, brought to the
United States by neurosurgeon Ernest Sachs, who had
trained under Horsely, is located in the Department of
Neurosurgery at UCLA. In the subsequent decades,
several efforts were made to improve on the ClarkeHorsley device to make it suitable for human use.
The most notable of these efforts was that of Aubrey
Mussen (1922) (Fig. 2b), a neuroanatomist/physiologist who worked briefly with Horsley and Clarke.
Despite these efforts, there is no evidence that a
Clarke-Horsley-type device was ever used on humans.
In fact, human stereotaxis would not occur for over
40 years following the landmark work of Clarke and
Horsley.

Historical Development of Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

3.2

Clinical Applications
of the Stereotactic Method:
Spiegel and Wycis

In 1933, Martin Kirschner, a German neurosurgeon,
developed a stereotactic apparatus for a skull approach
for treatment of trigeminal neuralgia (Kirschner 1933).
However, the first successful cranial application of stereotactic surgery in humans is credited to the team of
Ernest Speigel and Henry Wycis in the Department of
Experimental Neurology at Temple University in Philadelphia (Speigel et al. 1947). Their original frame, using a
Cartesian coordinate systems and similar in design and
operation to the Clarke-Horsley device, was fixed to a
patient’s head by means of a plaster cast. The frame and
cast were removable, allowing separate imaging and
surgery sessions. Contrast radiography, ventriculography
and later pneumoencephalography permitted the visualization of intracranial reference points from which the
location of target structures of interest could be determined. Initial applications were for psychosurgery, ‘‘…in
order to reduce the emotional reactivity by a procedure
much less drastic than frontal lobotomy’’ (Speigel et al.
1947). The authors envisioned further application for
pain (lesioning of the spinothalamic tract and Gasserian
ganglion), movement disorders (pallidotomy), and
draining of fluid from cysts (Speigel et al. 1947).

3.3

Widespread Development
of Stereotactic Apparatus
and Techniques

The work of Speigel and Wycis spawned an enormous
interest in the development and application of stereotactic
apparatus. The most notable development was the device
constructed by Lars Leksell (1949) (Fig. 2c). In contrast
to the Cartesian coordinate system of the Speigel-Wycis
device, Leksell’s frame employed used three polar coordinates (angle, depth and anterior–posterior location).
This ‘‘arc-quadrant’’ device provided maximum flexibility in choosing probe entry point and trajectory, and was
therefore much easier to use. The frame has been modified
over the ensuing years, but remarkably remains very
similar in function and appearance to the original 1949
device. Only two years after its development, Leksell
would use his frame to target narrow beams of radiation
(Leksell 1951). Following the invention of X-ray computerized tomography, Leksell was also quick to build a

13

CT-compatible device (Leksell and Jernberg 1980).
Other developments in stereotactic frames included the
efforts of Talairach (1949, 1952), Narabayashi (1952),
Reichert and Mundinger (1955) and Wells and Todd
(1998) (Fig. 2d). The Talairach frame is particularly
notable as it was used in the first stereotactic radiosurgery
procedure ever performed using a linear accelerator (Betti
and Derechinsky 1982). Similarly, modification to the
Todd–Wells device resulted in a widely used commercial
frame (Brown et al. 1980). The Brown-Roberts-Wells
(BRW) coordinate system is the foundation of present day
frames made by both Integra Radionics (Burlington, MA)
and BrainLAB (Feldkirchen, Germany).

4

The Development of Stereotactic
Radiosurgery

By most accounts the concept of using small crossfiring beams of charged particles to ablate or alter the
function of cranial structures originated with John
Lawrence and Cornelius Tobias in the late 1940s
(Tobias et al. 1955; Lawrence et al. 1962; Larsson
1996). Only a few years earlier, the Nobel physics
laureate, Robert R. Wilson, had pointed out that
protons would have a distinct physical advantage in
treating human disease (Wilson 1946). At the time,
John’s brother Ernest O. Lawrence, Nobel laureate
himself for invention of the cyclotron, was director of
the Radiation Laboratory in Berkeley, California.
John Lawrence was a Harvard Medical School graduate, already known for pioneering work in the field
of nuclear medicine which he had been conducting at
the Radiation Laboratory since the mid-1930s. Tobias
was a graduate student in nuclear physics at the
University of California, Berkeley; his Ph.D. committee consisted of Ernest Lawrence, Emilio Segre
and Luis Alvarez, all current or future Nobel laureates. Tobias began working with John Lawrence in
1939, prior to receiving his degree; their relationship
continued for several decades.

4.1

Lars Leksell and the Early Experience
with Stereotactic Radiosurgery

Aware of the work in Berkeley, Lars Leksell, a neurosurgeon working in Sweden, proposed applying the
burgeoning methodology of stereotaxis as a means to

14

T. D. Solberg et al.

more accurately guide cross-firing radiation beams
(Larsson 1996). In the seminal paper in the field,
Leksell coined the term stereotactic radiosurgery,
with the radiation beam ‘‘…directed to the exact
center of the semicircular arch of the stereotactic
instrument….’’ with the target subsequently ‘‘…irradiated through a large number of small portals by
fixing the semicircular frame at different angles and
moving the beam guide transversely along the frame.
In this way the whole convexity of the head can be
used for the entrance of the beams, which all meet and
cross in the structure in question’’ (Leksell 1951).
There are several interesting comments of note in this
short, three-page manuscript. First, the word ‘‘radiosurgery’’ appears only in the title of the manuscript,
nowhere within the text itself. Second, Leksell admits
that ultrasound was investigated prior to applying
‘‘Roentgen radiation.’’ Finally, even at the inception,
Leksell realized that ‘‘radiation of a higher energy’’
than the 200 kV system presently available was
highly desirable.
There is some uncertainty as to when the first
clinical radiosurgery application actually occurred.
While Leksell’s original manuscript includes a picture
of a patient in a stereotactic frame, coupled to an
X-ray tube, no treatment information is provided.
Bjore Larsson recalls the first patient being treated in
1955 (Larsson 1996). In a later manuscript, Leksell
described radiosurgery delivered to two patients with
tic douloureux treated in 1953 (Leksell 1971). These
patients received doses of 1,650 and 2,220 R delivered at 280 kV through 21 and 20 portals with 6 and
10 mm diameter beams, respectively. Both patients
had significant, durable relief of their pain.

4.2

Particle Beam Radiosurgery:
Uppsala, Berkeley and Cambridge

Larsson and Leksell soon discarded kV X-rays in
favor of 185 MeV protons at the Gustaf Werner
Institute in Uppsala, Sweden (Larsson et al. 1958,
1963; Leksell et al. 1960). In parallel, the Berkeley
group began systematic irradiation of the pituitary
gland in patients with advanced cancers, using
340 MeV protons generated by the 184 inch synchrocyclotron at the Radiation Laboratory (Lawrence
1957). Under the guidance of Lawrence and Jacob
Fabrikant, the Berkeley radiosurgery program thrived

until the early 1990s; the synchrocyclotron was
decommissioned in 1987 and the Bevalac in 1993.
In 1961, neurosurgeon Raymond Kjellberg began a
radiosurgery program using the 165 MeV proton
beam facility in Cambridge, Massachusetts (Kjellberg
et al. 1968). The Harvard program specialized in
arteriovenous malformations and skull base tumors
such as chordomas and chondrosarcomas; thousands
of patients with these and other histologies were
treated before the original cyclotron was decommissioned in 2002. It should be noted that the facilities in
Uppsala, Berkeley and Cambridge were never intended for clinical use, but were constructed for physics
research. That radiosurgery programs were developed, and many patients successfully treated, is
particularly remarkable, and a testament to the efforts
of these early pioneers.

4.3

The Advent of the Gamma Knife

Despite significant clinical success throughout the late
1950s and 1960s, particle radiosurgery presented
significant shortcomings. Physics research was the
main priority at particle facilities, and as a result,
access for biological studies and patient treatment was
limited. That none of the facilities were hospitalbased caused added difficulty for practitioners, as well
as anxiety for patients. Motivated by Leksell, the
Department of Physical Biology at the Gustaf Werner
Institute in Uppsala, headed by Larsson, the Radiation
Physics Department physics unit at the University of
Lund, headed by Kurt Lidén, and the Department of
Clinical Radiation Physics at the National Institute
of Radiation Protection in Stockholm, headed by
Rune Walstam, began a combined effort to devise a
radiosurgery device ‘‘suitable for use in a hospital’’
(Larsson 1996). As a side note of some historic
significance, Walstam was also head of Medical
Radiation Physics at the Karolinska Institute, a position in which he succeeded Rolf Sievert and was in
turn succeeded by Anders Brahme. Earlier, Lidén had
presented a preliminary analysis recommending the
use of high energy (10–20 MV) Roentgen radiation
(X-rays) and suggesting a design with the collimator
as close as possible to the patient in order to minimize
the geometric penumbra (Lidén 1957; Sarby 1974;
Larsson et al. 1974). The result of the collaboration
was the ‘‘Gamma Knife I,’’ installed at the Hospital

Historical Development of Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

15

Sofiahemmet in Stockholm in December, 1967. The
original device consisted of 179 60Co sources distributed within at spherical sector of 70 latitude and
160 longitude (Larsson et al. 1974; Larsson 1996).
Collimators were designed to provide a beam with a
2.5 9 7.5 mm cross-section with a penumbra width
of 0.5 mm at the beam focus (Sarby 1974). Interestingly, much of the original work on collimator design
and optimization was performed on a 6 MeV linear
accelerator (Varian) (Larsson et al. 1974). In addition
to collimator design, Bert Sarby, working at the
National Institute of Radiation Protection, also performed the original dosimetry studies (Sarby 1974),
and with Hans Dahiln, devised a methodology for
calculating the dose distribution resulting from the
179 superimposed beams (Dahlin 1970, 1971; Dahlin
and Sarby 1975).
The first two patients were treated in December of
1967 in an experimental hall at the Atomic Energy
Corporation in Studsvik, Sweden, prior to moving the
unit to the Hospital Sofiahemmet (Larsson 1996).
While the device was envisioned and designed for the
treatment of functional disorders, early applications
also included the treatment of both benign and
malignant tumors, as well as vascular malformations
(Larsson 1996).
By the mid 1970s, the cobalt sources in Gamma
Knife I had decayed significantly. Based on the
existing clinical experience, a redesigned device was
constructed and installed at the Karolinska Hospital in
1975 (Larsson 1996). This ‘‘Gamma Knife II’’ shared
many similarities with subsequent commercial devices, notably, circular as opposed to rectangular collimators. It was even envisioned that the new device
might be used for fractionated treatments (stereotactic
radiotherapy—SRT) (Leksell et al. 1987; Larsson
1996). Based on the personal relationships between
Leksell, Ned Langdon and Robert Rand, professors of
radiation oncology and neurosurgery, respectively, at
UCLA, the original Gamma Knife was given to
UCLA as a gift from the Karolinska Institute and the
government of Sweden. Langdon had visited the
Karolinska Institute in 1976 and was responsible for
securing the necessary approvals to receive the
Gamma Knife. Leksell was eager to have the unit
used by a major U.S. research center. The unit arrived
by ship in San Pedro, California on the morning of
July 20, 1980. Later that evening it was loaded on a
truck and driven 29 miles to UCLA, under police

escort, where it arrived at 2 am on July 21 (UCLA
1980). The unit saw limited clinical and research use
before it was returned to Elekta in the early 1990s.
Figure 3a shows the original Gamma Knife in use at
UCLA.
The first commercial Gamma Knife was installed
at the University of Pittsburgh in May, 1987 (Lunsford et al. 1987). Modifications to the original model
U Gamma Knife (Fig. 3b) delivered to UPMC,
including the models B (Fig. 3c), C and 4C (Fig. 3d),
adopted a modified source orientation relative to
patient anatomy and allowed for simpler source
replacement. In 2007, Elekta released the PerfexionTM gamma unit. The design and operation of the
Perfexion are quite different from the Gamma Knife
models, with 192 cobalt source arranged in a conical,
rather than spherical, configuration (Lindquist and
Paddick 2007). Additionally, the 192 sources are
divided into eight independent sectors, each of which
can dynamically change collimation between 4, 8 and
16 mm circular apertures, as well as a fully blocked
position. Through 2008, over 500,000 patients had
been treated worldwide on various Gamma Knife
models. More detail on design, operation and planning for Gamma Knife can be found in Chapter 2 of
this volume.
Another important effort of note was that of the
group at the University of Valencia in Spain. Beginning in 1975, Juan Luis Barcia-Salorio, Professor of
Neurosurgery, and Gregorio Hernández, Professor of
Physics, developed a stereotactic head frame and
subsequently, a specialized collimator to a fixed
cobalt device which was then rotated around a
patient’s head; the first treatment was for a carotid
cavernous fistula (Barcia-Salorio et al. 1982). BarciaSalorio was a pioneer in the application of radiosurgery to epilepsy and vascular disease.
Over the years there have been several attempts to
replicate the success of the Gamma Knife. The most
notable is the Rotating Gamma System designed by
OUR New Medical Technology Development in
Shenzen, China (Goetsch et al. 1999). The first U.S.
installation at the UC Davis Cancer Center in Sacramento, California in 2002 (Kubo and Araki 2002),
though few of the units have been delivered outside of
China. The successor to OUR, GammaStar Medical
Group headed by Shipeng Song, has had tremendous
success within China with gamma units designed for
both cranial and extracranial radiosurgery. A second

16

T. D. Solberg et al.

Fig. 3 Evolution of the
GammaKnife: a the original
device, repainted and in use at
UCLA Medical Center in the
early 1980s; b a Model U; c a
Model B; d a Model 4C

Chinese company, MASEP Infini Medical Science
Technology Development Co., Ltd. (Shenzhen, China)
is developing a next-generation gamma unit similar to
the PerfexionTM.

4.4

Linac Radiosurgery

The application of electron linear accelerators to
therapeutic radiology was first proposed by Henry
Kaplan, chairman of the Department of Radiology at
Stanford University, in the late 1940s. Shortly thereafter, Kaplan undertook a collaboration with Edward
Ginzton, Stanford Professor of Physics and Electrical
engineering, resulting in the development of the first
medical linear accelerator, a 4 MeV device that was
used to treat a child with retinoblastoma in January,
1956 (Ginzton et al. 1957; Jones et al. 1995). With the
subsequent development of isocentric device which
could rotate 360, the first of which was built by
Varian and installed at UCLA in 1960, linear accelerators quickly became the essential tool for radiotherapy (Levy 1998). While stereotactic radiosurgery
was becoming a routine procedure throughout the

1960s and 1970s, the linacs of that era lacked the
accuracy characteristics required for such an application. This was clearly appreciated by Larsson
and colleagues as they began the pioneering work
which produced the first Gamma Knife: ‘‘The choice
between the two alternatives, i.e. roentgen or gamma
radiation, should be based on technical, clinical and
economical rather than physical considerations.
If radiation surgery will reach a position as a standard
procedure, improved electron accelerators for roentgen production, adapted for the purpose, would seem
a most attractive alternative’’ (Larsson et al. 1974).

4.4.1

Initial Experience with Linac
Radiosurgery
Working in Buenos Aires, Argentina, neurosurgeon
Osvaldo Betti and Engineer Victor Derechinsky
modified a Varian Clinac 18 for use in radiosurgery;
the first patient was treated in 1982 (Betti and
Derechinsky 1982, 1984). Recognizing that the couch
was the weakest mechanical link, Derechinsky
designed a specialized chair which supported the
patient and to which a Talairach stereotactic frame
could be affixed. In the first iteration of the ‘‘Betti

Historical Development of Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

17

Fig. 4 The original linac
radiosurgery system with:
a drawings from patent
awarded to Derechinsky and
Betti in 1986; b a photograph
of the original ‘‘Betti chair,’’
installed in Buenos Aires,
Argentina; c from left—
Carsten Sommerfeld, Tim
Solberg, Osvaldo Betti, and
Victor Bourel during a visit to
the UCLA Novalis facility
in 2000

chair,’’ the patient was physically rotated about a
horizontal axis while the gantry rotated about a perpendicular horizontal axis, for providing multiple,
convergent beam delivery. The initial chair was subsequently replaced with one that rotated about a
vertical axis. In all, three Betti-Derechinsky systems
were installed and used, in Paris and Lille, France
in addition to the original in Buenos Aires.
Interestingly, a copy of the Betti-Derechinsky system
was also constructed and used in Bordeaux, France
(M. Derechinsky (2010) Personal communication; V.
Bourel (2010) personal communication). Illustrations
from the patent awarded to Derechinsky and Betti in
1986 are shown in Fig. 4a, with a picture of the original Buenos Aires system in Fig. 4b. Betti and
physicist Victor Bourel visited UCLA in 2000
(Fig. 4c) shortly before installing a Novalis unit in
Buenos Aires. Shortly after construction of the ‘‘Betti
chair,’’ a group in Vicenza, Italy, led by neurosurgeon
Federico Colombo, developed a stereotactic frame
and linac-based SRS system. On an amusing note, the
Vicenza group often referred to the Betti chair as a
‘‘Cyclothrone.’’
Linac radiosurgery came to the fore in the late
1980s through the pioneering efforts at four academic
centers, located in Heidelberg, Montreal, Boston and
Gainesville; Table 1 provides a summary of the early

linac SRS practitioners and the techniques employed.
Most used specially constructed circular collimators
with radiation delivered in one or more arcs at
discrete couch positions. The group at the German
Cancer Center (DKFZ) in Heidelberg used a
commercial Reichert-Mundinger stereotactic frame
modified to mount on the couch of a Siemens linac
(Hartmann et al. 1985). Concurrently, a large group at
the Joint Center for Radiation Therapy and Harvard
Medical School on Boston, led by Dr. William
Saunders, and later, Dr. Jay Loeffler, was developing
a system that would profoundly impact the adoption
of linac radiosurgery (Saunders et al. 1988; Loeffler
et al. 1989). At the time, mechanical characteristics of
the many moving components continued to be the
major impediment to a more routine of linacs for
radiosurgery. Central among these was the linac
couch. To address this, Wendell Lutz constructed a
floor stand to immobilize and precisely position a
patient’s head independent of the radiotherapy couch,
without reference to room lasers or light field (Lutz
et al. 1984, 1986, 1988). Intrinsic to the system was a
patient-specific QA process in which a radio-opaque
ball mounted to a BRW ring was attached to the
floor stand. After establishing the patient’s target
coordinates on the floor stand, a series of films at
eight representative gantry and couch positions were

18

T. D. Solberg et al.

Table 1 The initial LINAC radiosurgery experience
Reference

First Tx

Energy (MV)

Patient support

Frame

Betti and Derechinsky (1982, 1984)

1982

10

Institution-designed chair

Talairach

Colombo et al. (1985)

1982

4

Linac couch

Institution-designed

Hartmann et al. (1985)

1985

15

Linac couch

Reichert-Mundinger

Lutz et al. (1984, 1986, 1988)

1986

6

Floor stand

BRW

Podgorsak et al. (1987, 1988)

1986

6 and 10

Linac couch

Institution-designed

Friedman and Bova (1989)

1988

6

Floor stand

BRW

Fig. 5 a An original floor
stand and irradiation approach
from the Brigham and
Women’s Hospital/Joint
Center for Radiation Therapy;
b a photograph of an early
SRS treatment at the Brigham
and Women’s Hospital. From
left: Jay Loeffler, Eben
Alexander III, Bob Siddon
and Chee Wai Cheng

obtained (Saunders et al. 1988; Lutz et al. 1988). In
this manner patients could be accurately localized
without depending on external marks or room lasers.
The procedure of obtaining isocenter ball shots is now
universally referred to as the ‘‘Winston-Lutz’’ test,
though largely in the context of machine QA, and not
patient QA as originally designed. Lutz left for the
University of Arizona in 1985, where he continued to
manufacture floor stands and collimators which he
sold at his cost for approximately $14,000. Floorstand linac radiosurgery systems became quite common over the subsequent decade. Figure 5a shows
example of one of the initial floor stand, with an early
patient treatment at the Joint Center in Fig. 5b.
The floor stand development efforts were complemented by those of a number of Harvard scientists
in localization, dosimetry and treatment planning. A
method for localization of intracranial targets using a
pair of radiographs was developed by Bob Siddon and
Norman Barth (Siddon and Barth 1987). This method,
with submillimeter accuracy, continues to be the gold
standard for AVM localization to this day. Much of
the initial cone dosimetry was performed by Roger

Rice (Rice et al. 1987). Both Barth and Rice were
Harvard post-docs at the time. Siddon wrote the original treatment planning system on a Mac II; this was
subsequently rewritten on a specialized graphics
computer (Kooy et al. 1991). Svensson (1989) and
Tsai et al. (1991) made significant contributions to
furthering quality assurance efforts. A linac radiosurgery conference held in Boston in 1987 included
many notable scientists and clinicians from throughout the world (Fig. 6).
While the floor-stand approach addressed a major
source of inaccuracy, namely the linac couch, the
gantry rotation characteristics of existing linacs of that
time was also quite poor. To address this, a group at the
University of Florida in Gainesville, led by Frank Bova
and Bill Friedman, followed on the work of the Harvard
group, by designing an isocentric arm which coupled
the source and collimator, through a high precision
bearing, to the floor stand, thereby improving the
accuracy associated with gantry rotation (Fig. 7a)
(Friedman and Bova 1989). To avoid torque on the
linac head, a gimble-type bearing was developed to
hold the tertiary circular collimators. These efforts

Historical Development of Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

19

Fig. 6 An early linac SRS
symposium in Boston in 1987.
Those in attendance included:
Eric Cosman, Ken Winston,
Peter Black, Peter Heilbrun,
Goran Svennson, Bob Siddon,
Dennis Leavitt, Frank Bova,
Bill Saunders, John Adler and
Rock Mackie

Fig. 7 Drawing from the
1993 patent awarded to Frank
Bova and Bill Friedman. The
commercial version of the
Bova-Friedman design
(Philips SRS200) is shown in
clinical use at UCLA in 1992

resulted in the first complete, commercial linac radiosurgery system—the SRS 200 (Philips Medical
Systems). The SRS 200 system included the Gainesville floor-stand apparatus and CT-based treatment
planning system, a BRW stereotactic frame and other
components from Radionics, and circular collimators
with nominal diameter from 10 to 32 mm in 2 mm
increments. In an era when vendors also distributed
source code, enhancements to the treatment planning
system, including MR imaging and planning capabilities (by the group at Vanderbilt University) were
developed by several SRS200 customers. An SRS 200
system was installed on a Clinic-18 at UCLA Medical
Center in 1989 (Fig. 7); approximately 450 radiosurgery patients were treated between 1990 and early
1996. Thanks to the work of the Harvard and Gainesville groups, floor-stand linac radiosurgery systems
became quite common over the subsequent decade.
Gainesville ‘‘Linac Scalpel’’ changed commercial

hands several times, from Philips to Medtronic Surgical
Navigation Technologies (Minneapolis, MN) to Zmed
(Boston, MA), which were subsequently acquired by
Varian Medical Systems (Palo Alto, CA) in 2003.
Another significant early contribution occurred at
McGill University in Montreal, where a group directed
by Luis Souhami and Ervin Podgorsak modified two
linacs for radiosurgery. A single plane rotation technique was developed for a 6 MV linac (EMI Medical,
Sunnyvale, CA) while a technique employing simultaneous and continuous gantry and treatment couch
rotation was developed for a 10 MV linac (Varian
Clinac-18). The ‘‘dynamic radiosurgery’’ approach was
used for targets in close proximity to important structures and where a sharp dose gradient was required.
The group used a frame of their own design (Olivier
et al. 1986), mounted to either of the linac couches.
A treatment planning system supporting both CT and
MR was developed by Pike et al. (1987a, b).

20

T. D. Solberg et al.

Fig. 8 Micro-Multileaf
collimators from a MRC
systems (later Siemens);
b Radionics; c BrainLAB;
d 3D Line

4.4.2

The Advent of Micro-Multileaf
Collimators
Through the mid-1990s, radiosurgery, whether delivered by cobalt, linac or particle beams, was performed
using circular collimators. Because most tumors are not
spherical in shape, the use of circular collimators often
necessitated a compromise between plan quality,
treatment time and dose heterogeneity. Leavitt et al.
(1991) were the first to address the issue of field shaping
by adding two sets of upstream independent trimmers
(‘‘vanes’’) to the auxiliary circular radiosurgery collimators. The trimmers were motor controlled, and could
rotate about the beam axis as well translate in and out.
With a single isocenter, the authors demonstrated
markedly improved conformality over circular collimation alone. A similar, albeit non-dynamic approach
was subsequently developed and implemented by
Hacker et al. (1997). This methodology became available commercially in the XKnife planning system
(Radionics, Inc., Boston, MA).
Modeling studies by both Leavitt et al. (1991) and
Nezdi et al. (1991, 1993) generated increasing interest
in more sophisticated field shaping apparatus. As a
result, a group at the German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ) in Heidelberg group, who earlier had produced a number of significant developments, developed the first micro-multileaf collimators using for
cranial radiosurgery (Schlegel et al. 1992). Two

designs with 3 mm wide leaves were constructed, one
in which the leaves were positioned manually, and a
second with motorized, computer-controlled leaves.
Both mounted directly to the auxiliary device holder
on most linacs. The ModuLeaf MLC technology was
commercialized by a DKFZ spinoff (MRC Systems,
Heidelberg, Germany), and was subsequently sold to
Siemens Medical Solutions (Malvern, PA) (Fig. 8a).
Shiu et al. (1997) described the development and
characteristics of a miniature multileaf collimator
designed specifically for small field cranial radiosurgery. The MLC consisted of 15 pairs of leaves projecting a width of 4 mm at isocenter, for a maximum
field size of 6 9 6 cm2. Treatment planning was
facilitated using the XKnife system (Radionics, Burlington, MA). A 27 leaf pair version with a maximum
field size of 13.4 9 10.8 cm2 was subsequently commercialized by Radionics (Fig. 8b). Concurrently, the
m3, a 52 leaf micro-MLC was developed jointly by
BrainLAB GmbH (Heimstetten, Germany) and Varian
(Fig. 8c). The m3 had 14 pairs of 3 mm leaves located
in the center of the field, 6 pairs of 4.5 mm leaves in the
middle and 6 pairs of 5.5 mm leaves at the periphery for
a maximum field size of 10.2 9 10.0 cm2. Physical and
dosimetric characteristics of the m3 have been described by Cosgrove et al. (1999) and Xia et al. (1999). In
the ensuing years, the Radionics and BrainLAB microMLC have been installed on a variety of linacs, and

Historical Development of Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

21

Fig. 9 Drawing from the
1993 patent awarded to John
Adler, Russell Schonberg and
Peter Schonberg, with an
early version of the
CyberKnife

continue to be used to this day in the treatment of many
patients every year. Meeks et al. (2000) described a
double-focused miniature MLC developed in conjunction with Wellhofer Dosimetrie (Schwarzenbruck,
Germany).

4.4.3 Dedicated Linac Radiosurgery Systems
Through the 1990s, the use of linacs in radiosurgery
remained controversial, based largely on the assertion
by some practitioners that linac-based systems, with
multiple moving parts, could not match the accuracy of
gamma units. While the work of Friedman and Bova
rendered this argument largely specious, it remained
a common perception. In part to counter this argument,
several notable efforts aimed at developing linacs
dedicated exclusively to radiosurgery applications
were initiated. Their efforts culminated in a robotmounted linac (CyberKnife, Accuray, Santa Clara,
CA), a C-arm multi-rotation-axis linac (Mitsubishi
Electric Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), a conventional linac single energy 6 MV photon with a fixed 10 cm diameter
primary collimator (600SR, Varian) and a linac with
an integrated micro-multileaf collimator (Novalis,
BrainLAB). Each of these are described briefly.
4.4.3.1 The CyberKnife
In 1989, John Adler, a neurosurgeon working at Stanford University, conceived the idea of new radiosurgery device consisting of a compact, robot-mounted
linac. Adler approached Schonberg Radiation Corporation (Santa Clara, CA) for assistance in building a
linac with the necessary requirements (size, weight,
energy, dose rate, etc.). SRC was founded by Peter and

Russell Schonberg; Russell had previously worked as
manager of electrical systems at Varian Associates
where he worked on the development of medical linear
accelerators. Russell also developed a portable electron
linac which eventually became the Mobitron (IntraOp
Medical, Santa Clara, CA) (Schonberg 1987). Patent
number 5,207,223 was awarded in 1993 to Adler and
the Schonberg brothers, and assigned to Accuray.
A diagram form the patent award and a photo of the
original prototype at Stanford are shown in Fig. 9.
Originally called the Neurotron 1000 (Adler 1993;
Cox and Murphy 1995), the first system consisted of a
300 pound, 6 MeV x-band (9.3 GHz) SRC linac,
mounted to an industrial robot (GMF, Auburn Hills,
MI) (Adler and Cox 1996; Adler et al. 1997). The
robotic configuration eliminated the isocentric constraint of radiation delivery. From the time of its
inception the system was intended to facilitate frameless radiosurgery, performed using a stereo pair of
X-rays (Guthrie and Adler 1991a, b; Adler 1993), and
the Accuray founders deserve considerable credit as
pioneers in image-guided radiotherapy (IGRT). In 2001
the CyberKnife received FDA approval to treat indications anywhere in the body. Using anthropomorphic
phantoms, submillimeter accuracy has been demonstrated in cranial and spinal applications (Chang et al.
2003; Yu et al. 2004). CyberKnife is now a mainstay in
both cranial and extracranial stereotactic treatments.
4.4.3.2 The 600SR
To address the burgeoning radiosurgery market, Varian
released a linac dedicated to radiosurgery applications
in 1994. The first 600SR unit was installed at Brigham

22

and Women’s Hospital in Boston; subsequent 600SR
installations included: the Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia (Andrews et al. 2006), the
Rigshospitalet in Copenhagen, Apollo Cancer Institute in Delhi, India, the Klinikum Der Westfalische
Wilhelms-Universitat in Munster, Germany and the
University of California, Los Angeles. Modeled after
the 600C, the 600SR was a single energy 6 MV linac,
with a redesigned flattening filter and a fixed primary
collimator 10 cm in diameter. The smaller flattening
filter resulted in dose rates up to 800 MU/min in
clinical mode, and nearly 1,300 MU/min in service
mode. Radiation was delivered in the conventional
rotational manner, with an MU/degree range from 0.3
to 20.0 to facilitate both high (SRS) and low (SRT)
dose-per-fraction delivery. The machine had no
movable diaphragms, and the lighter treatment head
coupled with reduced counterweight and the new
Varian ETR couch resulted in a compound accuracy
(gantry, couch and collimator rotations) of \0.9 mm
as measured with a Winston-Lutz test (Das et al.
1996). All of the 600SR units were packaged with
stereotactic hardware (frames, collimators and QA
equipment) and treatment planning systems (XKnife)
from Radionics.
4.4.3.3 The Mitsubishi C-arm Linac
In 1996, Mitsubishi Electric Company, Limited
(Tokyo, Japan) introduced a unique linac with two
rotational axes designed for radiosurgery. The linac
head was mounted on a C-arm which rotated 60
about a horizontal axis perpendicular to the gantry
rotational axis. The unit operated at 4 or 6 MV, with a
variable dose rate to 450 MU/minute, and circular
collimators from 0.5 to 3.5 cm in diameter (Tamaki
et al. 2000). The linac was also equipped with a 120
leaf MLC, with the central 80 leaves projecting 5 mm
and the outer 40 leaves projecting 10 mm at isocenter
(Nakagawa et al. 2003). Another unique feature
included a small CCD video camera attached to the
center of the linac gantry used to determine geometrical accuracy; an isocenter precision of ± 0.8 mm,
including C-arm, gantry and table rotations, was
reported, ± 0.8 mm. (Nakagawa et al. 2003).
4.4.3.4 The Novalis
Shortly after delivering the last 600SR to UCLA, Varian
extended their collaboration with BrainLAB with an
agreement to integrate the BrainLAB m3 collimator

T. D. Solberg et al.

onto the 600SR platform. The result was the NovalisShaped Beam Radiosurgery System, the first of which
was installed at UCLA in 1997; the first Novalis treatment occurred in early 1998. The succession of Novalis
units, from the original UCLA device to the current day
Novalis Tx, is shown in Fig. 10. The ability to treat
increasingly more complex geometric targets using a
single isocenter produced dose distributions that are both
more conformal and more homogeneous than traditional
techniques (Solberg et al. 2000a, b; Andrews et al. 2006).
The development of dynamic arc delivery, in which the
leaves move during rotational delivery to continuously
shape to the beams-eye-view projection of the target,
further improved conformality and reduced average
treatment times to approximately 15 min (Solberg et al.
2001). Circular collimators mounted beneath the MLC
enabled the Novalis to become the first linac system used
routinely in the treatment of trigeminal neuralgia
(Solberg et al. 1998; Goss et al. 2003; Smith et al. 2003).
In 2000, BrainLAB provided an IMRT solution for
the Novalis, with inverse planning based on the dynamically penalized maximum likelihood (DPL) algorithm
described by Llacer (1997). Theoretical and practical
characteristics of the DPL algorithm, including performance under gated operation, have been described by
several authors (Chetty et al. 2000; Arellano et al. 2000;
Solberg et al. 2000a, b; Llacer et al. 2001; Hugo et al.
2002; Agazaryan et al. 2003). In 2001 BrainLAB
introduced their image guidance system based on stereoscopic X-ray imaging. The first generation utilized
two ceiling-mounted diagnostic tubes projecting on a
single couch-mounted flat panel detector (Fig. 10b).
Later generations were implemented with the two tubes
recessed in the floor, projecting on two opposing ceilingmounted detectors (Fig. 10c). The current BrainLAB/
Varian offerings include the Novalis Tx (Fig. 10d)
(Chang et al. 2008) and the Novalis powered by
TrueBeam STx.

5

The Development of Stereotactic
Body Radiation Therapy

The success of cranial SRS as an efficient, potent
means of local tumor treatment eventually prompted
several groups to evaluate analogous strategies of
high dose-per-fraction treatment to extracranial
tumors in a variety of sites away from the nervous
system. Very much influenced by Leksell’s use of a

Historical Development of Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

23

Fig. 10 Evolution of the
Novalis: a the original device
at UCLA in 1997; b the
UCLA device with original
ExacTrac X-ray system in
1999; c a Novalis with
upgraded ExacTrac X-ray
system; d the Novalis Tx

rigid frame to stabilize the head during cranial SRS,
initial efforts by several groups in Sweden, Arizona,
New York, Houston and elsewhere followed a frame/
fiducial-based paradigm for localization of extracranial targets. With the advent and now widespread
adoption of in-room image guidance, the frame-based
approaches have been largely relegated to history.
Nevertheless, many patients were successfully treated
with doses using frame-based approaches, and the
field is indebted to these early pioneers in demonstrating what can be clinically achieved through the
accurate administration of ablative dose of radiation.
Though the acronym SBRT (stereotactic body radiation therapy) is widely used to describe extracranial
application, a more appropriate nomenclature, stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SAbR), has been
proposed by Loo et al. (2011). In this chapter, SBRT
and SAbR are used synonymously.

non-invasive nature, found broad clinical acceptance in
the intervening years (Lax et al. 1994; Blomgren et al.
1995). The system consisted of an immobilization box
with embedded CT fiducials, and a device for compressing the chest to limit respiratory motion (Fig. 11).
Localization accuracy was limited to ‘‘5–8 mm in 90%
of setups,’’ due to large difficulty in reproducing the
patient’s position within the box between imaging and
treatment sessions. A unique feature of the body frame
was a mechanism for abdominal compression, which
was very effective for limiting motion due to respiration
(Negoro et al. 2001). The system was commercialized
by Elekta AB (Stockholm, Sweden) as the Stereotactic
Body Frame and used clinically at a number of
institutions throughout the world (Wulf et al. 2000;
Nagata et al. 2002; McGarry et al. 2005; Hansen et al.
2006). Elekta recently discontinued the Stereotactic
Body Frame.

5.1

5.2

The Karolinska Experience
and the Stereotactic Body Frame

Beginning in 1990, a group from the Karolinska Hospital in Stockholm, Sweden, began development of a
methodology for SBRT localization that, due largely its

The Tucson Experience with Spinal
Radiosurgery

A methodology for radiosurgery of targets involving
and adjacent to the spine was described by Hamilton
and Lulu (1995). The system consisted of a shallow

24

T. D. Solberg et al.

Fig. 11 a The Elekta
Stereotactic Body Frame,
based on the original design
of Lax and Blomgren; b the
abdominal compression
feature of the SBF is very
effective at reducing motion
associated with respiration

rigid box, with lateral dimensions compatible with CT
imaging (Fig. 12). Patients were placed within the
box in a prone position, and under anesthesia, small
clamps were attached to one or two spinous processes
adjacent to the intended target. These clamps were
rigidly attached to two semicircular metal arches
secured to the box. The stereotactic space was defined
relative to a small radio-opaque sphere using the
coordinate system of the CT scanner. Imaging, planning and treatment were performed in a single setting
with the patient rigidly fixed for the duration of the
procedure. The authors reported localization uncertainties of 2.0 mm in a worst case scenario. This
prototype spinal system was subsequently used in the
treatment of nine patients (Hamilton et al. 1995,
1996). Doses delivered were understandably conservative, ranging from 8 to 10 Gy, with distributions
constructed in such a way that no portion of the spinal
cords received more than 3 Gy. An attempt to commercially market the ‘‘Arizona’’ spinal radiosurgery
system proved unsuccessful.

5.3

Other Frame-Based Approaches
to SBRT

In the late 1990s the group at the German Cancer
Center (DKFZ) in Heidelberg described the development and clinical application of a stereotactic body
frame. A metal arch with v-shaped fiducials, rigidly
mounted to a full length carbon fiber board, established a CT-based coordinate system in the standard
manner (Lohr et al. 1999). Patients were fixed to the
frame through the use of a torso-length body cast.
Fixation of the patient within the frame can be
obtained with a vacuum pillow, or, as presented here,
with a Scotchcast body cast. Mean overall accuracy of
the system was reported as B3.6 mm. The authors
recommended repeat CT imaging immediately prior
to treatment, ‘‘…since an acceptable result of repositioning could be achieved in only less than one-half
of the patients on the first attempt’’ (Herfarth et al.
2000). Extracranial targeting accuracy could be
improved by supplementing the body cast with a head

Historical Development of Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

25

Fig. 12 The Arizona spinal
radiosurgery concept, as
illustrated in the drawings
from the patent awarded to
Hamilton and Lulu in 1994,
with the common ‘‘Z’’ fiducial
configuration for tomographic
localization

fixation. An abdominal compression device added
subsequently proved effective in reducing respiratory
motion. The system was commercialized by Leibinger
(Freiburg, Germany: Fig. 13b), and went through a
series of commercial hands before being discontinued
by Stryker (Kalamazoo, MI).

6

SRS and SBRT in the Era of Image
Guidance

Targets outside the skull are not readily amenable to
fixation using rigid frames, and therefore in present
day applications, image guidance is a prerequisite for
extracranial SRS and SBRT. As with frame-based
radiosurgery, ‘‘frameless’’ technologies were initially
developed to facilitate surgical applications. The first
reference depicting frameless capabilities was published by Roberts et al. (1986), who described a
method for registering CT data with an operating
microscope for neurosurgical applications. Subsequent investigators refined this approach (Kato et al.
1991; Guthrie and Adler 1991a, b; Tan et al. 1993),
and frameless neuro-navigation is now commonplace.

6.1

Image-Assisted Frame-Based SBRT

Obvious shortcomings in accuracy of frame-based
approaches prompted early SBRT-practitioners to
develop image-based methods for target verification.
Initial approaches certainly incorporated portal imaging.

Yenice et al. (2003) described frame-based SBRT
combined with daily CT imaging performed just prior
to each treatment. To facilitate improved reproducibility, the patient was setup initially in a standing
position, after which the frame and patient were tilted
backwards into a horizontal treatment position. The
authors were able to demonstrate a localization
accuracy of within 1 mm (1r) in any direction. Daily
CT was eventually replaced with localization based
on electronic portal imaging, with little loss of targeting accuracy (Lovelock et al. 2005).
Motivated by a desire to treat spinal lesions, the
group at UCLA designed and constructed a series of
body frames beginning in 1993; an early version,
never used clinically, is shown in Fig. 13a. Subsequently, Medin et al. (2002) proposed a minimally
invasive localization technology that allowed for
high-dose, single fraction irradiation of tumors near
the spine. Under local anesthesia, three small radioopaque markers were permanently affixed within the
vertebral and spinous processes. The implanted fiducials were localized on biplanar radiographs obtained
at the time of the planning CT. Imaging procedures
utilized an external localization box from which a
coordinate system was established (Fig. 14). At the
time of treatment, biplanar radiographs were repeated
in the treatment room using a mobile radiography
unit. The implanted fiducials were identified, and
the isocenter position was calculated based on the
geometric relationship between the target and
implanted markers obtained at the time of CT imaging. In this manner, accurate target localization could

26

T. D. Solberg et al.

Fig. 13 a An early body
frame design constructed by
the UCLA group; b a
commercial body frame
(Leibinger), originally
designed by the Heidelberg
group

Fig. 14 The spinal
radiosurgery approach
described by Medin et al
combined frame-based
localization with kV
projection image guidance
using a mobile radiography
unit

be performed despite the fact that (a) the patient had
moved from the time of the initial CT and (b) the
target could not be directly visualized in the treatment
room. In phantoms specially constructed to evaluate
overall system accuracy, the worst case targeting error
observed was 1.17 mm. The methodology was subsequently evaluated in a swine model. Radionics
briefly considered commercializing the methodology.
Two groups have combined in-room CT imaging with
linac delivery for stereotactic irradiation of intra- and
extra-cranial targets. A system combining in-room CT
with fiducial-based localization for spinal radiosurgery

has also been described by Shiu et al (2003). Patients
were immobilized in a full-body stereotactic frame and
received localization/verification CT scans immediately
prior to treatment. This was facilitated by a CT-on-rails
installed in the treatment room. With daily CT imaging,
the authors determined the overall deviation from
intended isocenter was within 1 mm for each treatment.
Capabilities were later developed to facilitate automated
registration of digitally reconstructed radiographs
(DRRs) generated from the pretreatment CT scans to
DRRs generated from the planning CT (Wang et al.
2007). Uematsu et al. (1996) reported on the treatment of

Historical Development of Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

27

eight patients with primary or metastatic brain tumors.
Immobilization was performed using conventional head
masks coupled with a dental impression. Localization
was achieved by aligning the target to the axis of the CT
gantry, marking the corresponding axes with small
metallic balls, and subsequently aligning the metallic
balls to the lasers of the linear accelerator. Phantom
studies showed localization uncertainty on the order of
1 mm. Subsequently, the system has been used extensively for stereotactic targeting of extracranial tumors
(Uematsu et al. 1998, 2000).

have focused on partial breast irradiation, the system
has been recently adopted for cranial stereotactic
radiotherapy (SRT) and general SBRT applications
(Lindgren-Turner et al. 2005; Cerviño et al. 2010;
Peng et al. 2010). Results suggest that the system
provides accuracy comparable with conventional
SRT methodologies. Further, localization can be
performed in a matter of a few seconds.
Investigators have also implemented infrared stereophotogrammetry for extracranial localization.
Wang et al. (2001) described a method in which
passive infrared-reflecting spheres were affixed to
the chest and/or abdomen of radiotherapy patients
(ExacTrac, BrainLAB AG, Feldkirchen, Germany).
Phantom studies demonstrated that the position of
each IR-reflecting sphere could be determined to less
than 0.3 mm, though CT-based target localization
introduced additional uncertainties, on the order of
3 mm at the 95% confidence level. Ultimately, issues
of marker reproducibility and patient motion led the
authors to conclude that the accuracy of surfacebased IR techniques was inadequate for stereotactic
applications.
Working with investigators at the University of
Iowa, Bova and colleagues subsequently coupled their
infrared-based navigation system with ultrasound
image guidance to facilitate targeting of paraspinal
tumors (Ryken et al. 2001). System applicability was
limited to soft tissue tumors located on the dorsal
aspect of the spinal column; disease involving the
bony vertebrae, the most common site for metastatic
spread, could not be localized due to inherent limitations of ultrasound imaging. The authors subsequently described the treatment of a single patient
presenting with a recurrent metastatic squamous cell
carcinoma at the level of T-11; a dose of 15 Gy
was delivered to the 80% isodose line. Bayouth
et al. (2007) subsequently coupled the IR-ultrasound
system with a specially designed linac to facilitate
cranial and extracranial stereotactic applications.
In a similar manner, Fuss et al. (2004) used the
stereotactic ultrasound (BAT, Best Medical International, Inc., Springfield, VA) to target malignancies of
the upper abdomen. Due to the challenge of visualizing many of these tumors directly on ultrasound, the
authors described the use of adjacent vascular structures as surrogates for target position. They reported
that the technique was useful in 95.8% of setups, a
significant improvement from traditional ultrasound

6.2

Stereophotogrammetric Methods
of Stereotactic Localization

Stereophotogrammetry is the general term applied to
the science of 3D measurement from two or more
overlapping two-dimensional (2D) images. By
obtaining images from at least two different locations
and measuring the same target in each picture, a ‘‘line
of sight’’ is developed from each camera location to
the target. If the camera location and direction are
known, the lines can be mathematically intersected to
produce the 3D coordinates of each targeted point.
The use of stereophotogrammetric techniques for
localization of patients undergoing radiation therapy
was first described by Schlegel et al. (1993) and
Menke et al. (1994). They employed video stereophotogrammetry as a means of evaluating the repositioning accuracy of a specially designed head holder
for fractionated radiotherapy. Shortly thereafter, Bova
et al. (1997) adopted the methodology for cranial
radiosurgery. The SPG method was sensitive enough
to detect 0.05 mm deflections in a radiosurgery head
holder.
In 1999, the group at the University of Chicago
developed a video-based system for patient positioning (Johnson et al. 1999). The system used two CCD
cameras to display real-time subtraction images for
analysis of misalignment of head and neck patients.
The authors showed that uncertainty could be significantly reduced (from 1r of 5–7 mm to 1r of
1–3 mm) if the system was used for online setup
correction. More recently, optical systems have seen a
resurgence in interest with the emergence of a commercial technology that uses optical techniques for
real-time 3D surface tracking. (AlignRT, VisionRT
Ltd., London, UK). While most clinical applications

28

T. D. Solberg et al.

methodologies. Despite these advances, ultrasound
imaging remains challenging in the vast majority of
tumor sites, and the use of stereotactic ultrasound is
now largely restricted to applications in prostate
cancer (Chinnaiyan et al. 2003; Fuller et al. 2006;
Peignaux et al. 2006).

6.3

Orthogonal kV Localization
(X-Ray Stereophotogrammetry)

The principles of stereophotogrammetry can be readily
extended to X-ray imaging for direct visualization of
internal anatomical structures, with the accuracy necessary for stereotactic applications. The application of
X-ray imaging in stereophotogrammetric analysis (also
known as Roentgen stereophotogrammetry) was first
described by Selvik and colleagues (Selvik 1990;
Johnsson et al. 1992; Axelsson et al. 1996).
Shirato et al. (1999, 2000) and Shimizu et al.
(2001) described a system consisting of three roommounted X-ray tube—image intensifier pairs, used for
both localization and tumor tracking. The use of three
imaging systems allowed for continuous 3D imaging,
regardless of the position of the gantry position,
which could obscure only one pair at a time. Continuous tracking was facilitated through the use of an
implanted gold marker, which was recognized automatically using a pattern matching algorithm. The
imaging system was synchronized with linac, with an
uncertainty between intended and delivered target on
the order of 1 mm.
Presently, both the CyberKnife and Novalis commercial systems provide room-mounted stereophotogrammetry capabilities coupled to their respective
SRS/SBRT linacs. Because the imaging system is
permanently mounted in the treatment room, targeting
can be performed without the need for additional
‘‘localization boxes.’’ The CyberKnife has two ceiling-mounted diagnostic X-ray units projecting
through the patient to two opposing amorphous silicon detectors recessed within the treatment room
floor. The biplanar imaging system provides capabilities for frameless stereotactic radiosurgery (Murphy 1997), and Initial CyberKnife applications were
for the treatment of cranial disease, treated in a single
or multiple fractions (Adler et al. 1999). However, the
integrated image guidance system employed by the
CyberKnife also makes it suitable for stereotactic

irradiation of treat extra-cranial tumors. Murphy et al.
(2000) have described modifications to the original
CyberKnife to facilitate stereotactic irradiation of
spinal and other tumors adjacent to rigid bony anatomy. Clinical applications of CyberKnife technology
have grown rapidly, and many investigators have now
reported their clinical experience in spine, lung, liver,
pancreas and other extracranial sites.
Similarly, the Novalis system incorporates stereoscopic X-ray component for localization of extracranial targets with an infrared (IR) component to
facilitate patient setup and allow for patient position
monitoring. In contrast to the CyberKnife, the kV
X-ray component consists of two floor-mounted
X-ray tubes and two opposing amorphous silicon
(aSi) flat panel detectors mounted to the ceiling. Each
X-ray tube/detector pair is configured to image
through the linac isocenter with a coronal field of
view of approximately 18 cm in both the superiorinferior (S–I) and left–right (L–R) directions at isocenter. The X-ray localization system can be operated
in two modes: matching of implanted radio opaque
markers and automated registration of X-ray and
digitally reconstructed radiographs (DRRs) using an
iterative edge matching algorithm. Comprehensive
evaluations of targeting accuracy have been reported
by Yan et al. (2003).

6.4

Volume-Guided Localization

In-room volumetric X-ray guidance, specifically kV
and MV cone-beam CT, has become commonplace in
radiotherapy. Cone-beam CT is now a widely utilized
modality for localization of SRS and SBRT patients
(Fukuda 2010; Kim et al. 2011; Galerani et al. 2010;
Worm et al. 2010; Wang et al. 2010). The initial
experience is briefly described here.
Two groups from Germany successfully implemented kV cone-beam CT localization for intracranial
radiosurgery and extracranial stereotactic body radiation therapy treatments. Boda-Heggemann et al.
(2006) used volumetric kV imaging to assess the
positioning accuracy and reproducibility in 21
patients undergoing cranial or head and neck irradiation. Automatic 3D–3D matching was used to register cone-beam images to the planning CT. While the
study addressed only conventional versus cone-beam
localization (i.e., there was no absolute reference on

Historical Development of Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

29

which to judge cone-beam localization itself), the
authors nevertheless concluded that their experience
supported a paradigm shift to purely image-guided
setup for all intracranial precision radiotherapy procedures. Subsequently, Guckenberger et al. 2007a, b)
used kV cone-beam CT for localization of patients
receiving stereotactic radiosurgery for the treatment
of brain metastases. They concluded that frameless
radiosurgery based on image guidance with registration of the bony anatomy could be performed accurately and efficiently.
The same group has extended their cone-beam CT
localization approach to SBRT treatment of lung
tumors (Guckenberger et al. 2007a, b). Cone-beam
CT imaging was determined to be of value in evaluating intrafraction variation in tumor position as well
as for minimizing setup errors. Based on their analysis, the authors suggested that a 5 mm isotropic ITVto-PTV margin was sufficient to account for intrafraction effects. Duggan et al. (2007) used a similar
localization technique in SBRT of lung cancer
patients, incorporating deep inspiration breath hold
for both the reference and cone-beam CTs.
Chang et al. (2007) evaluated the accuracy of kV
cone-beam localization relative to fiducial-based stereotactic targeting. In phantom studies, an uncertainty in
the cone-beam CT setup procedure of 1.34 ± 0.33 mm
was observed. The investigators concluded that localization based on cone-beam CT image guidance was
equivalent to that of currently used frame-based stereotactic radiosurgery systems. Letourneau et al. (2007)
have developed a phantom for end-to-end dosimetric
and geometric accuracy testing of cone-beam image
guidance radiosurgery-type applications. To evaluate
their methodology, a treatment plan was designed for
single fraction radiosurgery of a spinal target. Imageguided setup was performed, and the phantom was
irradiated according to the treatment plan. About
97.1% ± 1.5% of measurement points were within 3%
of the calculated dose or within 2 mm distance to
agreement.

the radiation biology of large doses per fraction. While
the latter is beyond the scope of this chapter, it is
important to note the rapidly growing body of work in
the development and application of preclinical stereotactic irradiation (DeSalles et al. 1996; Sun et al. 1998;
DeSalles et al. 2001; DesRosiers et al. 2003; Jahan et al.
2006, 2007; Stojadinovic et al. 2006, 2007; Lotan et al.
2006; Walsh et al. 2006; Graves et al. 2007; Deng et al.
2007; Matinfar et al. 2007; Wong et al. 2008; Solberg
et al. 2008; Matinfar et al. 2009; Saha et al. 2010;
Cho et al. 2010; Zhou et al. 2010; Song et al. 2010;
Medin et al. 2011).
With regard to technology, two devices have been
recently proposed that provide tighter integration of
imaging and delivery components. In 2006, a collaboration between scientists at three Japanese universities
and institutes, working together with engineers at
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan), constructed a next-generation system with capabilities for
2D and 3D localization and real-time tumor tracking
(Kamino et al. 2006, 2007a, b; Takayama et al. 2009).
A 6 MV C-band linear accelerator and micro-multileaf
collimator are mounted on a computer-controlled gimbal which allows the linac to pan and tilt; an opposing flat
panel provides beam-eye-view electronic portal images.
The imaging subsystem consists of 2 kV sources and
opposing detectors and can be operated in stereoscopic
mode (radiographic or fluorographic) or can be rotated
during image acquisition for reconstruction of volumetric (cone-beam) images. A cone-beam CT data set
can be acquired in as few as 16 s. All components are
housed in an O-ring gantry approximately 3.3 m in
diameter which can rotate 360 about the table axis. The
entire O-ring gantry can also rotate ± 60 about a vertical (skew) axis.
In April, 2010, Varian announced a new linac,
TrueBeamTM, with a significant redesign of major
components, including the accelerator, bending magnets, flattening filters and carousel assembly and beam
control systems. Further, the control systems allow
sequencing and automated control of the couch, gantry
and collimators with both on-board imaging and
delivery (Lovelock et al. 2010). One of the most unique
characteristics in the addition of flattening filter-free
(FFF) photon modes, which generate dose rates of
1,400 MU/min and 2,400 MU/min at 6 and 10 MV,
respectively. The FFF modes are well suited to stereotactic applications, as the beam profile is relatively
flat for small fields (Naqvi et al. 2010). A detailed

6.5

Future Developments in
Image-Guided SRS and SBRT

Future developments in image-guided SRS/SBRT will
focus on two essential lines of investigation: continued
improvement of imaging and delivery technology, and

30

T. D. Solberg et al.

analysis of dosimetric characteristics of both standard
and FFF modes has been provided by Hrbacek et al.
(2011). The standard mode photon beams are clinically
interchangeable with the Varian C-series linacs (Naqvi
et al. 2010), and modeling of both the standard and
FFF modes is accurately accommodated by the AAA
algorithm of the Eclipse treatment planning system
(Hrbacek et al. 2011). The TrueBeam is available in
two configurations: with the standard Millennium MLC
(0.5 cm wide leaves), or as the TrueBeam STx, with the
HD-120 MLC (0.25 cm wide central leaves).

7

Conclusions

Stereotactic radiosurgery, with roots over a century old,
has become a standard of care in the management of
cranial disease. The success of SRS has subsequently
stimulated application in extracranial disease sites. Just
as SRS revolutionized the practice of neurosurgery,
SBRT is now challenging conventional wisdom with
regard to the practice of radiation oncology. This paradigm change has been facilitated in large part through
technological development which continues to this day.
Future development, in combination with a better
understanding of the biological response to large doseper-fraction irradiation and molecular approaches to
optimize response ensure that SRS and SBRT will play
an increasingly important role in the treatment of cancer for decades to come.

References
Adler JR (1993) Frameless radiosurgery. In: Goetsch SJ,
DeSalles AA (eds) Stereotactic surgery and radiosurger.
Medical Physics Publishing, Madison, pp 237–248
Adler JR, Cox RS (1996) Preliminary experience with
the CyberKnife: image-guided stereotactic radiosurgery.
In: Kondziolka D (ed) Radiosurgery 1995. Karger, Basel,
pp. 316–326
Adler JR, Chang SD, Murphy MJ et al (1997) The CyberKnife:
a frameless robotic system for radiosurgery. Stereotact Func
Neurosurg 69:124–128
Adler JR, Murphy MJ, Chang SD et al (1999) Image-guided
robotic radiosurgery. Neurosurgery 44:1299–1306
Agazaryan N, Solberg TD (2003) Segmental and dynamic
intensity-modulated radiation delivery techniques for
micro-multileaf collimator. Med Phys 30:1758–1767
Agazaryan N, Solberg TD, DeMarco JJ (2003) Patient specific
quality assurance for the delivery of intensity modulated
radiotherapy. J Appl Clin Med Phys 4:40–50

Andrews DW, Bednarz G, Evans JJ, Downes MB (2006) A
review of 3 current radiosurgery systems. Surg Neurol 66:
559–564
Arellano AR, Solberg TD, Llacer J (2000) A clinically oriented
inverse planning implementation. In: Schlegel W, Bortfeld
T (eds) The use of computers in radiation therapy. Springer,
Berlin, pp 532–544
Axelsonn P, Johnsson R, Stromqvist B (1996) Mechanics of the
external fixation test of the lumbar spine: a roentgen
stereophotogrammetric analysis. Spine 21:330–333
Barcia-Salorio JL, Hernandez G, Broseta J et al (1982)
Radio surgical treatment of carotid cavernous fistula. Appl
Neurophysiol 45:520–522
Bayouth JE, Kaiser HS, Smith MC, Pennington EC et al (2007)
Image-guided stereotactic radiosurgery using a specially
designed high-dose-rate linac. Med Dosim 32:134–141
Betti OO, Derechinsky YE (1982) Irradiations stereotaxiques
multifaisceaux. Neurochirurgie 28:55–56
Betti OO, Derechinsky YE (1984) Hyposelective encephalic
irradiation with linear accelerator. Acta Neurochir 33:
385–390
Bischoff K (1950) Der konvergenstrahler, eine Röntgenstrahlenquelle mit extrem hohen prozentualen Tiefendosen (convergence
irradiation, an X-ray source with high depth dose). Strahlentherapie 81:365
Bischoff K (1952) Modern apparatus for cineroentgenography.
Fortschr Geb Rontgenstr 76(1):58–59
Blomgren H, Lax I, Naslund I et al (1995) Stereotactic high
dose fraction radiation therapy of extracranial tumors using
an accelerator: clinical experience of the first thirty-one
patients. Acta Oncol 34:861–870
Boda-Heggemann J, Walter C, Rahn A, Wertz H et al (2006)
Repositioning accuracy of two different mask systems—3D
revisited: comparison using true 3D/3D matching with cone
beam CT. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 66:1568–1575
Bova FJ, Buatti JM, Friedman WA et al (1997) The University
of Florida frameless high-precision stereotactic radiotherapy
system. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 38:875–882
Brown RA, Roberts TS, Osborn AG (1980) Stereotaxic frame
and computer software for CT-directed neurosurgical
localization. Invest Radiol 15:308–312
Cerviño L, Pawlicki T, Lawson J, Jiang S (2010) Frame-less
and mask-less cranial stereotactic radiosurgery: a feasibility
study. Phys Med Biol 55:1863–1873
Chang SD, Main W, Martin DP et al (2003) An analysis of the
accuracy of the CyberKnife: a robotic frameless stereotactic
radiosurgical system. Neurosurgery 52:140–146
Chang J, Yenice KM, Narayana A, Gutin PH (2007) Accuracy
and feasibility of cone-beam computed tomography for
stereotactic radiosurgery setup. Med Phys 34:2077–2084
Chang Z, Wang Z, Wu QJ et al (2008) Dosimetric characteristics of novalis Tx system with high definition multileaf
collimator. Med Phys 35:4460–4463
Chetty IC, Solberg TD, DeMarco JJ et al (2000) A phase-space
model for simulating arbitrary intensity distributions for
shaped radiosurgery beams using the Monte Carlo method.
In Kondziolka D (ed) Radiosurgery 1999. S. Karger AG,
Basel, pp 41–52
Chinnaiyan P, Tomée W, Patel R, Chappell R et al (2003)
3D-ultrasound guided radiation therapy in the post-prostatectomy setting. Technol Cancer Res Treat 2:455–458

Historical Development of Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

31

Cho J, Kodym R, Seliounine S et al (2010) High dose per
fraction irradiation of limited lung volumes using an imageguided highly focused irradiator: simulating stereotactic
body radiotherapy regimens in an animal model. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 77:895–902
Clarke RH, Horsley VA (1906) On a method of investigating
the deep ganglia and tracts of the central nervous system
(cerebellum). Br Med J 2:1799–1800
Colombo F, Benedetti A, Pozza F et al (1985) External
stereotactic irradiation by linear accelerator. Neurosurgery
16:154–160
Cosgrove VP, Jahn U, Pfaender M et al (1999) Commissioning
of a micro multi-leaf collimator and planning system for
stereotactic radiosurgery. Radiother Oncol 50:325–336
Coutard H (1932) Roentgen therapy of epitheliomas of the
tonsillar region, hypopharynx and larynx from 1920 to
1926. Am J Roentgenol 28:313
Coutard H (1937) The results and methods of treatment of
cancer by radiation. Annals Surg 106:584–598
Coutard H (1940) Present conception of treatment of cancer of
the larynx. Radiology 34:136–145
Cox RS, Murphy MJ (1995) Positioning accuracy of the
neurotron 1000. Radiother Oncol 32(suppl1):301
Dahlin H (1970) Om optimering av straldosfordelningar vid
cerebral stralkirurgi Internal Report (GWI-R 1/70). Gustaf
Werner Institute, Uppsala
Dahlin H (1971) Computerized calculation of dosage in
external radiotherapy. Nord Med 85:1248–1255
Dahlin H, Sarby B (1975) Destruction of small intracranial
tumours with 60Co gamma radiation. Physical and technical
considerations. Acta Radiol Ther Phys Biol 14:209–227
Daniel J (1896) The X-rays. Science 67:562–563
Das IJ, Downes MB, Corn BW et al (1996) Characteristics of a
dedicated linear accelerator-based stereotactic radiosurgeryradiotherapy unit. Radiother Oncol 38:61–68
Deng H, Kennedy CW, Armour E et al (2007) The smallanimal radiation research platform (SARRP): dosimetry of a
focused lens system. Phys Med Biol 52:2729–2740
DeSalles AAF, Solberg TD, Mischel P et al (1996) Arteriovenous malformation animal model for radiosurgery: the rete
mirabile. AJNR 17:1451–1458
DeSalles AAF, Melega WP, Lacan GL et al (2001) Radiosurgery with a 3 mm collimator in the subthalamic nucleus and
substantia Nigra of the Vervet Monkey. J Neurosurg 95:
990–997
DesRosiers C, Mendonca MS, Tyree V et al (2003) Use of the
Leksell gamma knife for localized small field lens irradiation in rodents. Technol Cancer Res Treat 2:449–454
Duggan DM, Ding GX, Coffey CW 2nd, Kirby W et al (2007)
Deep-inspiration breath-hold kilovoltage cone-beam CT for
setup of stereotactic body radiation therapy for lung tumors:
initial experience. Lung Cancer 56:77–88
Fodstad H, Hariz M, Ljunggren B (1991) History of Clarke’s
stereotactic instrument. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg 57:130–140
Friedman WA, Bova FJ (1989) The university of Florida
radiosurgery system. Surg Neurol 32:334–342
Fukuda A (2010) Pretreatment setup verification by cone beam
CT in stereotactic radiosurgery: phantom study. J Appl Clin
Med Phys 11:3162
Fuller CD, Thomas CR, Schwartz S, Golden N et al (2006)
Method comparison of ultrasound and kilovoltage X-ray

fiducial marker imaging for prostate radiotherapy targeting.
Phys Med Biol 51:4981–4993
Fuss M, Salter BJ, Cavanaugh SX, Fuss C et al (2004) Daily
ultrasound-based image-guided targeting for radiotherapy of
upper abdominal malignancies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
59:1245–1256
Galerani AP, Grills I, Hugo G et al (2010) Dosimetric impact of
online correction via cone-beam CT-based image guidance
for stereotactic lung radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 78:1571–1578
Garland LH (1934) Carcinoma of the larynx. Calif West Med
41:289–295
Ginzton EL, Mallory KB, Kaplan HS (1957) The Stanford
medical linear accelerator: I. Design and development.
Stanf Med Bull 15(3):123–140
Goetsch SJ, Murphy BD, Schmidt R et al (1999) Physics of
rotating gamma systems for stereotactic radiosurgery. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 43:689–696
Goss BW, Frighetto L, DeSalles AA et al (2003) Linear
accelerator radiosurgery using 90 gray for essential trigeminal neuralgia: results and dose volume histogram analysis.
Neurosurgery 53:823–828
Graves EE, Hu Z, Chatterjee R et al (2007) Design and
evaluation of a variable aperture collimator for conformal
radiotherapy of small animals using a microCT scanner.
Med Phys 34:4359–4367
Grubbé EM (1933) Priority in the therapeutic use of X-rays.
Radiology 21:156–162
Guckenberger M, Baier K, Guenther I, Richter A et al (2007a)
Reliability of the bony anatomy in image-guided stereotactic radiotherapy of brain metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 69:294–301
Guckenberger M, Meyer J, Wilbert J, Richter A et al (2007b)
Intra-fractional uncertainties in cone-beam CT based imageguided radiotherapy (IGRT) of pulmonary tumors. Radiother Oncol 83:57–64
Guthrie BL, Adler JR (1991a) Computer-assisted pre-operative
planning, interactive surgery, and frameless stereotaxy. In:
Selman W (ed) Clinical neurosurgery, vol 38. Williams &
Wilkins, Baltimore, pp 112–131
Guthrie BL, Adler JR (1991b) Frameless stereotaxy: computer
interactive neurosurgery. Neurol Surg 1:1–22
Hacker FL, Kooy HM, Bellerive MR et al (1997) Beam shaping
for conformal fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy: a
modeling study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 38:1113–1121
Hamilton AJ, Lulu BA (1995) A prototype device for linear
accelerator-based extracranial radiosurgery. Acta Neurochir
63:40–43
Hamilton AJ, Lulu BA, Fosmire H, Stea B et al (1995)
Preliminary clinical experience with linear acceleratorbased spinal stereotactic radiosurgery. Neurosurgery 36:
311–319
Hamilton AJ, Lulu BA, Fosmire H, Gossett L (1996) LINACbased spinal stereotactic radiosurgery. Stereotact Funct
Neurosurg 66:1–9
Hansen AT, Petersen JB, Høyer M (2006) Internal movement,
set-up accuracy and margins for stereotactic body radiotherapy using a stereotactic body frame. Acta Oncol 45:
948–952
Hartmann GH, Schlegel W, Strum V et al (1985) Cerebral
radiation surgery using moving field irradiation at a linear

32
accelerator facility. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 11:
1185–1192
Henschke U (1938) Über rotations bestrahlung (on rotation
irradiation). Fortschr Geb Rontgenstr 58:456
Herfarth KK, Debus J, Lohr F et al (2000) Extracranial
stereotactic radiation therapy: set-up accuracy of patients
treated for liver metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
46:329–335
Horsley V, Clarke RH (1908) The structure and functions of the
cerebellum examined by a new method. Brain 31:45–125
Hrbacek J, Lang S, Klöck S (2011) Commissioning of photon
beams of a flattening filter-free linear accelerator and the
accuracy of beam modeling using an anisotropic analytical
algorithm. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 80:1228–1237
Hugo G, Agazaryan N, Solberg TD (2002) The effects of tumor
motion on planning and delivery of respiratory gated IMRT.
Med Phys 30:1052–1066
Jahan R, Solberg TD, Lee D et al (2006) Stereotactic radiosurgery
of the rete mirabile in swine: a longitudinal study of
histopathological changes. Neurosurgery 58:551–558
Jahan R, Solberg TD, Lee D et al (2007) Arteriovenous
malformation model for stereotactic radiosurgery research.
Neurosurgery 61:152–159
Jensen RL, Stone JL, Hayne RA (1996) Introduction of the
human Horsley-Clarke stereotactic frame. Neurosurg 38:
563–567
Johnson LS, Milliken BD, Hadley SW, Pelizzari CA et al (1999)
Initial clinical experience with a video-based patient positioning system. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 45:205–213
Johnsson R, Strömqvist B, Axelsson P, Selvik G (1992)
Influence of spinal immobilization on consolidation of
posterolateral lumbosacral fusion. A roentgen stereophotogrammetric and radiographic analysis. Spine 17:16–21
Jones H, Illes J, Northway W (1995) A history of the department
of radiology at Stanford university. AJR 164:753–760
Kamino Y, Takayama K, Kokubo M, Narita Y et al (2006)
Development of a four-dimensional image-guided radiotherapy system with a gimbaled X-ray head. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 66:271–278
Kamino Y, Miura S, Kokubo M et al (2007a) Development of
an ultrasmall C-band linear accelerator guide for a fourdimensional image-guided radiotherapy system with a
gimbaled X-ray head. Med Phys 34:1797–1808
Kamino Y, Tsukuda K, Kokubo M, Miura S et al (2007b)
Development of a new concept automatic frequency controller for an ultrasmall C-band linear accelerator guide.
Med Phys 34:3243–3248
Kato A, Yoshimine T, Hayakawa T et al (1991) A frameless,
armless navigational system for computer-assisted surgery.
J Neurosurg 74:845–849
Kim J, Jin JY, Walls N et al (2011) Image-guided localization
accuracy of stereoscopic planar and volumetric imaging
methods for stereotactic radiation surgery and stereotactic
body radiation therapy: a phantom study. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 79:1588–1596
Kirschner M (1933) Die Punktionstechnik und die Elektrokoagulation es Ganglion Gasseri. Arch Klin Chir 176:581–620
Kjellberg RN, Shintani A, Frantz AG, Kliman B (1968) Protonbeam therapy in acromegaly. N Eng J Med 279:689–695
Kohl U (1906) Stellvorrichtung für Röntgenröhren (device for
X-ray tubes). DRP 192:571

T. D. Solberg et al.
Kooy HM, Nedzi LA, Loeffler JS et al (1991) Treatment
planning for stereotactic radiosurgery of intra-cranial
lesions. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 21:683–693
Kubo HD, Araki F (2002) Dosimetry and mechanical accuracy
of the first rotating gamma system installed in North
America. Med Phys 29:2497–2505
Larsson B (1996) The history of radiosurgery: the early years
(1950–1970). In: Kondziolka D (ed) Radiosurgery 1995, vol 1.
Karger, Basel, pp 1–10
Larsson B, Leksell L, Rexed B et al (1958) The high energy
proton beam as a neurosurgical tool. Nature 182:1222–1223
Larsson B, Leksell L, Rexed B (1963) The use of high-energy
protons for cerebral surgery in man. Acta Chir Scand 125:
1–5
Larsson B, Lidén K, Sarby B (1974) Irradiation of small
structures through the intact skull. Acta Radiol 13:512–534
Lawrence JH (1957) Proton irradiation of the pituitary. Cancer
10:795–798
Lawrence JH, Tobias CA, Born JL et al (1962) Heavy-particle
irradiation in neoplastic and neurologic disease. J Neurosurg
19:717–722
Lax I, Blomgren H, Naslund I et al (1994) Stereotactic
radiotherapy of malignancies in the abdomen: methodological aspects. Acta Oncol 33:677–683
Leavitt DD, Gibbs FA, Heilbrum MP et al (1991) Dynamic
field shaping to optimize stereotactic radiosurgery. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 21:1247–1255
Leksell L (1949) A stereotactic apparatus for intracerebral
surgery. Acta Chir Scand 99:229–233
Leksell L (1951) The stereotaxic method and radiosurgery of
the brain. Chirug Scand 102:316–319
Leksell L (1971) Stereotaxic radiosurgery in trigeminal
neuralgia. Acta Chir Scand 137:311–314
Leksell L, Jernberg B (1980) Stereotaxis and tomography: a
technical note. Acta Neurochir 52:1–7
Leksell L, Larsson B, Anderson B et al (1960) Lesions in the
depth of the brain produced by a beam of high energy
protons. Acta Radiol 54:251–264
Leksell L, Lindquist C, Adler J et al (1987) A new fixation
device for the Leksell stereotaxic system. J Neurosurg 66:
626–629
Letourneau D, Keller H, Sharpe MB, Jaffray DA (2007)
Integral test phantom for dosimetric quality assurance of
image guided and intensity modulated stereotactic radiotherapy. Med Phys 34:1842–1849
Levy RM (1998) Medical uses of linear accelerators. SLAC
Report 526, pp 55–60
Lidén K (1957) Physikalische Grundlagen für die Verwendung
ionisierender Strahlung bei gezielter Hirnchirurgie. In:
Olivecrona H, Tönnis W (eds) Handbuch der Neuochirurgie. Springer, Berlin, pp 199–211
Lindgren-Turner J, Corsini L, Keane R, Smith N et al (2005)
Position verification for intercranial stereotactic radiotherapy using 3D surface imaging. In: UK radiation oncology
conference, April 11–13 (abstract)
Lindquist C, Paddick I (2007) The Leksell gamma knife
perfexion and comparisons with its predecessors. Neurosurg
61(suppl1):130–140
Llacer J (1997) Inverse radiation treatment planning using the
dynamically penalized likelihood method. Med Phys 24:
1751–1764

Historical Development of Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

33

Llacer J, Solberg TD, Promberger C (2001) Comparative
behavior of the dynamically penalized likelihood algorithm
in inverse radiation therapy planning. Phys Med Biol 46:
2637–2663
Loeffler JS, Alexander E III, Siddon RL et al (1989) Stereotactic radiosurgery for intracranial arteriovenous malformations using a standard linear accelerator: rationale and
technique. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 17:1327–1335
Lohr F, Debus J, Frank C et al (1999) Noninvasive patient
fixation for extracranial stereotactic radiotherapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 45:521–527
Loo BW, Chang JY, Dawson LA et al (2011) Stereotactic
ablative radiotherapy: what’s in a name? Pract Radiat Oncol
1:38–39
Lotan Y, Stanfield J, Cho LC, Sherwood JB et al (2006)
Efficacy of high dose per fraction radiation for implanted
human prostate cancer in a nude mouse model. J Urol
175:1932–1936
Lovelock DM, Hua C, Wang P et al (2005) Accurate setup of
paraspinal patients using a noninvasive patient immobilization cradle and portal imaging. Med Phys 32:2606–2614
Lovelock DM, Wang P, Kirov A et al (2010) An accurate
mechanical quality assurance procedure for a new high
performance linac. Med Phys 37:3363 (abstract)
Lunsford LD, Maitz A, Lindner G (1987) First United States
201 source cobalt-60 gamma unit for radiosurgery. Appl
Neurophysiol 50:253–256
Lutz W, Winston KR, Maleki N et al (1984) Stereotactic
radiosurgery in the brain using a 6 MV linear accelerator.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 10(suppl 2):189
Lutz W, Winston KR, Maleki N (1986) A system for stereotactic
radiosurgery with a linear accelerator and its performance
evaluation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 12(suppl. 1):100
Lutz W, Winston KR, Maleki N (1988) A system for stereotactic
radiosurgery with a linear accelerator. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 14:373–381
Matinfar M, Gray O, Iordachita I et al (2007) Small animal
radiation research platform: imaging, mechanics, control
and calibration. Med Image Comput Comput Assist Interv
10:926–934
Matinfar M, Ford E, Iordachita I et al (2009) Image-guided
small animal radiation research platform: calibration of
treatment beam alignment. Phys Med Biol 54:891–905
Matoni HH (1924) Dependence of the strength of the biological
reaction on the intensity of the roentgen rays of equal doses.
Strahlentherapie 2:375
McGarry RC, Papiez L, Williams M et al (2005) Stereotactic body
radiation therapy of early-stage non-small-cell lung carcinoma:
phase I study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 63:1010–1015
Medin PM, Solberg TD, DeSalles AAF et al (2002) Investigations of a minimally invasive method for treatment of
spinal malignancies with linac stereotactic radiation therapy: accuracy and animal studies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 52:1111–1122
Medin PM, Foster RD, van der Kogel AJ et al (2011) Spinal
cord tolerance to single-fraction partial-volume irradiation:
a swine model. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 79:226–232
Meeks SL, Bova FJ, Buatti JM et al (2000) Clinical dosimetry
considerations for a double-focused miniature multileaf
collimator. In: Kondziolka D (ed) Radiosurgery 1999.
Karger, Basel, pp 83–90

Menke M, Hirschfeld F, Mack T (1994) Stereotactically guided
fractionated radiotherapy: technical aspects. Int J Radiation
Oncol Biol Phys 29:1147–1155
Murphy MJ (1997) An automatic six-degree-of-freedom image
registration algorithm for image-guided frameless stereotaxis radiosurgery. Med Phys 24:857–866
Murphy MJ, Adler JR Jr, Bodduluri M et al (2000) Imageguided radiosurgery for the spine and pancreas. Comput
Aided Surg 5:278–288
Mussen AT (1922) A cytoarchitectural atlas of the brain stem
of the Macaccus rhesus. J Psychsol Neurol 29:451–518
Nagata Y, Negoro Y, Aoki T et al (2002) Clinical outcomes of
3D conformal hypofractionated single high-dose radiotherapy for one or two lung tumors using a stereotactic body
frame. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 52:1041–1046
Nakagawa K, Aoki Y, Tago M, Ohtomo K (2003) Dynamic
conical conformal radiotherapy using a C-arm-mounted
accelerator: Dose distribution and clinical application. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 56:287–295
Naqvi S, Schinkel C, Jiang Z et al (2010) Dosimetric
characterization of a new prototype varian linear accelerator. Med Phys 37:3252 (abstract)
Narabayashi H (1952) Stereotaxic instrument for operation on
the human basal ganglia. Psychiatr Neurol Jpn 54:669–671
Nedzi LA, Kooy HM, Alexander E III et al (1991) Variables
associated with the development of complications from
radiosurgery of intracranial tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 21:591–599
Nedzi LA, Kooy HM, Alexander E III et al (1993) Dynamic
field shaping for stereotactic radiosurgery: a modeling
study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 25:859–869
Negoro Y, Nagata Y, Aoki T et al (2001) The effectiveness of
an immobilization device in conformal radiotherapy for
lung tumor: reduction of respiratory tumor movement and
evaluation of the daily setup accuracy. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 50:889–898
Olivier A, Peters TM, Bertrand G (1986) Stereotaxic systems
and apparatus for use with MRI CT and DSA. Appl
Neurophysiol 48:94–96
Peignaux K, Truc G, Barillot I, Ammor A et al (2006) Clinical
assessment of the use of the Sonarray system for daily
prostate localization. Radiother Oncol 81:176–178
Peng JL, Kahler D, Li JG et al (2010) Characterization of a
real-time surface image-guided stereotactic positioning
system. Med Phys 37:5421–5433
Pike B, Podgorsak EB, Peters TM, Pla M (1987a) Dose
distributions in dynamic stereotactic radiosurgery. Med
Phys 14:780–789
Pike B, Peters TM, Podgorsak EB, Pla M (1987b) Stereotactic
surgical planning with magnetic resonance imaging, digital
subtraction angiography and computed tomography. Appl
Neuophysiol 50:33–38
Podgorsak EB, Olivier A, Pla M et al (1987) Physical aspects of
dynamic stereotactic radiosurgery. Appl Neurophysiol
50:263–268
Podgorsak EB, Olivier A, Pla M et al (1988) Dynamic
stereotactic radiosurgery. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 14:
115–126
Regaud C (1922) Influence de la duree d’irradiation sur les
effete determine’s dans le testicule par le radium. C R Soc
Biol 86:787

34
Regaud C (1929) Progress and limitation in the curative
treatment of malignant neoplasms by radium. B J Radiol 2:
461–476
Regaud C, Ferroux R (1927) Discordance des effets de rayons
X, d’une part dans le testicule, par le peau, d’autre part dans
la fractionnement de la dose. C R Soc Biol 97:431
Rice RK, Hansen JL, Svensson GK, Siddon RL (1987)
Measurements of dose distributions in small beams of
6 MV X-rays. Phys Med Biol 32:1087–1099
Riechert T, Mundinger F (1955) Beschreibung und Anwendung
eines Zielgerates fur stereotaktische Hirnoperationen (II.
Modell). Acta Neurochir Suppl 3:308–37
Roberts DW, Strohbehn JW, Hatch JF et al (1986) A frameless
stereotaxic integration of computerized tomographic imaging and the operating microscope. J Neurosurg 64:545–549
Ryken TC, Meeks SL, Traynelis V, Haller J et al (2001)
Ultrasonographic guidance for spinal extracranial radiosurgery: technique and application for metastatic spinal lesions.
Neurosurg Focus 11:1–6
Saha D, Watkins L, Yin Y et al (2010) An orthotopic lung
tumor model for image-guided micro irradiation in rats. Rad
Res 174:62–71
Sarby B (1974) Cerebral radiation surgery with narrow gamma
beams. Acta Radiolog 13:425–445
Saunders WM, Winston KR, Siddon RL (1988) Radiosurgery
for arteriovenous malformations of the brain using a
standard linear accelerator: rationale and technique. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 15:441–447
Schlegel W, Pastry O, Bortfeld T et al (1992) Computer
systems and mechanical tools for stereotactically guided
conformation therapy with linear accelerators. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 24:781–787
Schlegel W, Pastyr O, Bortfeld T et al (1993) Stereotactically
guided fractionated radiotherapy: technical aspects. Radiother Oncol 29:197–204
Schonberg RG (1987) Field uses of a portable 4/6 MeV electron
linear accelerator. Nucl Instr Meth Phys Res B 25:797–800
Selvik G (1990) Roentgen stereophotogrammetric analysis.
Acta Radiol 31:113–126
Shimizu S, Shirato H, Ogura S et al (2001) Detection of lung
tumor movement in real-time tumor-tracking radiotherapy.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 51:304–310
Shirato H, Shimizu S, Tadashi S et al (1999) Real time tumourtracking radiotherapy. Lancet 353:1331–1332
Shirato H, Shimizu S, Kitamura K et al (2000) Four-dimensional treatment planning and fluoroscopic real-time tumor
tracking radiotherapy for moving tumor. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 48:435–442
Shiu AS, Kooy HM, Ewton JR et al (1997) Comparison of
miniature multileaf collimation (MMLC) with circular
collimation for stereotactic treatment. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 37:679–688
Shiu AS, Chang EL, Ye J et al (2003) Near simultaneous
computed tomography stereotactic spinal radiotherapy: an
emerging paradigm for achieving true stereotaxy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 57:605–613
Siddon RL, Barth NH (1987) Stereotaxic localization of
intracranial targets. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 13:1241–1246
Smith ZA, De Salles AA, Frighetto L et al (2003) Dedicated
linear accelerator radiosurgery for the treatment of trigeminal neuralgia. J Neurosurg 99:511–516

T. D. Solberg et al.
Solberg TD, Medin PM, DeMarco JJ et al (1998) Technical
considerations of linac radiosurgery for functional targets.
J Radiosurg 1:115–127
Solberg TD, Fogg R, Selch MT et al (2000a) Conformal
radiosurgery using a dedicated linac and micro multileaf
collimator. In: Kondziolka D (ed) Radiosurgery 1999,
Karger, Basel, pp 53–63
Solberg TD, Paul TJ, Agazaryan N (2000b) Dosimetry of gated
intensity modulated radiotherapy. In: Schlegel W, Bortfeld T
(eds) The use of computers in radiation therapy. Springer,
Berlin, pp 286–288
Solberg TD, Boedeker KL, Fogg R et al (2001) Dynamic arc
radiosurgery field shaping: a comparison with static conformal and non-coplanar circular arcs. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 49:1481–1491
Solberg TD, Baranowska-Kortylewicz J, Nearman J et al
(2008) Correlation between tumor growth delay and
expression of tumor and host VEGF, VEGFR2 and osteopontin in response to high dose per fraction radiotherapy. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 73:918–926
Song KH, Pidikiti R, Stojadinovic S et al (2010) An X-ray
image guidance system for small animal stereotactic
irradiation. Phys Med Biol 55:7345–7632
Speigel EA, Wycis HT, Marks M, Lee AJ (1947) Stereotaxic
apparatus for operations on the human brain. Science 106:
349–350
Stojadinovic S, Low DA, Vicic V et al (2006) Progress toward
a microradiation therapy small animal conformal irradiator.
Med Phys 33:3834–3845
Stojadinovic S, Low DA, Hope AJ et al (2007) MicroRT-Small
animal conformal irradiator. Med Phys 34:4706–4716
Sun B, DeSalles AAF, Medin P et al (1998) Reduction of
hippocampal-kindled seizure activity in rats by stereotactic
radiosurgery. Exp Neurol 154:691–695
Svennson GK (1989) Quality assurance in stereotactic radiosurgery using a standard linear accelerator. Radiographics
9:169–182
Takayama K, Mizowaki T, Kokubo M et al (2009) Initial
validations for pursuing irradiation using a gimbals tracking
system. Radiother Oncol 93:45–49
Talairach J, He0 caen M, David M, Monnier M, Ajuriaguerra J
(1949) Recherches sur la coagulation therapeutique des
structures sous-corticales chez l’homme. Rev Neurol 81:
4–24
Talairach J, de Ajuriaguerra J, David M (1952) Etudes
stereotaxiques des structures encephaliques profondes chez
l’homme technique, interet physiologique et therapeutique.
Presse Med 28:605–609
Tamaki N, Ehara K, Fujita K (2000) C-arm multi-axis rotation
stereotactic linac radiosurgery system. J Radiosurg 3:21–27
Tan KK, Grzeszczuk R, Levin DN et al (1993) A frameless
approach to neurosurgical planning based on retrospective
patient-image registration. J Neurosurg 79:296–303
Teschendorf W (1953) A simplified method of radiotherapy with a
movable tube; rotational or pendular technic. Strahlentherapie
90:536–545
Tobias CA, Roberts JE, Lawrence JH et al (1955) Irradiation
hypophysectomy and related studies using 340-MeV protons and 190-MeV deuterons with high energy proton
beams. In: Proceedings of the international conference on
the peaceful uses of atomic energy, Geneva 1995

Historical Development of Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

35

Tsai JS, Buck BA, Svennson GK et al (1991) Quality
assurance in stereotactic radiosurgery using a standard
linear accelerator. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 21:
737–748
Tyler AF (1918) Roentgenotherapy. CV Mosby, St. Louis
UCLA Cancer Center Bulletin (1980) Stereotaxic cobalt unit
being evaluated at UCLA. July 22
Uematsu M, Fukui T, Shioda A, Tokumitsu H et al (1996) A
dual computed tomography linear accelerator unit for
stereotactic radiation therapy: a new approach without
cranially fixated stereotactic frames. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 35:587–592
Uematsu M, Shioda A, Tahara K et al (1998) Focal, high dose,
and fractionated modified stereotactic radiation therapy for
lung carcinoma patients: a preliminary experience. Cancer
82:1062–1070
Uematsu M, Shioda A, Suda A, Tahara K et al (2000)
Intrafractional tumor position stability during computed
tomography (CT)-guided frameless stereotactic radiation
therapy for lung or liver cancers with a fusion of CT and
linear accelerator (FOCAL) unit. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 48:443–448
Walsh L, Stanfield JL, Cho LC, Chang CH et al (2006) Efficacy
of ablative high-dose-per-fraction radiation for implanted
human renal cell cancer in a nude mouse model. Eur Urol
50:795–800
Wang LT, Solberg TD, Medin PM et al (2001) Infrared patient
positioning for stereotactic radiosurgery of extracranial
tumors. Comput Biol Med 31:101–111
Wang C, Shiu A, Lii M, Woo S, Chang EL (2007) Automatic
target localization and verification for on-line image-guided
stereotactic body radiotherapy of the spine. Technol Cancer
Res Treat 6:187–196
Wang J, Zhong R, Bai S et al (2010) Evaluation of positioning
accuracy of four different immobilizations using cone-beam

CT in radiotherapy of non-small-cell lung cancer. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 77:1274–1281
Wells TH, Todd EM (1998) The Todd-Wells apparatus. In:
Gildenberg PL, Tasker RR (eds) Textbook of stereotactic
and functional surgery. McGraw-Hill, New York, pp 95–99
Wilson RR (1946) Radiological use of fast protons. Radiology
47:487–491
Wong J, Armour E, Kazanzides P et al (2008) High resolution,
small animal irradiation research platform with X-ray
tomographic guidance capabilities. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 71:1591–1599
Worm ES, Hansen AT, Petersen JB et al (2010) Inter- and
intrafractional localisation errors in cone-beam CT guided
stereotactic radiation therapy of tumours in the liver and
lung. Acta Oncol 49:1177–1183
Wulf J, Hädinger U, Oppitz U et al (2000) Stereotactic
radiotherapy of extracranial targets: CT-simulation and
accuracy of treatment in the stereotactic body frame.
Radiother Oncol 57:225–236
Xia P, Geis P, Xing L et al (1999) Physical characteristics of a
miniature multileaf collimator. Med Phys 26:65–70
Yan H, Yin FF, Kim JH (2003) A phantom study on the
positioning accuracy of the Novalis Body system. Med Phys
30:3052–3060
Yenice KM, Lovelock DM, Hunt MA et al (2003) CT imageguided intensity modulated therapy for paraspinal tumors
using stereotactic immobilization. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 55:583–593
Yu C, Taylor D et al (2004) An anthropomorphic phantom
study of the accuracy of cyberknife spinal radiosurgery.
Neurosurgery 55:1138–1146
Zhou H, Rodriguez M, van der Haak F et al (2010) Development of a micro-computed tomography-based image-guided
conformal radiotherapy system for small animals. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 78:297–305

CyberKnife System
Jun Yang, John P. Lamond, Jing Feng, Xiaodong Wu,
Rachelle Lanciano, and Luther W. Brady

Contents

Abstract

Introduction..............................................................

37

2
CyberKnife System Overview ................................
2.1 Target Tracking/Motion Management ......................

39
39

3
3.1
3.2
3.3

Treatment Planning Preparation...........................
Fiducial and Fiducial Placement...............................
Pre-Treatment Imaging..............................................
Image Fusion .............................................................

43
43
44
45

4
4.1
4.2
4.3

Treatment Planning.................................................
Dose Calculation .......................................................
Treatment Planning Technique .................................
Treatment Planning Optimization Algorithms .........

45
46
47
47

5

Treatment Delivery .................................................

49

6

Summary...................................................................

50

References..........................................................................

50

1

The CyberKnife delivers a great number of
independently targeted, non-coplanar radiation
beams with high precision under continuous
X-ray and optic image guidance for motion
management. This targeted delivery of tumor dose
with the capability of sparing surrounding normal
tissue has proven highly effective for stereotactic
body radiation therapy delivery. This chapter
provides an overview of the CyberKnife system
from a single institutional perspective, covering
target tracking and motion management features,
pretreatment patient set-up, treatment planning,
and treatment delivery.

1

J. Yang (&)  J. P. Lamond  J. Feng  R. Lanciano 
L. W. Brady
Drexel University and Philadelphia CyberKnife,
2010 West Chester Pike, Suite 115,
Havertown, PA, USA
e-mail: junbme@yahoo.com
X. Wu
Interterra Medical Technologies, LLC, Naples, FL, USA

Introduction

The inception of the CyberKnife was rooted in the
notion of bringing about a modernized dedicated
stereotactic radiosurgery system (SRS). Since the first
patient was treated at the Stanford University Medical
Center in 1994 by the inventor Dr. John Adler, the
CyberKnife has undergone numerous technological
improvements. Initially, only brain tumors could be
treated, but technical improvements have allowed
treatment of tumors in other areas, including tumors
that move. These technical improvements included
the development of tracking and correction based on
implanted fiducial markers (Murphy 2002), tracking
of tumors that move with respiration (Sayeh et al.
2007) and fiducial-free spinal tracking (Ho et al.
2007). The current CyberKnife system consists of a
linear accelerator mounted on a robotic manipulator

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2011_505, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

37

38

J. Yang et al.

Fig. 1 Overview of the
CyberKnife System. Shown is
the CyberKnife G4 with two
orthogonal X-ray sources,
floor flush-mounted image
detectors, linear accelerator
mounted on the robotic arm,
and treatment couch. Image
used with permission of
Accuray Incorporated

and an integrated image guidance system (Fig. 1).
The CyberKnife was designed with the intention
of delivering hundreds of independently targeted,
non-coplanar radiation beams from a wide range of
solid angles under continuous X-ray and optic image
guidance, to achieve highly concentrated target dose
delivery with minimal dose to surrounding normal
tissues. With the integrated image guidance system,
target motion is constantly monitored and automatically corrected by the robotic arm throughout treatment delivery. This unique robotic architecture with
an integrated image guidance system presents a new
paradigm in the clinical application of stereotactic
body radiation therapy (SBRT).
Following the success of frameless intracranial
SRS with single or multiple fractions (Adler and Cox
1996; Murphy 1997), the CyberKnife quickly extended its application beyond intracranial treatment with
SBRT. For example, the treatment of medically
inoperable patients with peripheral non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) for which published outcomes
show excellent 2-year local control and overall survival ranging from 97–100% to 62–97%, respectively
(Coon et al. 2008; Brown et al. 2009; Collins et al.
2009; Van Der Voort Van Zyp et al. 2009). The
improvement in quality of life and minimal toxicity
after CyberKnife SBRT has also been reported
(Van Der Voort Van Zyp et al. 2010b). Prostate
SBRT with CyberKnife has been increasingly used

and investigated, with the first 5-year results recently
published showing biochemical progression-free survival rates of 93% for low-risk patients (Freeman and
King 2011). These results are consistent with several
other reports that demonstrate low toxicity, low
impact on quality of life, promising erectile function
preservation, and biochemical control for low- and
intermediate-risk prostate cancer patients treated with
CyberKnife SBRT (Friedland et al. 2009; King et al.
2009, 2011; Jabbari et al. 2011; Katz et al. 2010).
CyberKnife SBRT for liver has been reported to yield
promising clinical outcomes for both metastases and
primary liver tumors (Choi et al. 2008; Goodman
et al. 2010; Louis et al. 2010; Stintzing et al. 2010;
Vautravers-Dewas et al. 2011; Lanciano et al. 2011).
Pancreatic cancer treatment with CyberKnife SBRT
has also been promising (Chang et al. 2009; Rwigema
et al. 2010), including extension of median survival
to 20 months and 2-year local control of 78%
(Mahadevan et al. 2011).
Since the installation of the CyberKnife at our
facility in June, 2006, we have treated over 1,500
patients in 5 years. Based upon this experience, in the
following we provide an overview of the CyberKnife
system including the target tracking and motion
management features. Subsequently, we describe in
detail the pretreatment patient set-up, treatment
planning, and delivery aspects of CyberKnife-delivered SBRT.

CyberKnife System

2

39

CyberKnife System Overview

Figure 1 provides a visual overview of the CyberKnife system which consists of a linear accelerator
mounted on a robotic manipulator with an X-ray
imaging system and an optic camera system. The
linear accelerator is a magnetron-based 6 MV X-band
linear accelerator that is currently capable of delivering radiation at a rate of 1,000 MU/min. The compact design allows for accurate positioning by the
robotic arm. Collimation is achieved with twelve
individual fixed circular collimators that have diameters ranging from 0.5 to 6 cm. Alternatively, the
same collimator diameters can be achieved thru the
adjustable IRIS variable aperture collimator (Fig. 2)
(Echner et al. 2009).
The robotic manipulator (KR240-2, Series 2000,
Kuka Roboter GmbH, Augsburg, Germany) offers 6°
of positional freedom with mechanical accuracy of
0.12 mm (Kuka KR240-2 Specification 04.2004.05).
As a result each treatment beam can be uniquely
positioned with non-coplanar beam geometry (Fig. 3).
End-to-end phantom tests have shown the system to
have submillimeter accuracy (Muacevic et al. 2006;
Ho et al. 2007; Antypas and Pantelis 2008). The beam
position and orientation can be adjusted by the robot
to accommodate changes in target position and orientation during treatment without the need to move
the patient (a process that can be less accurate and
more time consuming). This allows minimal body
immobilization and breathing constraints.
The CyberKnife’s real-time image guidance
employs a stereotactic X-ray imaging system and an
optic motion tracking system. Unlike many other systems that only use image guidance during patient setup, the CyberKnife provides continuous intrafractional
image guidance. In this system, two X-ray sources are
mounted to the ceiling which illuminate two flushmounted X-ray detectors situated at 45° from vertical
(Fig. 1). Orthogonal X-ray images are obtained
throughout treatment and compared to previously
generated digitally reconstructed radiographs (DRRs)
to instantly calculate patient position and target location via the tracking software systems. Optical markers
may be attached to the patient’s chest. The position of
these markers is continuously monitored during treatment using three CCD cameras to enable image guidance for tumors that move with respiration.

Fig. 2 a The 12 individual fixed circular collimators with
diameters ranging from 0.5 to 6 cm; b the IRIS variable
aperture collimator which provides 12 collimators ranging from
0.5 to 6 cm without the need for changing collimators during
treatment. Image used with permission of Accuray Incorporated

2.1

Target Tracking/Motion
Management

A central theme of all CyberKnife target tracking is
that the robotic arm compensates for most positional
changes rather than requiring adjustment of the
patient via the treatment couch (as is necessary for
conventional linear accelerators). Following initial
setup, the CyberKnife treatment couch is static for the
entire treatment delivery. If any patient movement or
tumor motion is detected during treatment delivery,
the robotic arm adjusts the linac head accordingly.
In the CyberKnife system, the target tracking
systems are categorized according to anatomic sites,
the tumor types, and the type of tumor motion. The
current specialized tracking modalities for different
clinical applications include six-dimensional (6D)
skull tracking, fiducial marker tracking, Xsight Spine
tracking, Xsight Lung tracking, Synchrony respiratory

40

Fig. 3 Comparison of treatment plans. Seven-beam intensity
modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) (left), TomoTherapy-based
SBRT (middle), and non-coplanar CyberKnife plan (right).
While all three techniques give similar dose to the tumor, the

J. Yang et al.

tissue dose is less with the non-coplanar CyberKnife plan.
Permission granted by The Radiosurgery Society (formerly
CyberKnife Society) to reuse these pictures

Fig. 4 Example brain
treatment. a ‘‘Checker box’’
display of CT and MRI fusion
on a 9 mm right occipital
brain metastasis; b dose
distribution of a nonisocentric plan on the target
with 1 mm margin using 190
non-coplanar beams; c patient
treatment set-up with a
thermoplastic mask; d Sixdimensional tracking based on
the DRR of the skull (left
column), real-time X-ray
image (middle column) and
overlaid images (right
column) providing
submillimetric treatment
precision

motion tracking, Lung Optimized Treatment (LOT),
and InTempo for prostate motion. The following
section provides a brief review of these tracking
systems. For a more detailed description of these
systems see the review by Kilby et al. (2010) and the
provided references.

2.1.1 6D-Skull Tracking
For intracranial targets the 6D skull tracking system
provides target tracking and automatic correction of
radiation beams without the need for a stereotactic
frame. Patients are positioned on the treatment couch
with a thermoplastic mask that immobilizes their head
to ensure reproducible positioning. During treatment

delivery, X-ray images are obtained to determine the
skull position with respect to the treatment planning
position. This is accomplished by comparing the
orthogonal X-ray images to a series of DRRs computed
from the treatment planning CT. The underlying principle assumes the fixed positional relationship between
the lesion and the skull’s bony anatomy as described in
detail by Fu and Kuduvalli (2008). Six-dimensional
skull tracking can be used to treat all intracranial lesions
and those located as inferior as the C2 cervical vertebrae. Head and neck lesions can also be treated with this
tracking system if targets are considered in a fixed
relationship with the tracked bony structures. Figure 4
shows an example of an intracranial treatment.

CyberKnife System

41

et al. 2006; Ho et al. 2007; Furweger et al. 2010).
Figure 5 shows an example of spinal treatment.

2.1.3 Fiducial Tracking
Fiducial tracking is used to track and automatically
correct for displacement and motion of targets located
within soft- tissue and lung. For targets that do not
move with respiration, fiducial tracking alone is performed. For targets that move with respiratory motion,
fiducial tracking is used in conjunction with additional
respiratory tracking (Synchrony) as described below.
In both cases, fiducial markers are used as a surrogate of
the treatment target and the alignment geometry.
Details of this alignment algorithm can be found elsewhere (Mu et al. 2006, 2008; Hatipoglu et al. 2007).
Fiducial tracking requires radiopaque fiducial markers
to be implanted in or adjacent to the lesion being treated, as described in detail below.

Fig. 5 Example spine treatment. a Non-isocentric treatment
plan for a spinal lesion (red) with a 2 mm PTV margin (brown).
The spinal cord (yellow) is a critical structure; b illustration of
spine tracking

2.1.2 Spine Tracking
For targets located within or near the spine, assuming
a fixed positional relationship with the spinal skeletal
structure, the Xsight Spine tracking system is used,
which carries out positional alignment based on bony
spinal skeletal structures. The underlying image processing and alignment algorithms are tailored to the
characteristics of skeletal structures based on a nonrigid registration (Fu and Kuduvalli 2006; Fu et al.
2006; Ho et al. 2007). Xsight Spine can also be used
for tracking of tumors that are adjacent in fixed
relationship to other bony structures such as the
femurhead, sacrum, iliac crest, or shoulder. Xsight
Spine can also be used as part of patient set-up for
treatment of extracranial lesions. Submillimeter
accuracy with Xsight Spine tracking has been reported in both phantom and clinical studies (Muacevic

2.1.4 Respiratory Motion Tracking
Synchrony is the tracking system used for treating
tumors that move with respiratory motion. Using
Synchrony, radiation beams continuously follow the
target motion in real time. In a Synchrony treatment
session, the position of the tumor (based on fiducials or
the tumor itself) is determined radiographically while
the respiratory motion is simultaneously determined by
the optical tracking system. The synchronized tumor
position and respiratory motion data are correlated to
establish a motion predictive model. During radiation
beam delivery, the model uses real-time respiratory
motion data to proactively project the tumor position
and subsequently synchronize the robotic motion with
the tumor motion in real time. The system is designed
with an adaptive feature such that the motion predictive
model continuously updates throughout the treatment
session as the patient’s breathing pattern evolves.
Using this approach the patient’s breathing is not
restricted in any manner during treatment. Nevertheless, good breathing coaching is imperative to minimize drastic swings in breathing patterns. Details on the
predictive model and the overall Synchrony algorithm
can be found in Sayeh et al. (2007). A number of publications substantiate Synchrony’s accuracy including
end-to-end phantom tests demonstrating its submillimeter precision (Muacevic et al. 2007; Wong et al.
2007; Nioutsikou et al. 2008) as well as evaluations of
the model’s goodness of fit in the clinical setting
(Hoogeman et al. 2009b).

42

J. Yang et al.

Fig. 6 Example Xsight lung treatment. a Patient set-up for
Xsight lung treatment with patient wearing the Synchrony vest
and three optical markers. The vac-lock bag is used to aid in
repeatable positioning of the upper body for each delivered
treatment fraction; b isocentric treatment plan for a 3-cm
spherical lung lesion with a 5-mm margin, with dose calculated
using the ray-tracing (RT) algorithm. A dose of 54 Gy is
prescribed at the 75% isodose line with a maximal dose of 72 Gy

using 65 treatment beams; c the same plan as shown in b, but
re-calculated using Monte Carlo. Compared with RT, the 54 Gy
isodose line of the Monte Carlo plan is tighter on the part of the
PTV next to the lung tissue while maintaining the same coverage
on the chest wall. In addition, the maximum dose is only 68.4 Gy;
d Xsight lung treatment with the tumor as the tracking objective.
The tumor was identified in the DRR (left) and X-ray (middle).
Images generated by the Xsight Lung tracking software

2.1.5 Lung Tumor Tracking
The CyberKnife also offers lung tumor motion
tracking without requiring fiducial implantation
through Xsight lung tracking (XLT). This eliminates
the risk of pneumothorax and complications related
to the invasive fiducial implantation procedure.
Also, tracking the actual tumor volume instead of
tracking a surrogate eliminates errors due to fiducial
migration.
XLT is performed in two stages. First, patient body
alignment, including both translation and rotation, is
performed using the spinal skeletal region near the
lung tumor to reproduce patient positioning. Second,
the couch shifts the patient body alignment center to
the tumor tracking center. As with the other tumor

tracking methods, real-time orthogonal X-ray images
are registered to DRR images for localization. In this
case, the image intensity map of the visible tumor is
used for the alignment. In order to determine the
tumor location it is necessary that the tumor is differentiable for detection in both X-ray images. For
this reason, Xsight Lung is restricted to treatment of
tumors 1.5 cm or larger and in specific locations to
insure that the tumor is not significantly blocked by
any major normal structures such as the heart, vertebral bodies and the diaphragm. As a result, the usage
of Xsight Lung is typically limited to about 30% of
the lung patients in our practice. Full details of the
algorithm are detailed by Fu et al. (2007). See Fig. 6
for an example of Xsight lung treatment.

CyberKnife System

2.1.6 Lung Optimized Treatment
LOT is a suite of lung treatment options intended to
further eliminate the need for implanted fiducials.
XLT requires the tumor to be visible in both X-ray
images. LOT extends the abilities of XLT to those
cases where the tumor is not always visible in both
images. This usually occurs when the tumor is
superimposed on other X-ray attenuating structures
such as the heart or the spine. The underlying concept
of the LOT tracking system is to define an internal
target volume (ITV) for the component of motion that
cannot be tracked. Since the stereoscopic X-ray
imaging system shares the inferior/superior axis
between the two imagers, the inferior/superior component of the tumor motion can be tracked directly
with a single imager, which is generally the principal
component of motion for lung tumors. Therefore, in
these cases where the tumor is only visible on one
image, the principal component of motion is tracked
and the partial ITV required to compensate for the
remaining component of motion is relatively small.
In cases where the tumor is not visible on both
images, then a full ITV is required and treatment is
performed based on spine tracking if ITV is not far
from the vertebral body.
LOT also comes with a simulation application that
allows the user to place the patient on the couch early
in the planning process and simulate the treatment to
determine what tracking method is likely to work best
for this the patient. XLT will be the best option if
tumor is visible on both images. If the tumor is visible
only on one image or none, then the physician can
make the clinical decision of implanting fiducials or
using the LOT option based on the specific clinical
conditions of the patient.
2.1.7 InTempo
The AAPM Task Group Report 75 estimates patients
will receive an additional dose of 0.1–0.7 mGy from
every kV X-ray image, depending on the treatment
site and the imaging technique used (Murphy et al.
2007). For CyberKnife treatment, X-ray images can
be obtained for every delivered beam, however,
imaging frequency can be decreased if the target
position is stable. As a result, X-ray images are typically only obtained every three beams or every 30 s
for extracranial treatment in our practice. In terms of
overall imaging dose, if 100 pairs of X-ray images
(typically 120 kV, 100 mA and 100 mS) are taken

43

during treatment, the total body dose resulting from
the X-ray tracking would be 2–14 cGy. Although this
amounts to only a small fraction of total treatment
dose, usage with improved intelligence is desirable.
InTempo is a feature that stratifies the imaging
frequency to account for the temporal variation of
target movement. For example, it has been shown
that periods of rapid target motion can occur during
prostate treatment (Xie et al. 2008). Thus, it is
desirable to obtain more frequent images during
these periods than during periods of limited motion.
InTempo dynamically adjusts the frequency of image
acquisition during treatment delivery based upon the
amount of prostate motion detected in recent images
and user-specified thresholds for maximum displacement. The image acquisition frequency automatically
increases when large prostate movement is detected.
Once the prostate motion has stabilized the therapist
can reduce the imaging frequency. This optimizes
the imaging X-ray exposure for improved targeting
accuracy. See Fig. 7 for an example of prostate
treatment with InTempo.

3

Treatment Planning Preparation

3.1

Fiducial and Fiducial Placement

For treatments requiring fiducial tracking, treatment
management begins with fiducial placement whereby
radiopaque fiducial markers are implanted either in or
near the targeted volume. A variety of implantation
methods and types of fiducials are available. The most
common fiducials are cylindrical gold markers, measuring 0.8–1.2 mm in diameter and 3–6 mm in length,
which can be preloaded in 17- or 18-gauge needles
and implanted percutaneously under image guidance.
For fiducial placement in the lung, bronchoscopic
implantation offers accurate placement with a
decreased chance of pneumothorax (Reichner et al.
2005; Anantham et al. 2007). More recently, alternative types of fiducials such as the Visicoil (Core
Oncology, Santa Barbara, CA) and gold anchor
fiducial have been introduced for clinical use. These
gold anchor fiducials are preloaded in 22-gauge needles and have less chance of fiducial migration and
pneumothorax (Hong et al. 2011; Yang et al. 2011).
Although the optimal number of fiducials needed for
tracking is still an unsettled debate (Wu et al. 2009),

44

J. Yang et al.

In order to reduce the rate of pneumothorax during
fiducial placement in lung patients, Wu et al. (2007)
proposed placing a single fiducial in the center of the
tumor and estimating the margin to compensate for
the linear displacement of the tumor boundary caused
by rotation. We routinely place a single fiducial for
small soft-tissue and lung lesions, and wait 1 week or
so (2 weeks for lung) to allow the fiducial position to
stabilize before planning CT acquisition.

3.2

Fig. 7 Example prostate treatment. a The prostate patient is
treated feet first in the supine position with arms folded on the
chest; b the dosimetry treatment plan for the prostate patient.
A dose of 7.25 Gy in 5 fractions was prescribed to the 83%
isodose line (white) covering the CTV (red) with a 5 mm
margin in all directions except 3 mm posteriorly resulting in the
PTV (orange). Critical structures shown are the rectum (yellow)
and bladder (green). Two out of the four fiducials used in the
prostate are 2 cm apart, positioned without overlapping one
another in the 45° lateral oblique X-rays images

typically 3–6 fiducials are recommended by the
CyberKnife manufacturer to be implanted in or near
the targeted volume. Multiple fiducials provide both
translational and rotational information on the lesion
and can be used to crosscheck for fiducial migration.
The fiducials should be placed at least 2 cm apart and
so as not to overlap on the 45° lateral oblique X-ray
image projection. At the Philadelphia CyberKnife
center, we place 4 fiducials for the prostate and
multiple fiducials for large (*5 cm or larger) extracranial lesions.

Pre-Treatment Imaging

Pre-treatment imaging typically includes non-contrast
CT imaging that is used for dosimetry calculations
and generation of the DRR images for target
tracking. Depending on indications, additional imaging modalities such as MRI and PET/CT are often
acquired with thin slices. For example, T1 contrast
MRI is commonly ordered for patients with brain
tumors; angiography for AVMs; and T2 MRI for
c-spine and prostate patients. These additional images
are co-registered with planning CT to assist in tumor
and critical structure contouring. Depending on target
location, CT with IV or PO contrast is commonly
obtained for better organs at risk and target definition.
Most patients are scanned head first in the supine
position; however, with fiducial tracking, positioning
feet first or in the prone position are both supported by
the CyberKnife. In the case of brain and head and
neck treatments patients are immobilized with a
thermoplastic mask on the head rest plate. For all
other body-site treatments, patients can be immobilized in a device such as a Vac-lok cushion (Civco
Medical Solutions, Kalona, IO). One has to weigh the
potential benefit of immobilization with the risk that
the immobilization device may make the patient less
comfortable and therefore more prone to move. Given
that the CyberKnife performs real-time motion
tracking, we prefer to use a Vac-lok cushion only for
targets in the upper body, where the Vac-lok facilitates reproducible patient shoulder position. For most
of our body treatments, we observed that patients
often experience discomfort with immobilization
devices. As a result, we prefer to simply place the
patient on a soft pad.
In most cases, contiguous thin slice (1–2 mm) 3D
CT images are acquired with a fast spiral multiple
slice CT scanner. At a minimum, a 4-slice CT scanner

CyberKnife System

should be used. If available, a 64-slice or faster
scanner is particularly preferred for extracranial
scans. During imaging, the patient should be centered
on the CT field of view, which should cover the
patient’s full circumference, if possible. In the case of
6D skull tracking, the CT scan should cover the whole
skull. For extracranial cases, it is desirable to have a
sufficient CT scanning volume starting from about
20 cm superior to the target to 20 cm inferior to the
target to allow accurate planning for non-coplanar
beams. In addition, we recommend scanning patients
with extracranial lesions with both normal expirationhold CT and normal inspiration-hold CT (Yang et al.
2009b). In addition to the expiratory CT that is used
as a planning CT, the inspiratory CT is fused with the
expiratory CT based upon vertebral body match and
used to estimate the excursion of the target and surrounding organs due to respiratory motion. This
allows for better determination of appropriate tracking modality and treatment margins, and for better
estimation of the dose to the organs at risk. In addition, the pattern of the target’s respiratory motion can
help treatment delivery by facilitating ‘‘lock on’’ of
the fiducial or tumor at various respiratory phases and
by use as a reference in the treatment quality control
process (Yang et al. 2009b).

3.3

Image Fusion

It is crucial to have an accurate definition of both the
targets and critical structures in radiosurgery or
SBRT. To do so requires not only high quality thin
slice image acquisition, but also accurate multimodality image fusion. The CyberKnife supports
fusion of the primary CT image set with up to five
secondary image sets of other imaging modalities. Both
the primary image and secondary images should be in
Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine
(DICOM) format. The supported secondary image sets
are CT, MR, PET, and XA (3DRA).
The CyberKnife offers image fusion based on
identified feature points in both set of images, or on
mutual information, or by manual adjustments, or a
combination of these methods. In the feature-pointbased method, the treatment planner defines three or
more feature points in both the primary and secondary
images and then performs fusion based on matching
of those feature points between images. This method

45

is commonly used for prostate cancer patients, where
implanted gold fiducial markers could be used as
feature points in both the CT and fast echo T2 MRI.
To exclude interference of anatomy mismatch outside
the area of interest, a partial volume is defined that
only includes the area of interest. Local fusion can be
performed based on similarity of the partial volume.
This is especially useful for avoiding chest wall
mismatch due to its respiratory motion during spinal
fusion.
Manual fusion allows visual assessment of image
fusion accuracy and adjustment of fusion, if necessary. Using manual fusion, the treatment planner
should not only check the fusion on the axial views
but they should also check the fusion on the sagittal
and coronal views. In addition to checking tumor
match, certain anatomy landmarks, such as the basilar
artery or sulcus for brain cases, should also be
checked to verify fusion accuracy.
Depending on the purpose of image fusion, different fusion strategies should be applied. For example, in order to contour a brain lesion, global fusion on
the brain CT and MRI should be performed. In contrast, for a peripheral lung tumor, a local spinal fusion
between expiration CT and inspiration CT is often
useful to estimate the tumor’s respiratory motion, or
to verify whether the fiducial moves consistently with
the tumor. If a fiducial is placed outside of the lung
tumor, fiducial point fusion is performed to check the
relative position of the fiducial and tumor in different
respiratory phases.

4

Treatment Planning

The MultiPlan treatment planning system is designed
exclusively for CyberKnife treatment planning which
allows the user to perform treatment planning in a
task-oriented step-by-step process. The workflow
begins with loading and fusing the images and proceeds through contouring the volumes of interest,
choosing the appropriate tracking mode, adjusting the
image center, and setting dose constraints to create an
optimized treatment plan using either forward or
inverse planning techniques.
First, a three-dimensional (3D) CT image series is
loaded into MultiPlan as the basic dosimetric planning CT, which is also used to generate the DRRs as
reference images for treatment tracking. Additional

46

J. Yang et al.

various available algorithms). As a result, the total
number of candidate beams ranges from 1,200 to
6,000 beams. The number of beams in most clinical
plans ranges from 50 to 250.

4.1

Fig. 8 Illustration of the virtual sphere centered at the imaging
center with an 800 mm radius. Shown in yellow is the node
distribution on the sphere’s surface which is the point from
which the robot’s Linac delivers the radiation. There are about
130 evenly distributed nodes available for brain treatment.
Image used with permission from Accuray Incorporated

3D images, such as a second CT study acquired
at a different respiratory phase, a contrast CT, MRI,
angiography, PET, or other modalities can be fused
onto the planning CT, to either estimate the respiratory motion of the volume of interest or, if necessary,
to generate the ITV or facilitate visualization of the
target volume and nearby organs at risk (OARs).
The treatment planning process optimizes the
group of beams that will be used for treatment from a
set of predefined source positions, called ‘‘nodes’’.
The nodes are widely distributed at the surface of a
virtual sphere, which is centered at the image tracking
center (Fig. 8). The radius for this approximate sphere
varies from 800 to 850 mm for intracranial treatment.
This workspace is closer to an ellipsoid for extracranial treatment with a radius ranging from 800 to
1,000 mm. Each set of the predefined nodes is called
a ‘‘path’’. The standard intracranial path has about
130 nodes and the extracranial path has about 110
nodes, with about 20 nodes less in the apex direction
of the extracranial path. The system will generate
multiple candidate beams per node depending on the
number of collimator sizes and the optimization
algorithm applied (see below for details on the

Dose Calculation

The CyberKnife output is calibrated so that 1 MU
delivers 1 cGy at an 800 mm source-axis distance
(SAD) to a depth of 15 mm in water for the central
axis of a 60 mm cone collimator. The standard dose
calculation algorithm uses a ray-tracing (RT) function
to calculate the dose contribution to voxels in the area
of interest of each beam in the treatment plan and
summarizes that into a complete dose distribution
plan. The RT algorithm provides a fast dose calculation method based on measured beam data look-up,
including the tissue phantom ratio (TPR), off-central
ratio (OCR), and output factor (OF). Heterogeneity
correction is performed using effective path length
and obliquity correction by casting multiple rays
within each beam using the equation: D/MU = OCR
9 IVS 9 TPR 9 OF, where IVS = (800/SAD)2. On
average, the final post-optimization high resolution
dosimetry calculation with RT algorithm, which is at
CT resolution, can be achieved within 5 min.
The CyberKnife also supports Monte Carlo for
advanced dosimetry calculations. The Monte Carlo
algorithm simulates millions of individual photons
incident to the patient model originating in a single
beam of a beam node that is generated using the
measurement data-based source model by a sampling
procedure. Each representative photon is transported
through the patient model, where it might interact
with the patient tissue based on probabilistic models.
The interactions generated and scatter electrons,
which are transported through the patient model,
deposit energy along the path. The energy deposited
is recorded at each voxel of the patient model to form
the overall plan dose distribution. Monte Carlo is
believed to be the most accurate dosimetry algorithm,
especially useful when the surrounding tissue has
various densities (Papanikoulaou et al. 2004).
It is reported that the RT method overestimates
lung cancer dosimetry by 5–25% since its heterogeneity correction does not compensate for the build
up between the low density of surrounding lung
tissue and the solid tumor (Hoogeman et al. 2009a;

CyberKnife System

Mardirossian et al. 2009). As a result, Monte Carlo is
considered the appropriate choice for lung cancer
dosimetry calculations, whereas RT remains adequate
for most other clinical applications. For instance,
Fig. 6b, c shows a comparison of a plan computed
with RT to one computed with Monte Carlo revealing
that the maximum dose is lower and the isodose lines
to the surrounding lung tissue are tighter. For these
reasons, Van Der Voort Van Zyp et al. (2010a) suggested decreasing the prescription dose for lung tumor
by 10% and selecting a lower isodose line as the
prescription isodose line in order to guarantee sufficient coverage, when Monte Carlo is used to be
consistent with traditional dosage with ray-tracing.

4.2

Treatment Planning Technique

The CyberKnife offers both isocentric treatment
planning as well as non-isocentric treatment planning.
In isocentric treatment planning, every radiation beam
intersects the same isocenter forming an oval- or
spherical-shaped dose cloud. The CyberKnife’s isocentric treatment planning is similar in concept to that
used by the Gamma Knife (Elekta AB, Stockholm,
Sweden) and conventional linear accelerators whose
fixed isocenter is defined by the mechanical center of
the gantry and collimator. In the case of the CyberKnife, however, the dosimetric isocenter is not limited by a mechanical device center; instead, it can be
placed anywhere in the CT by the treatment planner.
Multiple isocenters are also supported, allowing each
isocenter to be positioned at an individual location
and be weighted individually. Compared with the
Gamma Knife, which delivers all beams in an isocenter at the same time followed by repositioning
the patient and delivery of the next isocenter, the
CyberKnife robotic arm moves the Linac from one
node to next node without needing to reposition the
patient. It delivers all of the beams from the node for
any number of different isocenters before moving to
the next node. In addition, while the Gamma Knife’s
forward planning assigns an equal MU to every beam
of the same isocenter, the CyberKnife can weight
individual beams during the treatment planning optimization process to adjust the shape of the dose cloud
for improved dose conformality to the tumor.
Isocentric treatment plans have a unique dosimetric merit of fast dose fall-off, which is especially

47

attractive for SRS and SBRT in terms of sparing
surrounding healthy tissue. However, isocentric
treatment planning limits the dose cloud shape to only
a sphere or oval. As a result, isocentric treatment is
primarily used for small targets, such as trigeminal
neuralgia, or small brain, liver, or lung lesions, and
some larger lesions of oval shape. For most irregularly shaped targets, it is preferred to adopt non-isocentric targeting to generate a conformal dose cloud.
The CyberKnife non-isocentric treatment aims
each beam at a specific portion of the tumor rather
than aiming all beams at the same position. This is
unique to the CyberKnife since the robot can deliver
radiation beams from many different angles determined by the planning process and does not have the
gantry isocenter limitations that conventional linacs
have. The planning system pretargets thousands of
candidate beams inside the tumor volume based on
the shape of the tumor before optimization. The
treatment planning optimization process selects and
weights beams to generate a treatment plan that typically has a conformal dose cloud consistent with the
tumor shape. In addition to the conformality, nonisocentric plans also shape the high dose isodose line
to avoid nearby critical structures and thereby reduce
the MU of the radiation beam passing through critical
structures. It is these highly compelling advantages of
non-isocentric treatment plans that have made it the
primary planning strategy for the CyberKnife.
Nevertheless, it has been recognized that it may be
advantageous to combine the rapid dose fall-off of
isocentric plans with the dose conformality of nonisocentric plans. Whitaker et al. proposed adding
isocentric delivery into non-isocentric plans with
optimization of the non-isocentric and isocentric dose
(Whitaker et al. 2009). Yang et al. (2009a) proposed
increasing beam concentricity in non-isocentric plans
by having candidate beams aim at the central portion
of the tumor. Both methods can effectively increase
dose fall-off while maintaining dose conformality.

4.3

Treatment Planning Optimization
Algorithms

MultiPlan, the CyberKnife treatment planning software, offers three optimization algorithms: simplex,
iterative, and sequential optimization. Each of these
algorithms begins by pretargeting the 1,000–6,000

48

candidate beams to determine exactly which part of
the tumor they will intersect. Once the paths for the
candidate beams are determined, any beams that go
through critical structures (such as the lens, thyroid, or
any sensitive structure that must be avoided) are often
turned off by the treatment planner before optimization
begins. Next, constraints like the minimum and maximum MU allowed in the beams or nodes are also
specified. Once these initial configurations are denoted,
the specific optimization algorithm will choose from
the remaining candidate beams and assign appropriate
MUs to achieve the optimization goal. As detailed
below each optimization algorithm varies in how it
determines the final treatment plan.

4.3.1 Simplex Optimization
Simplex optimization is a standard linear algebra
method for solving optimization problems. For simplex
optimization, the treatment planner begins by setting
goal parameters including the minimum and maximum
tumor dose, maximum dose allowed to the critical
structures, and a weighting factor for these parameters
which ranges from 0 to 100. The lower the weighting
factor for a goal parameter (as low as 0) the less relevant
the goal parameter is in the optimization process. On
the other hand, when the weight factor is high (up to
100) for a goal parameter, it will strongly push optimization to achieve that goal. Optimization will combine the goal parameters and weight factors with the
volume of interest for the tumors and critical structures
involved, plus the minimum total MU used, into the
‘‘objective function’’. As a linear optimizer, simplex
optimization denotes the optimization problem as a
matrix equation and searches for the best combination
of available candidate beams that maximize the
objective function. Simplex is known for its efficiency
and can theoretically guarantee to find the global
optimum when certain precautions are taken.
In practice, simplex is convenient for compromising
between tumor coverage and critical structures sparing
by adjusting the weighting factor. It also allows the
treatment planner to manually add the point of constraint in the CT, and specify the desired dose to the
point of constraint. With this feature, the treatment
planner can easily adjust the dose cloud shape. However, the simplex algorithm has a steep learning curve
for novice users, particularly for mastering the tuning
of the goal parameters and weight factors. It is also a
one-stop optimization that does not allow the user to

J. Yang et al.

adjust the optimization goal during optimization; any
tuning of the planning parameters requires re-optimization. In addition, it does not support use of the IRIS
collimator and has a limit of 1,200 candidate beams for
optimization. In general, we use simplex optimization
for simple brain lesions, lung, and liver lesions that
have few nearby critical structures. Simplex is especially useful for prostate planning with a homogeneous
dose distribution.

4.3.2 Iterative Optimization
Similar to simplex, iterative optimization begins with
the treatment planner assigning the goal parameters
and weighting factors to build the objective function
with the exception that a minimum MU is not specified. Using the initially sized and targeted set of
beams as the initial solution, the optimization process
proceeds by altering the beam weights in every iteration. If the iteration improves in terms of a better
objective function evaluation, it will replace the former solution with the new one and start a new cycle
of optimization. Otherwise, it will try another iteration without replacement of the solution set. In this
manner, tens of thousands of iterations are usually
adopted before optimization stops when no further
improvement can be found. During the optimization,
some beams with zero MU will re-target at the ‘‘cold
spot’’ in the target and re-involve into optimization.
Iterative optimization has the advantage of updating
the isodose line display and dose–volume histogram
(DVH) at the end of each iteration. At that point, the
treatment planner can pause the iteration, adjust the
optimization parameters based on the updated information and continue iteration from where it was paused.
Despite its simplicity of use, iterative optimization
commonly generates a plan using more MU than simplex optimization, mainly resulting from the lack of
minimum total MU in the objective function and retargeting. Re-targeting can cause some beams’ fields to
partially cover the tumor to compensate for the cold spot
in the peripheral zone of the target, which is not only
inefficient in terms of MU but also potentially causes
higher dose to adjacent surrounding tissue. As a result, in
our practice we primarily use simplex or sequential
optimization and do not use iterative optimization.
4.3.3 Sequential Optimization
As with simplex optimization, sequential optimization
is a linear optimization algorithm, however, it is a

CyberKnife System

significant improvement over simplex optimization.
Unlike the other optimization approaches which optimize multiple objectives simultaneously, sequential
optimization only optimizes one objective at a time.
Sequential optimization begins by defining the
treatment planning constraints, maximum dose for each
target volume and critical structure, maximum MU per
beam, per node, and total MU. Using this information,
an initial solution that meets the planning constraints is
generated. The optimization processes proceed by
defining the objective function for one clinical objective at a time, optimizing that objective function, and
then proceeding to the next objective function. The
clinical objectives that can be sequentially optimized
include minimum dose, maximum dose, mean dose,
dose coverage, homogeneity, conformality, and total
MU. Each objective function is minimized using the
linear algebra simplex method under the existing dose
and MU constraints. Subsequent iterations use the
result of the prior iteration as an additional constraint
(with optional relaxation). The result is that the available solution space reduces at each step while the
optimization maps additional constraints.
Since the linear algebra simplex method is the
underlying optimization engine, sequential optimization keeps the power and efficiency of the abovedescribed simplex optimization in each iteration of
optimization while the sequential nature allows the
treatment planner to prioritize the optimization objectives. Sequential optimization also allows real-time
updates of the isodose and DVH. Because the maximum dose constraint for the critical structures is met by
the initial solution even before the optimization starts,
the quality of the final solution is commonly found
satisfactory for both simple and complicated cases.
At our center we use sequential optimization whenever
we do not use simplex optimization.

5

Treatment Delivery

Treatment delivery begins with positioning the patient
in the same position on the treatment table as they were
for CT simulation, including using the same immobilization and support device to reproduce patient position. Attention should be paid to patient comfort. Not
only does this aid in achieving a soothing treatment
experience for the patient but it also helps keep the
patient still during treatment. To position the patient,

49

therapists manually move the couch position such that
the target is close to the imaging center using the
in-room laser as a reference. Pre-adjustment X-ray
images are then taken to begin patient alignment either
guided by the image guidance system or by visually
matching the anatomy in the X-ray image with the DRR
image. During this process, the treatment table is
remotely adjusted by the therapist to improve the
alignment. Additional X-ray images are then acquired
to update the patient position and confirm the image
guidance system locks on the right anatomy. Once the
correction is below the manufacturer’s limits, which
are 10 mm and 1°, the system will allow treatment to
begin. In our practice we use tighter limits which are
normally 1–2 mm and 1°; however, the system will still
correct these smaller differences. In addition, for
tumors that move with respiration the Synchrony
technology requires acquiring about 8 images at different respiration phases to set-up the initial Synchrony
model before the treatment begins.
When delivering extracranial fiducial tracking we
use the patient set-up approach proposed by Wu et al.
(2007). In this approach, the tracking center is defined
as (X1, Y1, and Z1) in expiration-hold CT coordinates. Alignment begins by aligning the patient using
spine tracking on the nearest spinal region centering
at (X2, Y2, and Z2). After aligning the patient with
spinal setup, a precalculated couch shift of (X1–X2,
Y1–Y2, and Z1–Z2) is applied to move the patient
from the spinal setup position to the treatment position. The procedure not only aligns the patient’s body,
but it also aids the therapist in locating the fiducials
on the X-ray images. In addition, since the fiducials
should be in the center of the shifted X-ray image,
when taken at patient exhale, it also helps to rule out
fiducial migration before treatment starts.
Once treatment starts, the robot sequentially moves
through the nodes in the determined path set. The
optimized path traversal algorithm allows the robot to
skip those nodes for which no treatment beam is to be
delivered. At each active node, the robot will automatically correct the Linac position and rotation using
the latest patient transitional and rotational information
based upon image guidance to compensate for small
target movement. If image guidance finds target
movement is bigger than the manufacturer or clinical
limit, the treatment will pause automatically to allow
the user to re-adjust the patient position. Image guidance will, by default, take one pair of X-ray images for

50

J. Yang et al.

every beam, however, the user can change the imaging
frequency. In those cases where any part of the imaging
zone is blocked by moving parts such as the robotic arm
or Linac that image is not taken and the information
from the previous image will be adopted for motion
tracking. In addition, when the robot moves within
5 cm of a ‘‘safe zone’’, determined by the user and
defined based on patient size and couch position, or
when a touch sensor on the Linac is triggered, the robot
will pause with an ‘‘e-stop’’ warning until the user
clears and/or overrides the e-stop. If treatment is
interrupted and needs to be continued at a different
time, a make-up plan will be generated.
Total treatment time includes machine beam-on
time, robot traveling time from node-to-node, and
imaging time. In addition, Synchrony treatment
requires a few minutes to build the initial Synchrony
model after patient setup. Using our current V8.5
CyberKnife system, the average intracranial and
extracranial treatment times are roughly 40 minutes.

6

Summary

The CyberKnife offers a complete integrated system
for SBRT delivery. The robot-mounted linear accelerator delivers high radiation dose clouds that closely
conform to the shape of the target. Continuous image
guidance during treatment allows for accurate target
tracking even when the target is moving. Delivery via
multiple non-coplanar radiation beams allows for a
sharper fall-off of the radiation dose cloud, minimizing the risk of damaging nearby normal structures.
As the growing number of SBRT publications have
demonstrated, the CyberKnife presents a unique
approach in the clinical application of SBRT.
Acknowledgments We thank Pam Commike, PhD (Accuray
Incorporated) for editorial assistance. The views expressed here
are entirely the authors.

References
Adler JR, Cox RS (1996) Preliminary clinical experience with
the CyberKnife: image-guided stereotactic radiosurgery. In:
Alexander Iii E, Kondziolka D, Loeffler JS (eds) Radiosurgery 1995. Karger, Basel, pp 316–326
Anantham D, Feller-Kopman D, Shanmugham LN, Berman SM,
Decamp MM, Gangadharan SP, Eberhardt R, Herth F,
Ernst A (2007) Electromagnetic navigation bronchoscopy

guided fiducial placement for robotic stereotactic radiosurgery of lung tumors—a feasibility study. Chest 132:
930–935
Antypas C, Pantelis E (2008) Performance evaluation of a
CyberKnife G4 image-guided robotic stereotactic radiosurgery system. Phys Med Biol 53:4697–4718
Brown WT, Wu X, Fayad F, Fowler JF, Garcia S, Monterroso MI,
De La Zerda A, Schwade JG (2009) Application of robotic
stereotactic radiotherapy to peripheral stage I non-small cell
lung cancer with curative intent. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol)
21:623–631
Chang DT, Schellenberg D, Shen J, Kim J, Goodman KA,
Fisher GA, Ford JM, Desser T, Quon A, Koong AC (2009)
Stereotactic radiotherapy for unresectable adenocarcinoma
of the pancreas. Cancer 115:665–672
Choi BO, Choi IB, Jang HS, Kang YN, Jang JS, Bae SH,
Yoon SK, Chai GY, Kang KM (2008) Stereotactic body
radiation therapy with or without transarterial chemoembolization for patients with primary hepatocellular carcinoma: preliminary analysis. BMC Cancer 8:351
Collins BT, Vahdat S, Erickson K, Collins SP, Suy S, Yu X,
Zhang Y, Subramaniam D, Reichner CA, Sarikaya I,
Esposito G, Yousefi S, Jamis-Dow C, Banovac F,
Anderson ED (2009) Radical Cyberknife radiosurgery with
tumor tracking: an effective treatment for inoperable small
peripheral stage I non-small cell lung cancer. J Hematol
Oncol 2:1
Coon D, Gokhale AS, Burton SA, Heron DE, Ozhasoglu C,
Christie N (2008) Fractionated stereotactic body radiation
therapy in the treatment of primary, recurrent, and metastatic lung tumors: the role of positron emission tomography/computed tomography-based treatment planning. Clin
Lung Cancer 9:217–221
Echner GG, Kilby W, Lee M, Earnst E, Sayeh S, Schlaefer A,
Rhein B, Dooley JR, Lang C, Blanck O, Lessard E, Maurer
CR Jr, Schlegel W (2009) The design, physical properties
and clinical utility of an iris collimator for robotic
radiosurgery. Phys Med Biol 54:5359–5380
Freeman DE, King CR (2011) Stereotactic body radiotherapy
for low-risk prostate cancer: five-year outcomes. Radiat
Oncol 6:3
Friedland JL, Freeman DE, Masterson-Mcgary ME, Spellberg
DM (2009) Stereotactic body radiotherapy: an emerging
treatment approach for localized prostate cancer. Technol
Cancer Res Treat 8:387–392
Fu D, Kuduvalli G (2006) Enhancing skeletal features in digitally
reconstructed radiographs. Proc SPIE 6144:846–851
Fu D, Kuduvalli G (2008) A fast, accurate, and automatic
2D–3D image registration for image-guided cranial radiosurgery. Med Phys 35:2180–2194
Fu D, Kuduvalli G, Maurer CR Jr, Allison JW, Adler JR Jr
(2006) 3D target localization using 2D local displacements
of skeletal structures in orthogonal X-ray images for imageguided spinal radiosurgery. Int J Comput Assist Radiol Surg
1:198–200
Fu D, Kahn R, Wang B, Wang H, Mu Z, Park J, Kuduvalli G,
Maurer CR Jr (2007) Xsight lung tracking system: a fiducialless method for respiratory motion tracking. In: Urschel HC
Jr, Kresl JJ, Luketich JD, Papiez L (eds) Robotic radiosurgery: treating tumors that move with respiration. Springer,
Berlin, pp 265–282

CyberKnife System
Furweger C, Drexler C, Kufeld M, Muacevic A, Wowra B,
Schlaefer A (2010) Patient motion and targeting accuracy in
robotic spinal radiosurgery: 260 single-fraction fiducial-free
cases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 78:937–945
Goodman KA, Anderson EM, Maturen KE, Zhang Z, Mo Q,
Yang G, Gibbs IC, Fisher GA, Koong AC (2010) Dose
escalation study of stereotactic body radiotherapy for liver
malignancies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 78:486–493
Hatipoglu S, Mu Z, Fu D, Kuduvalli G (2007) Evaluation of a
robust fiducial tracking algorithm for image-guided radiosurgery. Proc SPIE 6509:65090A
Ho AK, Fu D, Cotrutz C, Hancock SL, Chang SD, Gibbs IC,
Maurer CR Jr, Adler JR Jr (2007) A study of the accuracy of
Cyberknife spinal radiosurgery using skeletal structure
tracking. Neurosurgery 60:147–156
Hong JC, Yu Y, Rao AK, Dieterich S, Maxim PG, Le QT,
Diehn M, Sze DY, Kothary N, Loo BW Jr (2011) High
retention and safety of percutaneously implanted endovascular embolization coils as fiducial markers for imageguided stereotactic ablative radiotherapy of pulmonary
tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 81:85–90
Hoogeman M, Marijnissen J, Hol J, Van Der Baan P,
Levendag PC, Heijmen, BJM (2009a) Validation of Monte
Carlo based dose calculation in MultiPlan 2.1 for dose
prediction in treatment of small lung tumors and comparison with ray tracing in MultiPlan 1.4.0 regarding GTV and
PTV coverage. In: CyberKnife users’ meeting, CyberKnife
User’s Society
Hoogeman M, Prevost JB, Nuyttens J, Poll J, Levendag P,
Heijmen B (2009b) Clinical accuracy of the respiratory
tumor tracking system of the cyberknife: assessment by
analysis of log files. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 74:
297–303
Jabbari S, Weinberg VK, Kaprealian T, Hsu IC, Ma L,
Chuang C, Descovich M, Shiao S, Shinohara K, Roach M
III, Gottschalk AR (2011) Stereotactic body radiotherapy as
monotherapy or post-external beam radiotherapy boost
for prostate cancer: technique, early toxicity, and PSA
response. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 56:7767–7775
Katz AJ, Santoro M, Ashley R, Diblasio F, Witten M (2010)
Stereotactic body radiotherapy for organ-confined prostate
cancer. BMC Urol 10:1
Kilby W, Dooley JR, Kuduvalli G, Sayeh S, Maurer CR Jr
(2010) The CyberKnife robotic radiosurgery system in
2010. Technol Cancer Res Treat 9:433–452
King CR, Brooks JD, Gill H, Pawlicki T, Cotrutz C, Presti JC Jr
(2009) Stereotactic body radiotherapy for localized prostate
cancer: interim results of a prospective phase II clinical
trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 73:1043–1048
King CR, Brooks JD, Gill H, Presti JC Jr (2011) Long-term
outcomes from a prospective trial of stereotactic body
radiotherapy for low-risk prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys (in press)
Lanciano R, Lamond J, Yang J, Feng J, Arrigo S, Good M,
Brady L (2011) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for
patients with heavily pretreated liver metastases and liver
tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 81:s354
Louis C, Dewas S, Mirabel X, Lacornerie T, Adenis A,
Bonodeau F, Lartigau E (2010) Stereotactic radiotherapy of
hepatocellular carcinoma: preliminary results. Technol
Cancer Res Treat 9:479–487

51
Mahadevan A, Miksad R, Goldstein M, Sullivan R, Bullock A,
Buchbinder E, Pleskow D, Sawhney M, Kent T, Vollmer C,
Callery M (2011) Induction Gemcitabine and stereotactic
body radiotherapy for locally advanced nonmetastatic
pancreas cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 81:e615–e622
Mardirossian G, Muniruzaman M, Lee C, Jin H (2009)
Validation of accuracy Multiplan Monte Carlo treatment
plans. In: CyberKnife users’ meeting, CyberKnife User’s
Society
Mu Z, Fu D, Kuduvalli G (2006) Multiple fiducial identification
using the hidden Markov model in image guided radiosurgery. In: Computer vision and pattern recognition, IEEE
Computer Society, p 92
Mu Z, Fu D, Kuduvalli G (2008) A probabilistic framework
based on hidden Markov model for fiducial identification in
image-guided radiation treatments. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 27:1288–1300
Muacevic A, Staehler M, Drexler C, Wowra B, Reiser M,
Tonn JC (2006) Technical description, phantom accuracy,
and clinical feasibility for fiducial-free frameless real-time
image-guided spinal radiosurgery. J Neurosurg Spine 5:
303–312
Muacevic A, Drexler C, Wowra B, Schweikard A, Schlaefer A,
Hoffmann RT, Wilkowski R, Winter H, Reiser M (2007)
Technical description, phantom accuracy, and clinical
feasibility for single-session lung radiosurgery using robotic
image-guided real-time respiratory tumor tracking. Technol
Cancer Res Treat 6:321–328
Murphy MJ (1997) An automatic six-degree-of-freedom image
registration algorithm for image-guided frameless stereotaxic radiosurgery. Med Phys 24:857–866
Murphy MJ (2002) Fiducial-based targeting accuracy for
external-beam radiotherapy. Med Phys 29:334–344
Murphy MJ, Balter J, Balter S, Bencomo JA Jr, Das IJ,
Jiang SB, Ma CM, Olivera GH, Rodebaugh RF, Ruchala KJ,
Shirato H, Yin FF (2007) The management of imaging dose
during image-guided radiotherapy: report of the AAPM task
group 75. Med Phys 34:4041–4063
Nioutsikou E, Seppenwoolde Y, Symonds-Tayler JR,
Heijmen B, Evans P, Webb S (2008) Dosimetric investigation of lung tumor motion compensation with a robotic
respiratory tracking system: an experimental study. Med
Phys 35:1232–1240
Papanikoulaou N, Battista J, Boyer A, Kappas C, Klein E,
Mackie T, Sharpe M, Van Dyke J (2004) Tissue inhomogeneity corrections for megavoltage photon beams. http://www.
aapm.org/pubs/reports/RPT_85.pdf
Reichner CA, Collins BT, Gagnon GJ, Malik S, Jamis-Dow C,
Anderson ED (2005) The placement of gold fiducials for
CyberKnife stereotactic radiosurgery using a modified
transbronchial needle aspiration technique. J. Bronchol.
12:193–195
Rwigema JC, Heron DE, Ferris RL, Gibson M, Quinn A,
Yang Y, Ozhasoglu C, Burton S (2010) Fractionated
stereotactic body radiation therapy in the treatment of
previously-irradiated recurrent head and neck carcinoma:
updated report of the University of Pittsburgh experience.
Am J Clin Oncol 33:286–293
Sayeh S, Wang J, Main WT, Kilby W, Maurer CR Jr (2007)
Respiratory motion tracking for robotic radiosurgery. In:
Urschel HC, Kresl JJ, Luketich JD, Papiez L, Timmerman

52
RD (eds) Robotic radiosurgery: treating tumors that move
with respiration. Springer, Berlin, pp 15–29
Stintzing S, Hoffmann RT, Heinemann V, Kufeld M,
Muacevic A (2010) Frameless single-session robotic radiosurgery of liver metastases in colorectal cancer patients. Eur
J Cancer 46:1026–1032
Van Der Voort Van Zyp NC, Prevost JB, Hoogeman MS,
Praag J, Van Der Holt B, Levendag PC, Van Klaveren RJ,
Pattynama P, Nuyttens JJ (2009) Stereotactic radiotherapy
with real-time tumor tracking for non-small cell lung
cancer: clinical outcome. Radiother Oncol 91:296–300
Van Der Voort Van Zyp NC, Hoogeman MS, Van De Water S,
Levendag PC, Van Der Holt B, Heijmen BJ, Nuyttens JJ
(2010a) Clinical introduction of Monte Carlo treatment
planning; a different prescription dose for non-small cell
lung cancer according to tumor location and size. Radiat
Oncol 96:55–60
Van Der Voort Van Zyp NC, Prevost JB, Van Der Holt B,
Braat C, Van Klaveren RJ, Pattynama PM, Levendag PC,
Nuyttens JJ (2010b) Quality of life after stereotactic
radiotherapy for stage I non-small-cell lung cancer. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 77:31–37
Vautravers-Dewas C, Dewas S, Bonodeau F, Adenis A,
Lacornerie T, Penel N, Lartigau E, Mirabel X (2011)
Image-guided robotic stereotactic body radiation therapy for
liver metastases: is there a dose response relationship? Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 81:e39–47
Whitaker TJ, Mclaughlin M, Haile K (2009) Reducing monitor
units and improving plan quality using combined isocentric and
conformal collimators as opposed to conformal collimators

J. Yang et al.
along. In: CyberKnife users’ meeting, CyberKnife User’s
Society
Wong KH, Dieterich S, Tang J, Cleary K (2007) Quantitative
measurement of CyberKnife robotic arm steering. Technol
Cancer Res Treat 6:589–594
Wu X, Fu D, De La Zerda A, Bossart E, Shao H, Both J,
Nikesch W, Huang Z, Markkoe A, Schwade J (2007) Patient
alignment and target tracking in radiosurgery of soft-tissue
tumors using combined fiducial and skeletal structures
tracking techniques. In: Urschel HC Jr, Kresl JJ,
Luketich JD, Papiez L, Timmerman RD (eds) Robotic
radiosurgery: treating tumors that move with respiration.
Springer, Berlin, pp 31–36
Wu X, Dieterich S, Orton CG (2009) Point/counterpoint: only a
single implanted marker is needed for tracking lung cancers
for IGRT. Med Phys 36:4845–4847
Xie Y, Djajaputra D, King CR, Hossain S, Ma L, Xing L (2008)
Intrafractional motion of the prostate during hypofractionated radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 72:236–246
Yang J, Feng J, Lamond J (2009a) Dose gradient analysis with
beam concentricity in conformal planning. In: CyberKnife
users’ meeting, CyberKnife User’s Society
Yang J, Lamond J, Feng J, Lanciano R, Arrigo S, Lavere N,
Curtin L, Brady L (2009b) A quality control procedure for
using Xsight lung. In: CyberKnife users’ meeting, CyberKnife User’s Society
Yang J, Lamond J, Lanciano R, Feng J, Gilman S, Brady L
(2011) Using foldable gold anchor markers for fiducial
tracking with the CyberKnife. In: Robotic radiosurgery
summit

Novalis and Varian Systems
Isaac I. Rosen and Ramiro Pino

Contents

Abstract

1

Introduction..............................................................

53

2

High-Intensity Beams ..............................................

55

3

Multileaf Collimator................................................

55

4

Robotic Couch..........................................................

56

5

ExacTrac...................................................................

56

6

On-Board Imager ....................................................

59

7

Respiratory Gating ..................................................

61

8

Treatment Planning.................................................

62

9

Summary...................................................................

64

References..........................................................................

64

The Novalis TxTM and TrueBeam STx are both
high-precision linear accelerator systems designed
for image-guided stereotactic treatment delivery to
the brain and body. Both systems have multiple
photon energies, 1 or more high-dose-rate flattening filter free beams, high-definition multileaf
collimator (MLC), MV portal imaging, kV planar
imaging, and cone beam CT. Brainlab ExacTrac
stereoscopic image guidance (infrared and X-ray)
and robotic couch top are included on the Novalis
TxTM and optional for the TrueBeam STx. Both
systems include software for automatic image
registration, remote patient positioning, motion
tracking, gated delivery, and treatment planning.
Measurements with phantoms and patients have
demonstrated a positioning accuracy of the order
of 1 mm as well as long-term stability in dosimetry
and imaging. Both systems have the accuracy and
image-guidance capabilities needed for successful
stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT).

1

I. I. Rosen (&)
Department of Radiation Oncology,
The Methodist Hospital, 6565 Fannin St,
Houston, TX 77030, USA
e-mail: iirosen@tmhs.org
R. Pino
Department of Radiation Oncology,
The Methodist Hospital, 6565 Fannin St,
Houston, TX 77030, USA

Introduction

Successful stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT)
requires small margins around the target volume. To
achieve that goal, it is necessary to have 3D imageguidance integrated with treatment delivery and to
manage intrafraction target motion (Solberg et al.
2012). Doses are typically prescribed to the 80–90%
isodose line so that the edges of the target volume are in
a high dose gradient region. Tight margins require
higher mechanical accuracy of the treatment machine

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2012_635, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

53

54

Fig. 1 Illustration of the Novalis Tx system. The OBI, attached
to the sides of the gantry, and the MV EPID are retracted. The kV
X-rays tubes, embedded in the floor, aim at flat panel imagers
opposite and above the patient. The infrared camera is situated
above the patient along the body axis (not visible). The Brainlab
robotic couch top is installed on the Varian Exact couch.
(photograph courtesy of Varian Medical Systems)

and greater positioning accuracy of the patient than for
conventional fractionated treatments.
The Novalis TxTM and TrueBeam STx are both
high-precision linear accelerator systems from Varian
designed for image-guided stereotactic treatment
delivery to the brain and body (Varian Medical Systems, Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA). Both systems have
multiple photon energies, high-definition multileaf
collimator (MLC), electronic portal imaging device
(EPID), and On-Board ImagerÒ (OBI). Novalis TxTM
(Fig. 1) is the latest version of the Novalis system that
was first introduced in 1998 by Brainlab (Brainlab
AG, Feldkirchen, Germany). Novalis TxTM includes a
high intensity flattening-filter-free (FFF) 6-MV beam
and Brainlab radiosurgery components-ExacTracÒ
stereoscopic image-guidance (infrared and X-ray),
robotic couch top, hardware for frame stereotactic
radiosurgery treatment, and treatment planning software (iPlanÒ). TrueBeam STx is a version of the
TrueBeam system (Fig. 2) that has been engineered
for radiosurgery treatment. It has 6-MV and 10-MV
high-intensity FFF beams that deliver dose-rates of
1400 and 2400 MU/min, respectively, as well as the
Varian EclipseTM treatment planning system. It can
also be configured to include the Brainlab radiosurgery system. Both systems include software for
automatic image registration, remote patient positioning, motion tracking, and gated delivery.

I. I. Rosen and R. Pino

Fig. 2 Photograph of a Varian TrueBeam system. The TrueBeam STx has the high-definition MLC and can be configured
with the Brainlab ExacTrac imaging and robotic couch top

As the latest generation of stereotactic imageguided treatment systems from Varian and Brainlab,
there are as yet relatively few reports of evaluations of
the Novalis TxTM and TrueBeam STx by academic and
clinical centers. However, most of the technologies
were available on previous systems and have been well
studied. Measurements reported for the MLC, robotic
couch, ExacTrac, OBI, and EPID on earlier systems are
either directly relevant to these new systems or at least
give an indication of how these new systems will
perform with patients. While the linear accelerators and
each of these subsystems have been studied individually, it is also useful to understand their performance
working together in ideal conditions (phantoms) and
working together in the treatment of patients.
Image-guided treatments with these systems require
accurate knowledge of the position of treatment isocenter.
Treatment isocenter is the ideal isocenter position about
which all motions take place and to which all images are
referenced. It is the isocenter position to which the patient
is positioned in treatment planning. It is defined in the
treatment room by the intersection of the setup lasers.
Radiation isocenter deviates slightly from this isocenter as
the gantry, collimator, and couch rotate. The center of each
imaging system may deviate slightly from this isocenter,
and the deviation may change with gantry position. The
sizes of these deviations may influence the amount of
target margin used in designing treatment plans.

Novalis and Varian Systems

This chapter focuses on the unique characteristics
of the Novalis TxTM and Varian STx systems. The
data presented are not intended to be a comprehensive
review of all research and measurements. They are
representative and intended to demonstrate the
inherent accuracy of the technology and the accuracy
achievable with patients.

55

larger at depth; the penumbras for the 10-MV FFF
beams are consistently sharper than for the flattened
beams. The FFF beams have been successfully
modeled in the iPlan and Eclipse treatment planning
systems.

3
2

Multileaf Collimator

High-Intensity Beams

Treatment times for SBRT fractions are typically
much longer than for conventional treatments because
of the higher dose and the usually longer setup time
for image guidance. These longer treatment times
provide more opportunities for intrafraction motion.
For example, Agazaryan et al. found that up to 3 mm
of motion can happen in as little as 5 min in spinal
radiosurgery patients (Agazaryan et al. 2008).
Clearly, high-dose-rate beams can reduce treatment
time. In a comparison of treatments to liver tumors
using an intensity-modulated arc technique, Mancosu
et al. reported that beam-on time was reduced from
about 9 min with conventional beams to about
2.3 min with FFF beams (Mancosu et al. 2012). Highdose-rate beams could also significantly reduce
treatment times for techniques that have low beam
efficiency, such as gating and breathhold. Vassiliev
et al. did a treatment planning study comparing nonIMRT dose distributions from FFF beams to those
from flattened beams for lung SBRT (Vassiliev et al.
2009). For fractions of 10–12.5 Gy, they estimated
that the beam-on time per field would have been
reduced from about 25 s to about 11 s with the FFF
beams. That would make it feasible to treat a beam in
a single breathhold.
Flattening-filter-free beams have significantly different dosimetric characteristics than conventional
flattened beams. Dosimetry measurements and beam
modeling for the 6-MV and 10-MV FFF beams from a
TrueBeam STx were reported by Hrbacek et al.
(2011). They found that the FFF beams have lower
mean energy and higher surface dose. The beam
profiles are peaked and the off-axis reduction in dose
increases with field size and beam energy. However,
for small fields, up to 3-cm square, the infield part of
the profile is almost the same as for flattened beams.
The penumbras for the 6-MV FFF beams are initially
sharper than for the flattened beams, but become

The high-definition MLC (HD120TM) has 120 leaves
with central leaves of 2.5 mm width at isocenter. The
mechanical and dosimetric characteristics of the
HD120 on a Novalis TxTM system were studied by
Sharma et al. for the SRS-6 (high-dose-rate 6-MV
beam), 6-MV, and 10-MV beams and by Chang et al.
for the SRS-6, 6-MV, and 15-MV beams (Sharma
et al. 2011; Chang et al. 2008). Leaf alignment was
found to be better than 0.3 mm along the direction of
leaf motion for a range of gantry and collimator
positions. The digital readout agreed with the radiation field to within 0.3 mm for field sizes down to
1 cm in size.
Penumbras (80–20%) increase with beam energy
and field size and are sharper perpendicular to leaf
motion. Mean values of 2.4, 3.7, and 5.1 mm parallel
to leaf motion and 2.1, 2.9, and 4.3 mm perpendicular
to leaf motion were measured for the SRS-6, 6-MV,
and 10-MV photon beams, respectively. At 1.5 cm
depth for the 6-MV beam, penumbra width increased
from 2.5–4.9 mm with field size. For the 15-MV
beam at 3.0 cm depth, penumbra increased from 3.6
to 6.0 mm with increasing field size.
Average leaf transmission was measured to be less
than 1.5% for the SRS-6, 6-MV, 10-MV, and 15-MV
beams. Output factors for dynamic multileaf collimation varied less than 1% for the 6-MV beams and
less than 0.5% for the 10-MV beam over all gantry
positions, and were reproducible within 0.5% over a
14-month period of time. Dose depression was 24%
for the 6-MV beams and 19% for the 10-MV beam,
and the corresponding tongue and groove size was
1.7 mm and 2.0 mm for the 6-MV and 10-MV energies, respectively.
Overall, the measured performance of the HD120
MLC was better than manufacturer specifications. Its
thin leaves, leaf positioning accuracy, sharp penumbra, and low transmission make the HD120 desirable
for SBRT applications. Treatment planning studies

56

I. I. Rosen and R. Pino

have suggested that the smaller leaves can improve
dose conformality and reduce critical structure doses
(Wu et al. 2009; Tanyi et al. 2009).

4

included in treatment planning by including the couch
top in the dose calculation and/or by minimizing the
number of beams that penetrate it. In iPlan, a model
of the couch is inserted as a structure into the treatment plan.

Robotic Couch

The 6D robotic couch combines the Varian ExactÒ
IGRT couch with the Brainlab Robotic Patient
Alignment system (Fig. 2). The Varian couch provides 3 translations and a couch rotation about the
patient anterior/posterior axis (yaw). This can be
considered 4D positioning. The Brainlab robotic
couch top adds rotations about the patient longitudinal
axis (roll) and lateral axis (pitch) to give 6D positioning. Translations can be remotely adjusted from
the control console using the ExacTrac software.
Rotations are also controlled by the software but
require closer observation by the therapist. The couch
is indexed to minimize setup time and maximize
reproducibility.
There are two significant benefits from 6D positioning. First, accuracy of image fusion is better when
rotation corrections are included, resulting in more
accurate 3D positioning (Jin et al. 2008). Second,
dose coverage is better for non-spherical targets when
rotation adjustments are made to the patient position.
Gevaert et al. studied the benefit of the two extra
rotational motions provided by the robotic couch for
mask-based cranial radiosurgery (Gevaert et al.
2011). They treated 66 lesions in 40 patients using
the full 6D positioning of the robotic couch. Then,
they simulated the setup errors that would have
resulted from only 4D positioning. They found mean
1D translation setup errors of less than 0.5 mm, but
the mean 3D setup error was 1.9 mm. They also
found that using only 4D positioning resulted in a 5%
loss in target dose coverage.
Photon attenuation through any couch top depends
on the angle of incidence and the couch rotation, and
can potentially affect target coverage. Attenuation
through the Novalis robotic couch top was measured
by Njeh et al. (2009). They found that attenuation at
normal incidence was 3.4–4.9% for 6-MV photons,
depending on field size, and negligible for 18-MV
photons. They measured the highest attenuation at the
120° gantry position with values of 8.3–10% for 6MV photons, and values of 3.4–3.6% for 18-MV
photons. The effect is clearly significant and should be

5

ExacTrac

The ExacTrac system from Brainlab is a combination
of imaging and control systems external to the linac,
but integrated with its operation. ExacTrac includes
two different stereoscopic imaging systems. The realtime infrared (IR) system measures the position of the
patient’s surface. It is used for initial patient positioning, monitoring patient position, and tracking
patient motion during gated treatment delivery.
ExacTrac also uses the IR images to move the 6D
robotic couch with submillimeter precision and
accuracy. The X-ray imaging system (ETX) gives
accurate localization based on internal anatomy and/
or implanted fiducials.
Two stereoscopic IR cameras, mounted from the
ceiling, record the positions of IR reflective markers
on the patient’s surface. From these images, the system computes the 3D position of the patient. The IR
markers are positioned identically on the patient
during CT simulation and at treatment time. Based on
the treatment plan isocenter, the ExacTrac software
calculates the shifts and rotations needed to bring the
patient to the correct treatment location. Figure 3
shows the IR markers on a patient and the computer
screen after alignment. This initial positioning is
followed by more accurate X-ray positioning. During
treatment, the real-time data obtained from this IR
system is used to monitor the patient’s position for
unexpected changes and/or to track motion for gated
delivery. Because IR positioning is based on the
patient’s external surface, it is inherently more accurate for cranial targets than for body targets.
Final positioning of the patient is done using the
X-ray images of ETX. Two X-rays tubes embedded in
the treatment room floor aim at two overhead flat panel
imagers. The ETX images are taken at oblique angles
relative to the patient, so the x–y axes in the individual
images do not correspond to the orthogonal axes in the
treatment room. The ExacTrac software compares the
images to radiographs digitally reconstructed (DRR)
from the planning CT images. Figure 4 shows

Novalis and Varian Systems

Fig. 3 Example of ExacTrac alignment using the infrared
markers (a). The computer display (b) shows the actual positions
of the markers, the planned positions, and the displacements and

Fig. 4 Example of ExacTrac X-ray imaging and fusion. An
image is taken with each X-ray tube and compared to the
corresponding DRR. Automatic 6D fusion provides the translations and rotations needed to bring the images into alignment
and the patient to the proper treatment position

examples of the X-ray images and corresponding
DRR’s. The software computes the shifts and rotations
needed to bring the patient to the planned treatment

57

rotations. When the patient is at the planned position, the
therapists are instructed to proceed with X-ray positioning

position based on either bony anatomy or identified
internal markers. The patient is then moved using the
6D robotic couch.
The X-ray imaging, registration, and adjustment
process is repeated until the patient is at the desired
treatment position within a specified tolerance (typically less than 1.5 mm). Because there is no motion of
the X-ray tubes or imagers, the spatial accuracy of the
ETX images is very high. The ETX system can also
compare a single X-ray image to its corresponding
DRR. This snap verification option can be used at any
couch angle and at any time during treatment to assess
whether the patient position is still within tolerance.
Each imaging system of ExacTrac is calibrated
independently to the isocenter defined by the room
lasers. First, the geometric relationship of the IR camera
images to the machine isocenter is quantified using a
phantom with IR markers. Then, the relationship of the
X-ray images to the machine isocenter is established
using an X-ray phantom. The calibration phantoms are
shown in Fig. 5. Because of the physical stability of the
system, the calibration values should rarely change.
Verification of accuracy is performed daily, but full
calibration is required much less frequently.
Most studies of the accuracy of ExacTrac have
focused on its use for cranial SRS. However, the
inherent accuracy of the system as measured by hidden target tests with phantoms is the same for SBRT.
One or more target markers are embedded in a
phantom (often anthropomorphic), the phantom is

58

I. I. Rosen and R. Pino

Fig. 5 Calibration phantoms for the ExacTrac imaging systems. The small phantom (a) has IR markers for calibrating the video
system, and the large phantom (b) has high density inserts for calibrating the X-ray system

positioned for treatment using the system being
evaluated, and then the accuracy of the position is
measured using an independent measurement (usually
orthogonal radiographs). Often, the tests are repeated
starting from different induced errors in translation
and/or rotation.
Measurements of an early version of the IR system
and a prototype of the ETX system were performed in
2003 by Verellen et al. (2003) and Yan et al. (2003).
They found that the accuracy of IR positioning was,
on average, better than 0.5 mm in each direction.
ETX localization showed an overall 3D accuracy of
0.4 mm with image matching and 0.3 mm with
implanted fiducials. They concluded that the ExacTrac system achieved an overall accuracy of better
than 1 mm. It is worth noting that current ExacTrac
systems have a more rigid geometry than the early
system used in these initial evaluations.
Hidden target tests for cranial radiosurgery using head
phantoms have shown an accuracy of 0.3 mm to 1.1 mm
for X-ray positioning, with most well under 1 mm. Solberg et al. measured an average 3D positioning error of
1.1 mm for 50 repetitions of a hidden target test (Solberg
et al. 2008). For 29 image-guided setups, Lamba et al.
found the average 3D alignment error to be 0.6 mm
(Lamba et al. 2009). Ramakrishna et al. measured a mean
total error of 0.7 mm in 57 setups (Ramakrishna et al.
2010). Jin et al. compared the accuracy of 6D image fusion
versus 3D image fusion for X-ray positioning (Jin et al.
2008). They found that without correction for rotations,
there could be significant localization errors. With 6D
fusion, however, the positioning accuracy was 0.6 mm.

Studies with hidden target tests using a variety of
body phantoms have reported accuracy for X-ray
positioning of 0.1–1.4 mm. Hayashi et al. (2009)
measured the accuracy using a lumbar phantom. For
IR positioning, they found a translational accuracy of
1 mm for induced shifts up to 10 cm and a rotational
accuracy of 0.1°. For X-ray guidance, they measured
an overall uncertainty of 1.36 mm with CT simulation
images of 1.25 mm slice thickness. Kim et al. used a
pelvis phantom containing several 2-mm metal BBs
(Kim et al. 2011). They found X-ray localization to be
accurate to within 0.8 mm in each direction. Using a
torso phantom, Agazaryan et al. found that X-ray
positioning was accurate within 0.1 mm and 0.2° for
all axes of rotation (Agazaryan et al. 2008). Takakura
et al. made 10 measurements with a head and neck
phantom and obtained a mean positional error of
0.06 mm in any direction with a mean 3D error of
0.07 mm (Takakura et al. 2010). The mean rotational
errors were all \0.05°. They concluded that the
overall accuracy of the ExacTrac system for intracranial SRS was 0.31 mm using 6D ETX positioning
with the robotic couch.
ExacTrac was rapidly implemented for prostate
treatments. In early reports on its clinical use, Soete
et al. evaluated the accuracy of IR localization and
X-ray imaging (Soete et al. 2002a, 2002b). Setup
errors were measured using orthogonal verification
films. From 184 patient treatments, they measured
average IR setup errors of 2.0, 1.6, and 3.5 mm in the
AP, lateral, and longitudinal directions, respectively.
The accuracy of X-ray guided setup was similarly

Novalis and Varian Systems

measured in 261 patient treatments and found to be
2.0, 1.7, and 2.4 mm for the AP, lateral, and longitudinal directions, respectively. X-ray guided setup
was significantly better than IR setup and both were
better than conventional setups. Graf et al. evaluated
X-ray positioning for 33 prostate patients with
implanted fiducial markers (Graf et al. 2010). After
initial X-ray positioning, they took another set of
X-rays and measured the residual error. They found
residual random errors of 1.3, 1.7, and 2.2 mm in the
lateral, AP, and longitudinal directions, respectively.
These residual errors include intrafraction patient
motion and organ motion in addition to systeminherent uncertainties. They concluded that a 2 mm
margin is needed for their patients when using image
guidance with ETX.
For spine treatments, image guidance with ETX
has the advantage of being noninvasive and frameless.
In 2002, Yin et al. evaluated the accuracy of positioning in a series of 25 patients (mostly thoracic
spine) (Yin et al. 2002). They used IR positioning
followed by X-ray positioning and then took orthogonal portal images. The residual setup error was
measured by comparing the isocenter in the orthogonal images to reference DRR images. They found 1D
displacements of 0.2–1.2 mm and 3D displacements
of 0.3–1.9 mm. They considered these deviations
acceptable because they used a 2-mm margin in
treatment planning.

6

59

Fig. 6 Example of using the OBI to position the patient using
either 2D/2D matching with planar kV images (a) or 3D/3D
matching with CBCT images (b)

On-Board Imager

OBI is a combination of kV X-ray tube and flat panel
detector (both retractable) mounted on the gantry
orthogonal to the beam line. OBI produces kV
radiographs, fluoroscopic imaging, and volumetric
cone beam CT (CBCT).Radiographs can be generated
rapidly at low dose in situations where bony anatomy
is suitable for positioning. CBCT is particularly useful
for image guidance when deformation and motion
play a significant role. Soft-tissue targets can be
visualized and positioned without the need for
implanted fiducials. Patients can be positioned using
2D/2D matching of orthogonal planar radiographs to
DRR’s or using 3D/3D matching of CBCT to simulation CT images. Registration of images can be done
either manually or automatically, and the results of
registration give the shifts that will bring the patient

to the planned treatment position. Figure 6 shows an
example of each type of image matching.
While the potential benefits of CBCT are clear, the
complexity of the technology offers some practical
challenges (see e.g., Moore et al. 2006). Limitations
of the filtered backprojection algorithm can cause the
same problems for CBCT that are sometimes seen in
diagnostic CT, such as streaking by high density
bone, ring artifacts from unresponsive detectors, and
rings due to the heel effect of the X-ray source.
Unique to CBCT, the large field sizes produce patient
scatter that adds to the inaccuracies of reconstruction.
Furthermore, anatomical motion during the gantry
rotation and data acquisition produces blurring and
reduces contrast. Mechanical flex of the radiographic
system and gantry means that the central X-rays do
not cross at a point in space. The Novalis TxTM and

60

TrueBeam STx offer the Varian IsoCal system to
measure this flex as a function of gantry and collimator angle and then to automatically compensate for
it in acquired MV, kV, and CBCT images.
Du et al. found that the OBI has excellent shortterm and long-term stability (Du et al. 2010). For
10 consecutive measurements of the CBCT image
center, the position changed by less than 0.1 mm.
Over a 7-month period, the image center deviated
from the accelerator radiation isocenter by less than
0.5 mm in each direction. They also found a 0.8 mm
systematic discrepancy between the CBCT image
center and the EPID MV image center. Mao et al.
measured the long-term performance of the OBI and
EPID imaging systems on a Varian Trilogy system
(Mao et al. 2011). They examined the congruence of
image isocenters 5 times over the course of a year and
found that the isocenters in the 2D kV (OBI) and MV
(EPID) images agreed to with 0.7 mm in each
direction. Source angle deviations from the nominal
position were found to be within 0.3° for both systems. These measurements were made without the use
of flex compensation.
The accuracy of CBCT positioning measured with
phantoms has been reported to be 0.2–1.0 mm. Ma
et al. measured the accuracy of 3D matching and 6D
matching (Ma et al. 2009). They positioned an
anthropomorphic head phantom using ExacTrac
X-ray imaging and then performed online 3D
matching and offline 6D matching. Both methods
yielded essentially the same result, an RMS error of
less than 0.5 mm in any direction compared to ExacTrac ETX setup. In a hidden target test with a pelvis
phantom, Kim et al. measured the 3D localization
error of the CBCT system and found it to be 1.0 mm
on average (Kim et al. 2011). Wang et al. used a head
phantom to measure the accuracy of OBI setup on a
TrueBeam STx with planar images (2D/2D matching)
and with CBCT (3D/3D matching) (Wang et al.
2012). They found that the difference in setup positions between the two methods was 0.1 mm in each
direction and 0.4 mm in total absolute difference.
They found that the accuracy of 2D/2D setup was
0.2 mm for shifts of less than 1 cm. For larger shifts,
they reported a problem arising from image distortion
due to magnification and beam divergence. In contrast, CBCT setup was accurate to 0.15 mm in each

I. I. Rosen and R. Pino

direction even for shifts as large as 2.5 cm. They
created 9 treatment plans using RapidArc and intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) for various
target sizes. The plans were delivered to the phantom
using CBCT setup and the dose distributions were
measured with film. They found that the shifts needed
to bring the measured distributions into alignment
with the calculated ones were less than 1 mm for all
9 plans.
Measurements with patients have demonstrated a
setup accuracy of the order of 1 mm. Kriminski et al.
acquired CBCT images for paraspinal radiosurgery
treatments of 16 patients with implanted markers
(Kriminski et al. 2008). The patients were treated
using their standard technique of positioning based on
EPID (MV) images. The CBCT images were automatically fused to treatment planning images using
only translations (3D). They found that the average
1D differences between CBCT and EPID positions
were 1.0 mm. They concluded that setup accuracy
with CBCT is comparable to EPID setup, but without
the need for marker implantation. In a study by
Schreibmann et al., the authors compared the results
of manual 3D matching to automated 6D matching for
10 spinal radiosurgery cases (Schreibmann et al.
2011). They found that the average 1D error with 3D
matching was less than 0.4 mm, but for individual
cases the largest 1D error was 1.9 mm. The authors
concluded that precise positioning for spinal radiosurgery cannot be accomplished with manual 3D
matching only and that rotations may be required to
achieve the same level of accuracy as for cranial
treatments. Ma et al. took CBCT images of
18 patients treated for cranial tumors and matched
them to the treatment planning images using online
3D matching and offline 6D matching (Ma et al.
2009). They found that the root-mean-square (RMS)
difference between the two methods was less than
0.2 mm in any direction. Both methods agreed with
ExacTrac ETX setup to within 1.5 mm an each
direction.
There have been concerns regarding dose from
CBCT procedures because they usually involve large
volumes of normal tissue. For the Varian OBI, CT
dose index (CTDI) was determined by Kim et al.
using ion chamber measurements and Monte Carlo
simulations (Kim et al. 2010). For body scans, low-

Novalis and Varian Systems

61

dose CBCT protocols had CTDI’s of approximately
2.5 cGy for pelvis and 0.7 cGy for thorax, which
were a factor of about two lower than high imagequality protocols. They concluded that although the
low-dose protocols have lower image-quality, the
images are acceptable for target localization in IGRT.

7

Respiratory Gating

The geometric uncertainty in target and normal tissue
location caused by respiratory motion, particularly in
the thoracic and abdominal region near the diaphragm, is an especially serious concern for treatments such as SBRT that deliver high doses per
fraction. A variety of methods have been developed
and studied to minimize the effects of these motions.
Using an internal target volume that encompasses the
whole respiratory trajectory of the planning treatment
volume (PTV) is a simple method, but it increases the
volume of irradiated normal tissue and it assumes that
the 4DCT obtained during simulation is an accurate
representation of motion during therapy. A phantom
study of lung SBRT using the breathing patterns of
patients found that when targets moved irregularly
with a large range (*20 mm), a portion of the PTV
was underdosed by more than 10% due to inaccurate
representation of the motion in the maximium intensity projection (MIP) images (Huang et al. 2010). The
most common methods for actively mitigating the
effect of respiratory motion are abdominal compression, gated beam delivery, and coached breathing
(e.g., deep inspiration breath-hold). The most complex method of motion management is to move the
radiation field and/or patient dynamically to match the
respiratory motion.
The Novalis TxTM and TrueBeam STx systems can
deliver gated treatments using external IR markers
alone or using external IR markers in combination
with X-ray imaging. In the first method, the relationship between the IR marker positions and the
internal target is determined by the treatment planning
system. This method has the advantage of avoiding
the invasive implantation of internal fiducials. There
are some challenges with gating based on external
markers alone (see e.g., Li et al. 2007).There may be
differences in the patient’s breathing pattern between
simulation and treatment, and there may be variations
in the relationship between motion of the external

Fig. 7 Respiratory-gated delivery using the ExacTrac system
(a) and RPM system (b). Both systems track respiratory motion
using infrared markers on the patient’s surface. The ExacTrac
system defines the treatment portion of the cycle using a
reference level and gating window, while the RPM system uses
upper and lower thresholds. (photo of the RPM trace courtesy
of Varian Medical Systems)

markers and motion of the internal anatomy. Nevertheless, this technique has been successfully implemented and is currently in clinical use.
The second approach uses both the external IR
markers and X-ray imaging. Optical tracking of the IR
markers is used to position the patient initially and to
measure the breathing pattern. Based on this pattern, a
trigger point set for X-ray acquisition and a window is
selected for radiation delivery. The patient’s position
can then be adjusted based on ExacTrac X-ray images
taken at the trigger point, and OBI fluoroscopy can be
used to verify the target position. Gating of the beam
then proceeds based on the motion of the IR markers. In
this way, the relationship between the external and
internal markers is established at the time of treatment.
With ExacTrac, X-ray images can be taken at any time
during the treatment to verify the position of the target
in the gating window. This approach requires that the
target position can be visualized on X-rays. For most
patients, this will require the implantation of one or
more fiducial markers.

62

Regardless of which approach is used, the respiratory
motion of the patient is measured by optical tracking of
the IR markers using either the Brainlab ExacTrac system or the Varian Real-time Position ManagementTM
(RPM) system. The breathing trace is displayed and the
treatment window is set by the therapist under the
guidance of the physicist and physician. Figure 7 shows
the displays for gating with the ExacTrac system and for
gating with the RPM system. The ExacTrac system
defines the treatment portion of the respiratory cycle
using a reference level and gating window, while the
RPM system uses upper and lower thresholds.
A variety of phantom measurements have been
performed to evaluate the accuracy of gated delivery.
The accuracy of tracking by the ExacTrac and RPM
systems was tested by Chang et al. (2011) using both
artificial and patient motion patterns. With motion
amplitude of 28 mm, they found average discrepancies
between the measured positions and the planned positions of 1.5–1.9 mm for ExacTrac and 1.1–1.7 mm for
RPM. However, they did not quantify the accuracy of
the motion platform itself, so these values are upper
limits. Willoughby et al. used a spherical tungsten
target on a custom moving phantom (Willoughby et al.
2006). With a motion amplitude of 2.0 cm in the
anterior/posterior direction and 2.0 cm in the superior/
inferior direction and a 20% gating window, they
measured a 3D localization accuracy of 1.7 mm. They
also found that there was no significant difference in
dose between gated delivery and non-gated delivery
over a wide range of dose-rates and gating levels.
Wurm et al. used a computer-controlled phantom to
simulate breathing motion (Wurm et al. 2006). With a
10% beam-on window, the accuracy of the system was
within 1 mm and there was no difference in the 80–20%
penumbra. More recently, Matney et al. used a commercial respiratory motion phantom and a brass coil to
measure the localization accuracy of both the ExacTrac
gated delivery and the 4D CT acquisition (Matney et al.
2011). Localization errors for the 4D CT were less than
1.5 mm for end inhale/exhale phases, but up to 3.5 mm
for mid-respiratory phases. On the other hand, the ExacTrac accurately localized the coil over all respiratory
phases with a maximum localization error of 0.8 mm.
For patient treatments, there are concerns about the
possible complications of marker implantation, the
possible migration of markers, and the accuracy of
delivery. Willoughby et al. treated 11 patients with

I. I. Rosen and R. Pino

upper lobe lung lesions implanted with Visicoil
markers (Willoughby et al. 2006). A repeat CT during
the fourth week of treatment showed generally little
marker migration. The average 3D change in position
relative to the center of the GTV was 2.5 ± 1.5 mm,
with the largest being 5.4 mm, but they attributed the
changes primarily to tumor shrinkage rather than
migration. In their patients, the markers were inserted
using a transcutaneous approach that resulted in a
30% pneumothorax rate, all of which eventually
resolved. Wurm et al. treated three lung and three
liver patients with gated delivery for 8–11 fractions
(Wurm et al. 2006). They compared the setup position
for gated delivery based on X-rays of the implanted
fiducials to the setup position that would have been
used with IR setup and free breathing. They found
differences of up to 30 mm, suggestive of the
improvement possible with gated delivery. The differences between expected marker position and
measured marker position during gating averaged no
more than 4 mm. None of their lung patients developed pneumothorax and they found minimal, if any,
marker migration four weeks after treatment.

8

Treatment Planning

In order to minimize treatment toxicity, SBRT treatments are delivered with many beams or arcs that
distribute the normal tissue dose over as a large a
volume as possible. Non-coplanar beams are used
when practical, but except for head and neck sites,
access to the body from non-transaxial angles is usually
quite limited. Where sharp gradients are needed, such
as in spinal and paraspinal targets, IMRT is needed. The
accuracy requirements for doses with small fields and
for doses in the lung are greater for SBRT than for
conventional treatments. Treatment planning software
for the Novalis TxTM and TrueBeam STx systems must
also properly model FFF beams and support imageguided setup. iPlan from Brainlab has a pencil beam
model for fast calculation and a Monte Carlo model for
cases where greater accuracy is required. It exports
images to ExacTrac for image-guided setup. Eclipse
from Varian has an analytical anisotropic algorithm
(AAA) for fast calculation and a linear Boltzmann
transport model (AcurosÒ XB) for greater accuracy. It
exports images to the OBI for image-guidance.

Novalis and Varian Systems

Both the 6-MV and 10-MV FFF beams have been
modeled in the eclipse treatment planning system.
Hrbacek et al. modeled the beams using the AAA
calculation (Hrbacek et al. 2011). They found generally good agreement, with most comparison points
meeting a 1%/1 mm gamma criterion and all meeting
a 2%/2 mm criterion. Depth doses and the infield
regions of the profiles were modeled well, but calculated penumbras were on average 0.7 mm wider
than measured. For FFF beams, the AAA uses only a
single source model because the extra-focal radiation
originating in the flattening filter is missing. However,
multisource modeling of FFF beams suggests that the
extra-focal radiation in FFF beams is not significantly
reduced (Cho et al. 2011).
The routine use of inhomogeneity corrections for
patient dose calculations has been recommended since
2004, and modern calculation algorithms that incorporate
3D scatter are sufficiently accurate for almost all situations (Papanikolaou et al. 2004). For tumors in the lung,
however, the loss of lateral electron equilibrium at the
tissue-air interfaces poses a challenge for all approximation methods. This is particularly important for the
small tumors and small field sizes encountered in SBRT.
Loss of lateral electron equilibrium at the interfaces will
affect the dose at the surface of the tumor and can affect
the central dose. Nevertheless, the incorporation of heterogeneity corrections most often improves the accuracy
of dose calculation. The primary exception is that 1D
path-length based heterogeneity corrections overestimate the dose at tumor-lung boundaries to such an extent
that they are contraindicated (Papanikolaou et al. 2004).
Monte Carlo dose calculations are ideal for treatment
planning of lesions in the lung, especially when they are
entirely surrounded by low-density lung tissue. The
Monte Carlo dose engine in iPlan is based on the XVMC
code of Fippel 1999. In 2003, Fippel et al. developed a
new Monte Carlo model of the linear accelerator head
that can be easily commissioned and implemented
(Fippel et al. 2003). It uses measurement-driven photon
and electron source models, and includes modeling of
the collimator jaws and MLC. The original XVMC code
was 15–20 times faster than traditional EGS4 code and
calculated a ‘‘standard’’ treatment plan in about 20 min
on a ‘‘normal’’ personal computer. More recently, iPlan
computation times of 5–20 min have been reported
(Fragoso et al. 2010; Petoukhova et al. 2010).

63

iPlan Monte Carlo dose calculations have been
experimentally verified with film and ion chamber
measurements. For a 6-MV beam, the difference between
calculated and measured doses in a water phantom was
found to be within 2%/1 mm by Fragoso et al. (2010) and
within 1%/1 mm by Petoukhova et al. (2010). In homogeneous phantoms the difference was within 3%/1 mm,
and in heterogeneous slab geometries, the agreement was
within 4%/2 mm. In anthropomorphic phantoms containing lung, bone, and air cavities, Petoukhova et al.
found that the Monte Carlo calculations were within 5%
of measured values for small fields and within 3% for air
cavities (Petoukhova et al. 2010).
The newer Acuros model in Eclipse was tested
against measurements and AAA calculations by Fogliata
et al. for simple geometries in water (Fogliata et al.
2011b). They modeled flattened beams of 6 and 15 MV,
including wedges, and both FFF beams. They found that
Acuros was generally accurate to 1% for open beams and
to 2% for mechanical wedges. In subsequent calculations, Acuros was tested against a Monte Carlo code for
accuracy in two virtual phantoms containing heterogeneous media (Fogliata et al. 2011a). Using a 3%/3 mm
gamma criterion, Acuros agreement with the Monte
Carlo calculation was 100%, 86%, and 100% for doses in
normal lung, light lung, and bone, respectively.
How to best use the Monte Carlo calculation clinically remains an open question. Fragoso et al. applied the
Monte Carlo dose calculation to patient lung treatment
plans calculated with a pencil beam algorithm (Fragoso
et al. 2010). As expected, they found significant dose
reduction at the edges of the tumor at the tumor–lung
interface. This effect produces substantial dose heterogeneity in the tumor, which is not altered by simply
scaling the dose at isocenter to improve coverage.
Widder et al. studied lung treatments delivered with a
conformal arc technique and calculated using Monte
Carlo (Widder et al. 2010). They recommended
increasing the isocenter dose such that the prescription
isodose line is considerably less than 80% on the basis
that it results in lower dose to surrounding tissues. Such a
prescription reflects the dose heterogeneity in the target
that actually exists, but is not seen with less accurate
dose calculations. It is not clear if the inherent dose
heterogeneity in such lung targets caused by disequilibrium effects can be mitigated by IMRT optimization
based on more accurate Monte Carlo doses.

64

9

I. I. Rosen and R. Pino

Summary

The high dose per fraction delivered in SBRT treatments requires high accuracy in the delivery system, in
the positioning of the patient, and in the calculation of
dose. Both the Novalis TxTM and TrueBeam STx have
suitable mechanical accuracy, precision, and stability.
They have multiple imaging systems for positioning
the patient and monitoring motion, the capability for
respiratory-gated treatment delivery, and treatment
planning systems with advanced dose calculations.
Measurements with phantoms and patients have demonstrated a positioning accuracy of the order of 1 mm.
The wide ranging capabilities of these systems and the
need for high accuracy make the clinical implementation of these systems complex and labor intensive.
They require the implementation of a comprehensive
QA program, training for personnel, and most likely the
development of new clinical processes and procedures.
Task Group 101 of the American Association of
Physicists in Medicine published an excellent, comprehensive overview of SBRT in 2010,and the reader is
referred to that report for information about implementation of an SBRT program (Benedict et al. 2010).

References
Agazaryan N, Tenn SE, Desalles AA, Selch MT (2008) Imageguided radiosurgery for spinal tumors: methods, accuracy and
patient intrafraction motion. Phys Med Biol 53:1715–1727
Benedict SH, Yenice KM, JM, Hinson W, Kavanagh B et al
(2010) Stereotactic body radiation therapy: the report of
AAPM Task Group 101. Med Phys 37:4078–4101
Chang Z, Wang Z, Wu QJ, Yan H, Bowsher J, Zhang J et al (2008)
Dosimetric characteristics of Novalis Tx system with high
definition multileaf collimator. Med Phys 35:4460–4463
Chang Z, Liu T, Cai J, Chen Q, Wang Z, Yin FF (2011)
Evaluation of integrated respiratory gating systems on a
Novalis Tx system. J Appl Clin Med Phys 12:71–79
Cho W, Kielar KN, Mok E, Xing L, Park JH, Jung WG et al
(2011) Multisource modeling of flattening filter free (FFF)
beam and the optimization of model parameters. Med Phys
38:1931–1942
Du W, Yang JN, Chang EL, Luo D, McAleer MF, Shiu A et al
(2010) A quality assurance procedure to evaluate cone-beam
CT image center congruence with the radiation isocenter of a
linear accelerator. J Appl Clin Med Phys 11:15–26
Fippel M (1999) Fast Monte Carlo dose calculation for photon beams
based on the VMC electron algorithm. Med Phys 26:1466–1475

Fippel M, Haryanto F, Dohm O, Nusslin F, Kriesen S (2003) A
virtual photon energy fluence model for Monte Carlo dose
calculation. Med Phys 30:301–311
Fogliata A, Nicolini G, Clivio A, Vanetti E, Cozzi L (2011a)
Dosimetric evaluation of Acuros XB advanced dose calculation algorithm in heterogeneous media. Radiat Oncol 6:82
Fogliata A, Nicolini G, Clivio A, Vanetti E, Mancosu P, Cozzi L
(2011b) Dosimetric validation of the Acuros XB advanced
dose calculation algorithm: fundamental characterization in
water. Phys Med Biol 56:1879–1904
Fragoso M, Wen N, Kumar S, Liu D, Ryu S, Movsas B et al
(2010) Dosimetric verification and clinical evaluation of a
new commercially available Monte Carlo-based dose algorithm for application in stereotactic body radiation therapy
(SBRT) treatment planning. Phys Med Biol 55:4445–4464
Gevaert T, Verellen D, Engels B, Depuydt T, Heuninckx K,
Tournel K et al (2011) Clinical evaluation of a robotic
6-degree of freedom treatment couch for frameless radiosurgery. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 83:467–474
Graf R, Boehmer D, Budach V, Wust P (2010) Residual
translational and rotational errors after kV X-ray imageguided correction of prostate location using implanted
fiducials. Strahlenther Onkol 186:544–550
Hayashi N, Obata Y, Uchiyama Y, Mori Y, Hashizume C,
Kobayashi T (2009) Assessment of spatial uncertainties in
the radiotherapy process with the Novalis system. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 75:549–557
Hrbacek J, Lang S, Klock S (2011) Commissioning of photon
beams of a flattening filter-free linear accelerator and the
accuracy of beam modeling using an anisotropic analytical
algorithm. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 80:1228–1237
Huang L, Park K, Boike T, Lee P, Papiez L, Solberg T et al
(2010) A study on the dosimetric accuracy of treatment
planning for stereotactic body radiation therapy of lung
cancer using average and maximum intensity projection
images. Radiother Oncol 96:48–54
Jin JY, Yin FF, Tenn SE, Medin PM, Solberg TD (2008) Use of
the BrainLAB ExacTrac x-ray 6D system in image-guided
radiotherapy. Med Dosim 33:124–134
Kim J, Jin JY, Walls N, Nurushev T, Movsas B, Chetty IJ et al
(2011) Image-guided localization accuracy of stereoscopic
planar and volumetric imaging methods for stereotactic
radiation surgery and stereotactic body radiation therapy: a
phantom study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 79:1588–1596
Kim S, Yoo S, Yin FF, Samei E, Yoshizumi T (2010)
Kilovoltage cone-beam CT: comparative dose and image
quality evaluations in partial and full-angle scan protocols.
Med Phys 37:3648–3659
Kriminski SA, Lovelock DM, Seshan VE, Ali I, Munro P, Amols
HI et al (2008) Comparison of kilovoltage cone-beam
computed tomography with megavoltage projection pairs
for paraspinal radiosurgery patient alignment and position
verification. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 71:1572–1580
Lamba M, Breneman JC, Warnick RE (2009) Evaluation of
image-guided positioning for frameless intracranial radiosurgery. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 74:913–919
Li XA, Keall PJ, Orton CG (2007) Point/counterpoint. Respiratory
gating for radiation therapy is not ready for prime time. Med
Phys 34:867–870

Novalis and Varian Systems
Ma J, Chang Z, Wang Z, Jackie WuQ, Kirkpatrick JP, Yin FF (2009)
ExacTrac X-ray 6 degree-of-freedom image-guidance for
intracranial non-invasive stereotactic radiotherapy: comparison
with kilo-voltage cone-beam CT. Radiother Oncol 93:602–608
Mancosu P, Castiglioni S, Reggiori G, Catalano M, Alongi F,
Pellegrini C et al (2012) Stereotactic body radiation therapy
for liver tumours using flattening filter free beam: dosimetric and technical considerations. Radiat Oncol 7:16
Mao W, Speiser M, Medin P, Papiez L, Solberg T, Xing L
(2011) Initial application of a geometric QA tool for
integrated MV and kV imaging systems on three image
guided radiotherapy systems. Med Phys 38:2335–2341
Matney JE, Parker BC, Neck DW, Henkelmann G, Rosen II
(2011) Target localization accuracy in a respiratory
phantom using BrainLab ExacTrac and 4DCT imaging.
J Appl Clin Med Phys 12:301–309
Moore CJ, Amer A, Marchant T, Sykes JR, Davies J, Stratford J et al
(2006) Developments in and experience of kilovoltage X-ray
cone beam image-guided radiotherapy. Br J Radiol 79:S66–S78
Njeh CF, Raines TW, Saunders MW (2009) Determination of
the photon beam attenuation by the BrainLAB imaging
couch: angular and field size dependence. J Appl Clin Med
Phys 10:16–27
Papanikolaou N, Battista J, Boyer A, Kappas C, Klein E,
Mackie T et al (2004). AAPM Report No. 85: tissue
inhomogeneity corrections for megavoltage photon beams.
American Association of Physicists
Petoukhova AL, van Wingerden K, Wiggenraad RG, van de
Vaart PJ, van Egmond J, Franken EM et al (2010)
Verification measurements and clinical evaluation of the
iPlan RT Monte Carlo dose algorithm for 6 MV photon
energy. Phys Med Biol 55:4601–4614
Ramakrishna N, Rosca F, Friesen S, Tezcanli E, Zygmanszki P,
Hacker F (2010) A clinical comparison of patient setup and
intra-fraction motion using frame-based radiosurgery versus
a frameless image-guided radiosurgery system for intracranial lesions. Radiother Oncol 95:109–115
Schreibmann E, Fox T, Crocker I (2011) Dosimetric effects of
manual cone-beam CT (CBCT) matching for spinal radiosurgery: our experience. J Appl Clin Med Phys 12:132–141
Sharma DS, Dongre PM, Mhatre V, Heigrujam M (2011)
Physical and dosimetric characteristic of high-definition
multileaf collimator (HDMLC) for SRS and IMRT. J Appl
Clin Med Phys 12:142–160
Soete G, Van de Steene J, Verellen D, Vinh-Hung V, Van den
Berge D, Michielsen D et al (2002a) Initial clinical experience
with infrared-reflecting skin markers in the positioning of
patients treated by conformal radiotherapy for prostate
cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 52:694–698
Soete G, Verellen D, Michielsen D, Vinh-Hung V, Van de Steene J,
Van den Berge D et al (2002b) Clinical use of stereoscopic X-ray
positioning of patients treated with conformal radiotherapy for
prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 54:948–952

65
Solberg TD, Balter JM, Benedict SH, Fraass BA, Kavanagh B,
Miyamoto C et al (2012) Quality and safety considerations in
stereotactic radiosurgery and stereotactic body radiation therapy: executive summary. Practical Radiation Oncology 2:2–9
Solberg TD, Medin PM, Mullins J, Li S (2008) Quality
assurance of immobilization and target localization systems
for frameless stereotactic cranial and extracranial hypofractionated radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
71:S131–S135
Takakura T, Mizowaki T, Nakata M, Yano S, Fujimoto T,
Miyabe Y et al (2010) The geometric accuracy of frameless
stereotactic radiosurgery using a 6D robotic couch system.
Phys Med Biol 55:1–10
Tanyi JA, Summers PA, McCracken CL, Chen Y, Ku LC, Fuss
M (2009) Implications of a high-definition multileaf collimator (HD-MLC) on treatment planning techniques for
stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT): a planning
study. Radiat Oncol 4:22
Vassiliev ON, Kry SF, Chang JY, Balter PA, Titt U, Mohan R
(2009) Stereotactic radiotherapy for lung cancer using a
flattening filter free Clinac. J Appl Clin Med Phys 10:2880
Verellen D, Soete G, Linthout N, Van Acker S, De Roover P,
Vinh-Hung V et al (2003) Quality assurance of a system for
improved target localization and patient set-up that combines real-time infrared tracking and stereoscopic X-ray
imaging. Radiother Oncol 67:129–141
Wang L, Kielar KN, Mok E, Hsu A, Dieterich S, Xing L (2012)
An end-to-end examination of geometric accuracy of IGRT
using a new digital accelerator equipped with onboard
imaging system. Phys Med Biol 57:757–769
Widder J, Hollander M, Ubbels JF, Bolt RA, Langendijk JA
(2010) Optimizing dose prescription in stereotactic body
radiotherapy for lung tumours using Monte Carlo dose
calculation. Radiother Oncol 94:42–46
Willoughby TR, Forbes AR, Buchholz D, Langen KM, Wagner
TH, Zeidan OA et al (2006) Evaluation of an infrared
camera and X-ray system using implanted fiducials in
patients with lung tumors for gated radiation therapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 66:568–575
Wu QJ, Wang Z, Kirkpatrick JP, Chang Z, Meyer JJ, Lu M et al
(2009) Impact of collimator leaf width and treatment
technique on stereotactic radiosurgery and radiotherapy
plans for intra- and extracranial lesions. Radiat Oncol 4:3
Wurm RE, Gum F, Erbel S, Schlenger L, Scheffler D, Agaoglu D
et al (2006) Image guided respiratory gated hypofractionated
stereotactic body radiation therapy (H-SBRT) for liver and
lung tumors: initial experience. Acta Oncol 45:881–889
Yan H, Yin FF, Kim JH (2003) A phantom study on the
positioning accuracy of the Novalis body system. Med Phys
30:3052–3060
Yin FF, Ryu S, Ajlouni M, Zhu J, Yan H, Guan H et al (2002)
A technique of intensity-modulated radiosurgery (IMRS)
for spinal tumors. Med Phys 29:2815–2822

Helical TomoTherapy System
Whitney Warren, Walter H. Grant III, and Bin S. Teh

Contents

Abstract

Introduction..............................................................

67

Tomotherapy Treatment Planning
and Delivery .............................................................
2.1 Basics of Treatment Planning and Delivery ............
2.2 SBRT Treatment Planning and Delivery..................

68
68
69

1

Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) treatments are characterized by high dose conformality
to the target with steep dose gradients, so even slight
patient misalignment from patient simulation to
treatment could lead to a geographical miss resulting
in underdosing of the target or overdosing of organs
at risk (OARs). The role of the numerous imaging
modalities available for SBRT treatments is crucial
for precise delivery of radiation treatments. Furthermore, many treatment delivery techniques are
available and may prove advantageous for sitespecific SBRT treatments. In recent years, image
guidance has matured sufficiently to allow acquisition of volumetric image data sets by treatment
machines with the patient in the treatment position
and then use registration techniques to automatically or manually align and shift the patient to the
planned treatment position. This chapter discusses
the use of the Tomotherapy Hi-ArtÒ machine, which
delivers Helical Tomotherapy Intensity Modulated
Radiation Therapy (IMRT) and uses built-in megavoltage computerized tomography (MVCT) for
Image-Guided Radiation Therapy (IGRT).

2

3
Tomotherapy’s Helical Megavoltage CT ..............
3.1 Fundamentals of Tomotherapy’s
Megavoltage CT ........................................................
3.2 Overview of Tomotherapy Imaging .........................
3.3 Tomotherapy Registration .........................................
3.4 Assessment of Image-Guided Patient
Setup in SBRT...........................................................
4

69
69
70
70
72

Clinical Examples of the Use of Megavoltage CT
Images for SBRT Treatments ................................

75

5

Future Improvements
in Tomotherapy Delivery........................................

76

6

Summary...................................................................

76

References..........................................................................

77

W. Warren
Department of Radiation Oncology,
The Methodist Hospital,
Houston, TX 77070, USA
W. H. Grant III (&)
Department of Radiology,
Baylor College of Medicine, BCM 360,
Houston, TX 77030, USA
e-mail: wgrant@bcm.edu
B. S. Teh
Department of Radiation Oncology,
The Methodist Hospital, Cancer Center
and Research Institute, Houston TX77030, USA

1

Introduction

Technological advancements in imaging as well as
planning and delivery of radiation treatments have
made the ability to deliver hypofractionated high dose
radiation therapy a reality. Stereotactic body radiation
therapy (SBRT) refers to the delivery of a limited
number, defined as five fractions or less in the US but

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2012_705, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

67

68

may extend to 10–12 fractions outside of the US, of
high dose fractions with high conformality and hence
steep dose gradients, as well as a high positional
accuracy. As such, the combination of intensity
modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) and image-guided radiation therapy (IGRT) have made possible
the advent of SBRT on several radiation therapy
machines. IMRT was a significant technological
advancement for the field of radiation oncology,
because it enabled radiation therapy delivery with
extremely conformal dose distributions while also
sparing adjacent normal tissues and organs at
risk (OARs). However, it has quickly been realized
that conformal dose distributions, and thus tighter
planning treatment volume (PTV) margins, would
enhance the probability of the high dose region
missing the target. This is confounded by the fact that
many treatment sites move due to anatomic motion or
patient setup variability. IGRT offers automated
patient positioning and the ability to visualize targets
as well as OARs on a daily basis, thereby enabling
even more precise radiation deposition. Thus, this
development allows for a reduction of target margins
used to account for setup variability and interfraction
patient changes, enabling one to treat less normal
tissue. Additionally, stereotactic targeting, including
the use of strict immobilization devices, can further
reduce potential setup and motion error.
The Tomotherapy Hi-ArtÒ machine has introduced
the first practical clinical implementation of a system
that has combined a volumetric IGRT system with an
IMRT delivery system. It comprises of a linear
accelerator waveguide that rotates in a gantry around
the patient as the couch translates through the gantry
bore during treatment, analogs to a computerized
tomography (CT) unit. The system offers treatment
field sizes based on jaws that are 40 cm wide, with
Slice Width choices of 1.0, 2.5, or 5.0 cm to optimize
patient treatment. It is also equipped with a binary
multileaf collimator (MLC) used to create intensitymodulated radiation fields at a source-axis distance of
85 cm. Helical tomotherapy is a dynamic system
requiring synchrony of gantry rotation, couch translation, linear accelerator pulsing, and opening and
closing of the binary MLC leaves that treat targets
sequentially by modulating the beam intensity in each
‘‘slice’’ of the patient. One can acquire a megavoltage
CT (MVCT) immediately prior to treatment. This is
automatically registered with the treatment planning

W. Warren et al.

CT image, allowing the user to make rotational and
translational adjustments so the machine can make
these adjustments prior to treatment. The combination
of MVCT image guidance with IMRT’s improved
dose conformation capability improves the potential
for reducing normal tissue complications from high
dose procedures, thus making the Tomotherapy unit
well suited to deliver SBRT treatments.
In this chapter, further detail regarding the physical
parameters of Tomotherapy will be discussed. Planning is discussed but emphasis will be on the IGRT
aspects that make it a system capable of performing
SBRT treatments with similar accuracy as other
SBRT capable machines. The chapter will conclude
with several SBRT examples and their respective
MVCT images.

2

Tomotherapy Treatment Planning
and Delivery

2.1

Basics of Treatment Planning
and Delivery

The Tomotherapy machine has been in clinical use for
nearly 10 years without major changes to its capabilities. The machine has been described in detail by
numerous authors, so only salient features will be
discussed here. For more complete details, the reader
is directed to the initial articles by Mackie (Mackie
et al. 1993, 1999) and to AAPM Task Group Report
148 (Langen et al. 2010) which describes the machine
in complete detail and specifies the necessary quality
assurance programs for its safe use.
Basically, the Tomotherapy machine is a helical CT
unit with a mega-voltage (MV) linear accelerator
(6 MV) instead of a kilovoltage (kV) X-ray tube as a
source of radiation. It contains a third generation CT
detector consisting of 738 individual detector cells and
is filled with xenon gas pressurized to 25 atm. The
primary beam intercepts only 640 of these detectors and
each detector projects to a 1 mm width at isocenter.
The Tomotherapy machine produces the intensitymodulated fields using a binary, multileaf collimator
that has 64 leaves that are 0.625 cm wide, resulting in
a 40 cm wide field. The machine was designed
without a flattening filter and can achieve dose rates
of approximately 850 cGy/min at isocenter, adequate
for SBRT treatments. Because a leaf can change

Helical TomoTherapy System

binary state in 20 ms, the machine can produce
complex modulation in spite of the shape of an unflattened field.
Since the Tomotherapy machine operates as a
helical scanner, there are no longer concerns about
traditional parameters as gantry angle, field size,
collimator angle, etc. Instead, one considers Slice
Width, Pitch (the distance the couch travels/per revolution), and Modulation. For planning purposes, the
delivery is considered to be 51 equally spaced fixed
fields (projections) and modulation of each leaf is
considered to be the amount of time a leaf is open or
closed in the arc sector about each field. If a leaf is
open the entire sector, it is considered to be 100 %
modulation. If it is open for only half of the sector, it
is considered to be 50 % modulation. For planning
purposes, one selects a nominal 1.0, 2.5, or 5.0 cm
Slice Width. One then selects a Pitch that is normally
a value less than one, resulting in every point within
the treatment region being seen in multiple revolutions. This is known as ‘‘oversampling’’ in diagnostic
scanning and allows the creation of highly conformal
plans as well as plans that deliver in excess of the
nominal 8.5 Gy. The last planning parameter is the
modulation factor that controls the amount of modulation in the plan and is defined as the maximum time
any leaf is open divided by the average opening of all
leaves. It can range in value from 1.0 (a dynamic
conformal arc) to 10. For conventional planning, the
value is normally 2–3.
As with all inverse-planning systems, it is possible
for the planner to assign weights to the various targets
and normal structures in order for the optimizer to
achieve the desired dosing results.

2.2

SBRT Treatment Planning
and Delivery

There are additional considerations when SBRT cases
are planned. A major disadvantage with the Tomotherapy delivery system is that it acts just as a helical
scanner, meaning that it has ‘‘ramp up’’ and ‘‘ramp
down’’ characteristics at the beginning and end of
treatment. The machine will begin to deliver the
treatment beam as soon as any ray projection from
the physical target between the primary jaws sees the
region to be treated and will continue to treat as long
as any ray projection sees treatment region. This

69

results in unwanted dose superiorly and inferiorly to
the treatment volume. Fortunately, most SBRT target
volumes are small and using the 1.0 cm Slice Width
can minimize this effect. For the 2.5 cm Slice Width,
we employ ‘‘Cap Structures’’ directly above and
below the target volume to help compress the dose in
these regions toward the target volume.
The use of the 1.0 cm Slice Width creates problems with achieving high dose/fraction deliveries.
This Slice Width reduces the output of the machine by
a factor of approximately 0.75, meaning the nominal
dose rate of 850 cGy/min is now near 640 cGy/min.
To compensate for this, one must reduce the Pitch to a
small value, i.e. 0.25, which increases the treatment
time. To reduce the treatment time, one can lower the
Modulation Factor to a value near 1.2 or even lower if
there are no nearby OARs. In clinical practice, we
have been able to achieve a dose of 12 Gy/fx in a
single pass for centrally located lung tumors with
delivery times of 10–12 min.

3

Tomotherapy’s Helical
Megavoltage CT

3.1

Fundamentals of Tomotherapy’s
Megavoltage CT

The machine is magnetron powered and operates at
6 MeV for treatments and is ‘‘detuned’’ to 3.5 MeV
along with decreasing the pulse repetition frequency
for imaging purposes (Welsh et al. 2002; Meeks et al.
2005). At this megavoltage (MV) energy, the predominant mode of interaction with matter is Compton
scattering, which is independent of atomic number Z,
and rather depends on mass density. This differs from
kV imaging, where the photoelectric effect is the
predominant mode of interaction. Thus, the probability of an interaction depends strongly on the atomic
number of the matter, i.e. Z3. Therefore, MV images
exhibit a loss of contrast in that they have less ability
to differentiate small changes in Z as compared to
kV generated images. However, it also eliminates
susceptibility to high Z streaking artifacts often
encountered in kV images, for example with tooth
fillings and hip prostheses.
Since 2004, the process for creating the megavoltage
CT images, often referred to as TomoImages, is to use a
Rotation Period of 10 s (6 revolutions/min), set a 4 mm

70

W. Warren et al.

Slice Width, and allow the user to select a Pitch of 1, 2,
or 3 for a Fine, Normal, or Coarse image, respectively.
The choice of Pitch determines the couch velocity
(4, 8, or 12 mm/s) and the axial image reconstruction
spacing (2, 4, or 6 mm). There are reports of measured
doses for TomoImages (Shah et al. 2008; Xu et al.
2009), but for a simple rule of thumb, one can estimate
the dose delivered when performing a MVCT to be the
reverse of the possible Pitch choices, i.e. 3, 2, and 1 cGy.
(The company specification for dose from a TomoImage
is \4 cGy). Unlike volumetric images generated with
kilovoltage X-rays, these doses are uniform throughout
the patient’s body.
Recently, tomotherapy changed the Slice Width
for TomoImages from 4 to 1 mm. Energy, Rotation
Period, and Pitch were not changed, but the accelerator output was increased to maintain the same dose
to the patient for each Pitch. Measurements made by
the manufacturer indicate that the smaller Slice Width
results in a 38 % reduction in the Full Width at Half
Maximum (FWHM) of the beam profile for the Fine
scan as well as an almost doubling of contrast. For
either the Normal or Coarse selection, the improvements were only minor. This change will only affect
the longitudinal resolution of a TomoImage; this is
demonstrated in Figure 1 with coronal reconstructions
of scans of a ‘‘bb’’ with a 1.5 mm diameter. The
implication for SBRT has improved positioning in the
longitudinal direction by using the fine selection when
imaging the patient.

3.2

Overview of Tomotherapy Imaging

When preparing to perform a scan, the operator can
select the number of slices, or length of the patient’s
anatomy, to be imaged under the Scan tab at the
operator’s console. The imaging procedure takes 10 s
per slice to acquire and then reconstruct. Therefore,
a scan 10 cm in length takes approximately 250 s
(*4 min), 125 s (*2 min), and 83 s (*1 min) for
Pitch values of 1, 2, or 3, respectively. The choice of
Pitch and Slice Width are determined by the treatment
intention as well as the expansion margins (International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements 1999) created in treatment planning. When
performing SBRT treatments, one does not encounter
the same concerns with imaging dose versus possible
improved accuracy due to image quality as for

conventionally fractionated treatments. Rather, one is
concerned with attaining the best image quality so as
to ensure the most precise positioning for the few
fractions delivered.
One should realize that the MVCT scan has much
longer acquisition time scan as compared to modern
spiral CT-simulators. Therefore, it provides motion
visualization to assess the PTV in relation to the target
as well as ensuring that normal tissue structures do
not encompass the treated volume. Because respiratory gating or tumor tracking systems are not currently compatible with tomotherapy systems, a slow
MVCT scan is advantageous for SBRT treatments
where the target volume can possibly move during
respiration of other internal anatomy movements,
including SBRT treatments in the lung or liver.

3.3

Tomotherapy Registration

The registration tab on the Operator’s Console automatically registers the localization pretreatment
MVCT images with the planning kV CT simulation
images with the option of registering based on bony
and/or soft tissue anatomy (Holmes et al. 2008). The
algorithm used in Tomotherapy at this time is a rigidbody adjustment that will only provide translational,
rotational, pitch, and yaw calculations. Deformable
co-registration remains in a development stage but it
is not yet available (Xu et al. 2009). The registration
process allows the user to define structures for coregistration including the Whole Image (Mutual
Information with no thresholding), Bone and Tissue
Technique (pixel threshold [0.3 g/cm3), or a Bone
Technique (pixel threshold [1.1 g/cm3) as the focus
for registration. In addition, if the entire body is not
covered in the MVCT, there is an opportunity to use a
tool for improvement of the registration (Ruchala
et al. 2002).
The presence of any imaging error is due to misalignment of the imaging volume relative to the
machine isocenter. Because the Tomotherapy imaging
and treatment volumes are the same, this type of error
is predominately dependent on the CT voxel size.
Consequently, a study using anthropomorphic phantom images was performed to assess the error in the
imaging and fusion process. The Tomotherapy image
guidance software yielded total imaging system errors
of 0.6, 0.5, and 0.6 mm with the automatic image

Helical TomoTherapy System

fusion algorithm options set to Bone, Bone and Soft
Tissue, and Whole Image, respectively. The uncertainty in the superior-inferior direction (0.6 mm) was
twice the uncertainty in the AP and lateral directions
(0.3 mm) (Mahan et al. 2005). The larger uncertainty
in the superior-inferior direction can be attributed to
the minimum superior-inferior image resolution due
to slice thickness. Now with the machine capability to
produce ‘‘thin slice’’ MVCTs, improved localization
accuracy in the superior-inferior dimension can be
expected with the improved longitudinal resolution. It
is important to keep in mind that this study involved
phantoms, so total clinical error, which one hopes to
keep very minimal especially for SBRT treatments,
can be affected by patient immobilization and patient
intra-fraction motion.
On the registration tab, the operator can select the
resolution in which to perform the fusion. Choices
include: ‘Standard’, which down-samples the image
four times in the right-left and anterior-posterior
directions before fusing; ‘Fine’, which down-samples
twice in the same directions; and ‘Superfine’, in
which there is no down-sampling and all voxels are
used in the image fusion process (Soisson et al. 2010).
Experiments with a head phantom have shown that
setup accuracy in the Right/Left and Anterior/Posterior axes is within  of a voxel, or about 2 mm for
the coarsest selections (Boswell et al. 2006). The
registration is a statistical process using the mutual
information algorithm, so one needs to weigh the
benefit of additional time for the algorithm to sort
through more pixel information versus the accuracy
of the alignment for SBRT treatments.
The Superior/Inferior co-registration accuracy is
harder to define. For a Pitch = 1, it has been stated
that the voxel size is 2 mm (Jaffray 2007; Langen
et al. 2010). This is based on an 180° reconstruction,
and there is no documentation that this is what is
employed by the software. To maximize accuracy,
one should scan ample lengths of bone, especially in
regions where there are very distinct shapes. Again,
the recently modified ‘‘thin slice’’ MVCT setting will
provide an increased longitudinal resolution which
should further a user’s confidence in manually
assessing the automatic registration. This can greatly
enhance SBRT treatments on Tomotherapy, because
SBRT strives to decrease treatment margins while
still providing local tumor control and limiting normal
tissue toxicity. On the other hand, a study acquired

71

coarse (6 mm), normal (4 mm), and fine (2 mm) slices for thoracic cases, and their root-mean-square
calculations concluded that no specific combination
of resolution and fusion selection technique resulted
in a statistically significant lower residual error.
However, it was also determined that a scan length of
6 cm with any slice spacing registered with the full
image fusion selection technique and fine resolution
will result in the lowest residual error most of the
time, but this requires the greatest time to reconstruct.
Further, on average, large corrections to the automatic
registration values are infrequent. Small manual corrections made after the automatic registration process
were shown to be within their residual error averages,
but their impact on the average patient position is
small (Woodford et al. 2007).
It has been shown that Tomotherapy registers the
kV CT and MVCT scans with extremely acceptable
accuracy and similarity between the coarse and finest
scans (Mahan et al. 2005; Soisson et al. 2010; Zhou
et al. 2010). However, regarding SBRT cases, accuracy is of key importance. Therefore, some additional
time during scan acquisition as well as the increased
time to reconstruct in the finest resolution can prove
advantageous for such procedures where sub-millimeter accuracy is desired, as long as patient immobilization is not compromised.
A useful tool for Tomotherapy registration allows
the user to display the contours used in treatment
planning, including OARs and PTVs, as well as the
choice of isodose lines as calculated on the original
kV CT planning data set to be visualized. As a result,
they can be superimposed on the MVCT image taken
for the daily patient treatment. This enables the user
to confirm that the patient alignment provides adequate target coverage, while also ensuring no high
dose regions encompass critical structures or OARs
(Holmes et al. 2008). This is extremely useful for
SBRT treatments in which we are dealing with a
higher dose per fraction, and thus the accuracy of
each treatment is highly important for the effectiveness of the treatment. This is especially true for targets that are in close proximity to critical structures,
and thus one wants to be confident that the hypofractionated dose tolerance of such structures will be
delivered as planned.
One major limitation in the current version of the
registration software is the absence of user-defined
regions-of-interest (ROIs) in guiding the registration

72

W. Warren et al.

process. As the registration process is rigid, non-rigid
changes in the patient’s anatomy, including differences in flex between two consecutive scans in cases
such as head-and-neck patients, can pose problems in
the registration process that cannot be solved by
translating and/or rotating the entire patient. In some
cases, it would be useful to define ROIs to register the
patient’s anatomy, including the target and/or OARs.
Another useful tool could determine regions to either
emphasize (target region) or ignore (e.g. the mandible
or a shoulder) during the registration process. Such a
tool could allow one to avoid manually readjusting
the patient unless necessary in the region of treatment
for discrepancies caused by pitch or yaw due to
patient setup. Currently, this can be resolved by
manually readjusting the results of the auto-registration based on clinical considerations but one, for
safety reasons, needs to establish limits to the amount
of adjustment that can be made without intervention
by a physician or physicist (Grant III et al. 2012).

3.4

Assessment of Image-Guided Patient
Setup in SBRT

The megavoltage CT scan performed immediately
before treatment potentially allows for smaller PTV
expansions due to decreased setup uncertainty,
thereby permitting acceptance of a higher treatment
dose while sparing normal tissue and critical organs.
This gains considerable significance considering that
even small increase in the treatment dose in the case
of lung SBRT may result in a dramatic increase in
tumor control probability (Baisden et al. 2007).
As mentioned in the previous section, because we
are discussing SBRT treatments, precedence is given
to the accuracy of the treatment. This is unlike conventional treatments in that one has to weigh both the
benefits of image quality to the additional dose
received to verify patient setup during treatment.
Thus, the additional dose that a patient will receive
from a higher quality image in order to ensure the
most optimal treatment is considered a miniscule
effect compared to the necessity of sub-millimeter
accuracy when very few treatments with such a high
dose per fraction are delivered.
It is possible for the software to perform auto
registration of the MVCT to the kV CT using all six
degrees of freedom. However, the system can only

correct for four of them automatically, specifically the
translational axes and roll. Although errors in pitch
and yaw must be adjusted for manually, this capability is advantageous, because it provides insight if
the patient requires repositioning and reimaging,
which is necessary for successful radiation treatments,
and particularly crucial for SBRT cases. Errors in
pitch and yaw may occur because, while bones are
rigid, the human body is designed to articulate and the
relationship to boney landmarks and organs can shift
daily. Along this same line regarding the automatic
fusion process, it was determined that there was little
value in performing more than two automatic registrations because shifts converged to a single solution
after two (Soisson et al. 2010).
Another feature of the Tomotherapy imaging system is that the treatment and imaging beams come
from the same point, and the imaging detectors are
rigidly mounted in the gantry ring. The isocenter
specification of the ring gantry is 0.2 mm, with no
additional characterization of the source-detector
geometry required for routine image reconstruction.
This differs from conventional linear accelerators
utilizing kV CBCT images, where even with the
tighter isocenter specifications on these sophisticated
machines, the exact position of the source and
detectors during the gantry rotation/image acquisition
process must be characterized in the image reconstruction software model to minimize reconstruction
artifacts in images with pixel resolutions less than
1 mm (Holmes et al. 2008).
When assessing a system used to perform image
guidance, one must also consider image quality. A
study (Meeks et al. 2005) investigated the image
characteristics of the Tomotherapy system, including:
noise and uniformity, spatial resolution, contrast
properties, and multiple scan average doses. Their
results showed very uniform images with uniformity
index greater than 95 %, and no statistically significant differences as a function of an equivalent
reconstruction matrix or pitch. Typical noise standard
deviations were 2–4 %, which indicate that the
MVCT image noise characteristics are slightly worse
than for diagnostic CT. Low contrast resolution was
another imaging parameter examined. It determines
the ability to distinguish the difference in CT number
between an object and surrounding tissue, e.g.
between muscle and tissue, and thus is a clinically
important characteristic. The system shows low

Helical TomoTherapy System

73

Fig. 1 Longitudinal view of
fine MVCT images of a
1.5 mm bb using the old
4 mm Slice Width (left) and
the new 1 mm Slice Width
(right)

contrast detectability for electron densities on the
order of 8–10 % different than the surrounding
region; this percent difference resembles the contrast
difference between the prostate versus the rectum. In
our clinic, we treat many liver SBRT patients and
have found the image quality to be more than adequate to delineate the target from the normal liver.
Nevertheless, one should evolve into an imaging
schema for their clinic based on their testing and
confidence of the system.
Also mentioned in the previous section, it is necessary to scan an adequate patient length for the
MVCT scan so if pitch and yaw corrections are significant, which demonstrates an adjustment in patient
setup is necessary, realignment and reimaging of the
patient can be performed. The choice of appropriate
scan length is variable due to different users and
various treatment sites, but additional care must be
taken to ensure that an adequate scan length is chosen
to assess the patient setup according to the treatment
planning kV CT for SBRT cases. Inherently, these are
often smaller targets with little margin, thus posing
quite a challenge when in a region with few anatomic
landmarks to ensure that a major registration error did
not occur. An example of when such an issue might
arise is a target in the lung where the vertebral bodies
are not easily distinguishable. In such a case, we do a
coarse scan over a 7 cm length to ensure that we have
a minimum of two vertebral bodies. After that, a short
scan in the fine mode will verify the shifts made and
acquire a finer resolution for increased accuracy.
Conversely, for SBRT cases, where anatomical
landmarks or the tumor are easily distinguishable,
which is frequently the case, a scan length is chosen
with a physicist’s assistance and scanned in Fine
resolution. Others perform similar MVCT localization
imaging in their clinic for SRS/SBRT treatment
delivery segments. An example of such includes an
MVCT image for each treatment fraction covering a

length of 10 cm using Fine mode technique. The
imaging acquisition takes approximately 3–4 min and
their clinical experience has shown that aligning the
localization lasers to the marks on the patient’s skin
and immobilization system typically localizes an
intracranial target to within 5 mm and an extracranial
target in the thorax to within 1–2 mm of the final
position determined by the MVCT localization images (Holmes et al. 2008). Further, for cranial targets,
with one or multiple targets, some choose an imaging
protocol to include the top of the skull to a point just
superior of the frame. The frame is used for single
treatments and the thin slice mode for scanning is
used, which results in a scan time of about 12 min
(Soisson et al. 2010). Other recommendations for
lung SBRT (Hodge et al. 2006; Zhou et al. 2010) as
well as for spine and paraspinal lesions have been
published (Mahan et al. 2005). Again, one should
develop an imaging protocol based on their unique
clinical experience at their site.
The MVCT capability allows for precise image
guidance for interfraction motion assessment, but not
yet for intrafraction motion assessment. This is a
disadvantage compared to other systems that use
imaging to track position during treatment delivery,
especially for targets located in the cervical spine that
tend to be more deformable (Mahan et al. 2005;
Soisson et al. 2006). However, previous research
showed that the interplay between the multileaf collimator and tumor motion in IMRT is not likely to
cause any significant dosimetric consequences (Bortfeld et al. 2002, 2004). A more recent study using
motion phantoms also showed that helical tomotherapy is not particularly affected by tumor motion
(Kanagaki et al. 2007). With motion margin comparable to the conventional radiotherapy included in
PTV, tumor dose coverage is adequate without
increased inhomogeneity, even when hypofractionation is used (Baisden et al. 2007). On the other hand,

74
Fig. 2 Comparison of the
imaging of a metal marker in
the liver in the planning CT
versus the MVCT

Fig. 3 A lung tumor before
positional adjustment (left)
and after adjustment (right) in
axial and sagittal views

W. Warren et al.

Helical TomoTherapy System

Fig. 4 Axial, coronal, and sagittal views of a spine treated for
metastatic bone cancer demonstrating the alignment

in addition to rigid immobilization for SBRT extracranial treatments, such as lung, some also have
incorporated a real-time system to monitor patient
motion during the imaging and treatment process for
their intracranial SRS cases (Holmes et al. 2008).

4

Clinical Examples of the Use
of Megavoltage CT Images
for SBRT Treatments

In this section, the authors wish to demonstrate how
the many facets of Tomotherapy imaging impact
clinical situations, in particular for SBRT case.

75

Figure 1 shows the improved accuracy of the
MVCT in the longitudinal direction when a 1.5 mm
bb is scanned with the Fine (Pitch = 1) setting. This
will make an improvement in the ability to position
the patient more precisely.
The lack of scatter in volumetric images from
megavoltage beams is normally demonstrated using
images of prostheses or dental filings. For SBRT,
Fig. 2 demonstrates the difference in the appearance
of inserted markers. The lack of scatter from the
megavoltage energy beam improves the ability to
determine the location of a marker.
Lung tumors show very clearly in MVCT. The
problem is that there is no default Window/Level
setting available so one must make these adjustments
manually. The advantage is that a scan on the Tomotherapy unit is very slow as compared to the
planning scan so one gets to see a better average of
target location, and this aids positioning within the
intended target volumes. Figure 3 is an example of a
lung tumor. All images are MVCT images with the
left side being the initial position of the patient, and
the right side use the corrected position. One can see
that the imaged target falls with intended target on the
axial image (lines) and on the sagittal image (dots).
MVCT images work well with bone because of
lack of scatter and the fusion algorithm has high
gradient images to align. Figure 4 shows a patient
with metastatic disease to the spine. Again, one can
see the delineated target and the delineated OAR,
spinal cord, in the axial, coronal, and sagittal views.
In this case, one cannot afford to be anything but
precisely positioned and the viewability of the two
structures enables one to use the tomotherapy
machine for SBRT delivery in these cases.
Figure 5 is an example of another viewing technique
when analyzing TomoImages. Especially where there
is bone present, one can use the checkerboard view to
see the planning and MVCT images at the same time.
After fusion, one can verify that the bones match and
confidently apply manual corrections if needed.
One can display the treatment planning dose on the
MVCT image. Obviously, this is useful when treating
close to critical structures, but there are other opportunities to use this feature. Figure 6 shows the dose
color wash on the MVCT image and confirms the
patient’s pacemaker is protected from radiation as

76

W. Warren et al.

Fig. 5 The ‘‘checkerboard’’
panel with the initial scan
(left) and the position
corrected scan (right)

Fig. 6 Application of the
dose color wash onto the
MVCT to insure a safe dose to
the patient’s pacemaker

planned. In this case, the maximum total dose to the
pacemaker is 0.5 Gy but should the patient change
shape that could quickly increase.

5

Future Improvements
in Tomotherapy Delivery

Another Tomotherapy technique that has been
investigated for SBRT treatments is STAT RT, which
can feasibly allow for daily real-time SBRT treatment
planning for each treatment fraction using the daily
MVCT. Dose computation algorithms were shown to
produce clinically equivalent plans for liver, lung, and
spine SBRT treatments, with fast optimization times
(Dunlap et al. 2010).
A newer model, known as Tomotherapy HD, is
being sold now. There are some changes that will
improve the machines SBRT capabilities. One is the
introduction of a new primary collimator that will
allow for a variable Slice Width during treatment.

(Sterzing et al. 2010; Chen et al. 2011a). This eliminates the ‘‘ramp up’’ and ‘‘ramp down’’ doses discussed in Sect. 2.2 and will reduce delivery time.
However, this feature is not FDA-cleared at this time
for clinical use.
The use of a variable Slice Width requires a
change in the optimization and dose calculation
engines. This new planning system has been FDAcleared and is available for purchase. Based on the
use of the graphics processing unit (GPU) and new
beam models, calculation times are reduced dramatically (Chen et al. 2011b, 2012).

6

Summary

Tomotherapy MVCT images as an IGRT tool in
radiation therapy treatments has proven to be an
effective addition to improve the precision of SBRT
treatments. Options are available to produce a finer
scan, and therefore an improved image quality, as

Helical TomoTherapy System

well as the option of the length of scan. Also, the
accuracy of the registration of the planning kV CT to
the daily treatment MVCT has been shown to be
suitable for SBRT treatments. Tomotherapy treatment
planning as well as its delivery provides a unique
radiation therapy platform, which has proven effective
in delivering highly conformal SBRT treatments.

References
Baisden JM, Romney DA, Reish AG, Cai J, Sheng K, Jones
DR, Benedict SH, Read PW, Larner JM (2007) Dose as a
function of lung volume and planned treatment volume in
helical tomotherapy intensity-modulated radiation therapybased stereotactic body radiation therapy for small lung
tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 68(4):1229–1237
Bortfeld T, Jiang SB, Rietzel E (2004) Effects of motion on the
total dose distribution. Semin Radiat Oncol 14(1):41–51
Bortfeld T, Jokivarsi K, Goitein M, Kung J, Jiang SB (2002)
Effects of intra-fraction motion on IMRT dose delivery:
statistical analysis and simulation. Phys Med Biol
47(13):2203–2220
Boswell S, Tome W, Jeraj R, Jaradat H, Mackie TR (2006)
Automatic registration of megavoltage to kilovoltage CT
images in helical tomotherapy: an evaluation of the setup
verification process for the special case of a rigid head
phantom. Med Phys 33(11):4395–4404
Chen Q, Chen M, Lu W (2011a) Ultrafast convolution/
superposition using tabulated and exponential kernels on
GPU. Med Phys 38(3):1150–1161
Chen Q, Lu W, Chen Y, Chen M, Henderson D, Sterpin E
(2012) Validation of GPU based tomotherapy dose calculation engine. Med Phys 39(4):1877–1886
Chen Y, Chen Q, Chen M, Lu W (2011b) Dynamic tomotherapy delivery. Med Phys 38(6):3013–3024
Dunlap N, McIntosh A, Sheng K, Yang W, Turner B, Shoushtari
A, Sheehan J, Jones DR, Lu W, Ruchala K, Olivera G, Parnell
D, Larner JL, Benedict SH, Read PW (2010) Helical
tomotherapy-based STAT stereotactic body radiation therapy: dosimetric evaluation for a real-time SBRT treatment
planning and delivery program. Med Dosim 35(4):312–319
Grant WH III, Butler EB, Verellen D (2012) Tomotherapy
image guided radiation therapy. In: Levitt SH, Purdy JA,
Perez CA, Poortmans P (eds) Technical basis of radiation
therapy, 5th edn. Springer, Heidelberg
Hodge W, Tome WA, Jaradat HA, Orton NP, Khuntia D, Traynor
A, Weigel T, Mehta MP (2006) Feasibility report of image
guided stereotactic body radiotherapy (IG-SBRT) with
tomotherapy for early stage medically inoperable lung cancer
using extreme hypofractionation. Acta Oncol 45(7):890–896
Holmes TW, Hudes R, Dziuba S, Kazi A, Hall M, Dawson D
(2008) Stereotactic image-guided intensity modulated
radiotherapy using the HI-ART II helical tomotherapy
system. Med Dosim 33(2):135–148
International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements (1999) Prescribing, recording, and reporting photon
beam therapy. Bethesda

77
Jaffray DA (2007) Kilovoltage volumetric imaging in the
treatment room. Front Radiat Ther Oncol 40:116–131
Kanagaki B, Read PW, Molloy JA, Larner JM, Sheng K (2007)
A motion phantom study on helical tomotherapy: the
dosimetric impacts of delivery technique and motion. Phys
Med Biol 52(1):243–255
Langen KM, Papanikolaou N, Balog J, Crilly R, Followill D,
Goddu SM, Grant W III, Olivera G, Ramsey CR, Shi C
(2010) QA for helical tomotherapy: report of the AAPM
Task Group 148. Med Phys 37(9):4817–4853
Mackie TR, Balog J, Ruchala K, Shepard D, Aldridge S,
Fitchard E, Reckwerdt P, Olivera G, McNutt T, Mehta M
(1999) Tomotherapy. Semin Radiat Oncol 9(1):108–117
Mackie TR, Holmes T, Swerdloff S, Reckwerdt P, Deasy JO,
Yang J, Paliwal B, Kinsella T (1993) Tomotherapy: a new
concept for the delivery of dynamic conformal radiotherapy.
Med Phys 20(6):1709–1719
Mahan SL, Ramsey CR, Scaperoth DD, Chase DJ, Byrne TE
(2005) Evaluation of image-guided helical tomotherapy for
the retreatment of spinal metastasis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 63(5):1576–1583
Meeks SL, Harmon JF Jr, Langen KM, Willoughby TR,
Wagner TH, Kupelian PA (2005) Performance characterization of megavoltage computed tomography imaging on a
helical tomotherapy unit. Med Phys 32(8):2673–2681
Ruchala KJ, Olivera GH, Kapatoes JM, Reckwerdt PJ, Mackie
TR (2002) Methods for improving limited field-of-view
radiotherapy reconstructions using imperfect a priori
images. Med Phys 29(11):2590–2605
Shah AP, Langen KM, Ruchala KJ, Cox A, Kupelian PA,
Meeks SL (2008) Patient dose from megavoltage computed
tomography imaging. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
70(5):1579–1587
Soisson ET, Hardcastle N, Tome WA (2010) Quality assurance
of an image guided intracranial stereotactic positioning
system for radiosurgery treatment with helical tomotherapy.
J Neurooncol 98(2):277–285
Soisson ET, Tome WA, Richards GM, Mehta MP (2006)
Comparison of linac based fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy and tomotherapy treatment plans for skull-base
tumors. Radiother Oncol 78(3):313–321
Sterzing F, Uhl M, Hauswald H, Schubert K, Sroka-Perez G,
Chen Y, Lu W, Mackie R, Debus J, Herfarth K, Oliveira G
(2010) Dynamic jaws and dynamic couch in helical
tomotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 76(4):1266–1273
Welsh JS, Patel RR, Ritter MA, Harari PM, Mackie TR, Mehta
MP (2002) Helical tomotherapy: an innovative technology
and approach to radiation therapy. Technol Cancer Res
Treat 1(4):311–316
Woodford C, Yartsev S, Van Dyk J (2007) Optimization of
megavoltage CT scan registration settings for thoracic cases
on helical tomotherapy. Phys Med Biol 52(15):N345–N354
Xu SP, Xie CB, Ju ZJ, Dai XK, Gong HS, Guo YY, Wang LY
(2009) Measurement and analysis of the imaging dose with
megavoltage computed tomography for helical tomotherapy. Ai Zheng 28(8):886–889
Zhou J, Uhl B, Dewitt K, Young M, Taylor B, Fei DY, Lo YC
(2010) Image-guided stereotactic body radiotherapy for
lung tumors using BodyLoc with tomotherapy: clinical
implementation and set-up accuracy. Med Dosim 35(1):
12–18

Elekta System
Julian R. Perks, Megan E. Daly, David Schlesinger,
and Stanley H. Benedict

Contents

Abstract

1

Introduction: The History of SBRT at Elekta.....

79

2

Elekta Image-Guided Radiation Therapy
for SBRT...................................................................
Elekta CBCT Technology .........................................
Elekta CBCT and SBRT ...........................................
Elekta Ultrasound Guidance .....................................
4D Image-Guidance...................................................

80
80
81
81
81

3
Elekta Multileaf Collimators and SBRT ..............
3.1 Elekta MLC Technology...........................................

82
82

2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4

4

Elekta Treatment Tables, Couchtops,
and IMRT .................................................................

Elekta Strategies for Motion Management
and Improved Patient Positioning .........................
5.1 Full-Body Immobilization .........................................
5.2 Motion Management Solutions: Abdominal
Compression, Active Breathing Control,
and Laser-Based Positioning Solutions ....................
5.3 Head and Neck Immobilization ................................

Elekta AB has developed a wide range of products
and accessories to enable highly accurate and precise
delivery for stereotactic body radiation therapy
(SBRT). In this chapter the specific systems designed
and manufactured by Elekta will be presented,
including their developments for image guidance,
multileaf collimation, specialized couchtops, and
motion management strategies. Elekta has developed
image guidance technology for kilovoltage cone
beam CT, ultrasound, and 4D motion management
tools. Elekta multileaf collimator (MLC) technology
provides modulation for intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) and has recently been improved
to provide 4 mm leaves for high conformality SBRT.
Elekta couchtops and treatment tables with 6D
motion provide for improved patient setup, and a
wide range of motion management solutions such as
abdominal compression, active breathing coordination, and laser-based positioning systems. These
technologies are combined in the latest line of linacs
from Elekta, including the Synery-S and Axesse with
their dedicated stereotactic radiotherapy (SRT) and
SBRT features.

84

5

84
84

86
87

6

The Elekta Linear Accelerator
SBRT Platforms.......................................................
6.1 The Synergy-S Linear Accelerator ...........................
6.2 The Axesse Linear Accelerator.................................

87
88
88

7

Summary and Conclusion.......................................

88

References..........................................................................

89

J. R. Perks  M. E. Daly
University of California at Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA
D. Schlesinger
University of Virginia Health System, 1300 Jefferson Park
Avenue, Charlottesville, VA, USA
S. H. Benedict (&)
Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
California at Davis Comprehensive Cancer Center,
4501 X Street, Suite 0144, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA
e-mail: stanley.benedict@ucdmc.ucdavis.edu

1

Introduction: The History of SBRT
at Elekta

The storied history that Elekta AB has with stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) predates the
formation of the company itself, stretching back in
time to the origins of radiosurgery. Lars Leksell, first
coined the term radiosurgery (Leksell 1951), and then

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2012_643, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

79

80

went on to create the Elekta Corporation in Stockholm with his sons as a vehicle to create a funding
stream for his ongoing research in stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) which resulted in what we now know
as the Gamma Knife (Benedict et al. 2008).
The second Gamma Knife unit was installed at
Karolinska hospital in 1974. Karolinska subsequently
became an important center for radiosurgery research
and its close proximity to Elekta’s offices facilitated
collaboration. In 1991, at the Karolinska, Henric
Blomgren and Ingmar Lax expanded the concept of
SRS beyond the cranium by developing a body
immobilization frame with embedded stereotactic
fiducials. Their subsequent treatments of tumors in the
liver and lung established the key SBRT concepts of
rigid, whole body fixation, stereotactic alignment, and
a large dose gradient across the target area (Blomgren
et al. 1995; Lax et al. 1994). The frame system used
by Lax and Blomgren was later marketed by Elekta as
the Steerotactic Body Frame (SBF). This frame would
go on to assist a number of important studies, notably
the work of Timmerman, publishing the results of the
phase I lung study data in 2003 and 2005 (McGarry
et al. 2005; Timmerman et al. 2003) which helped to
definitely establish the prescriptive use of hypofractionated (e.g. a small number of high dose fractions,
now by convention limited to \5 fraction) ionizing
radiation.
The invention of the multileaf collimator (MLC) at
Elekta found first on the SLi accelerator portended the
ability to quickly and easily create small fields without the use of stereotactic cones (Linthout et al. 2002;
Van de Walle et al. 2003). In parallel, a paradigm
shift away from the external fiducials of SBRT body
frame was begun with the advent of imaging detectors
built into the treatment machine (Nakagawa et al.
2000; Pouliot et al. 2005), particularly cone beam
computed tomography (CBCT) provided by on-board
KV imaging. The first papers on linear accelerator
mounted CBCT were from Elekta development sites
including the work of Jaffray et al. at Princess Margaret Hospital (Jaffray et al. 2002), Toronto and
William Beaumont Cancer Center in Royal Oak,
Michigan (Letourneau et al. 2005; Oldham et al.
2005). The ability to visualize 3D anatomy and to coregister and fuse two CT data sets was a vast step
forward in technology, and it provided additional
assurance that what was planned (simulated) matched
what was treated during delivery in the treatment

J. R. Perks et al.

room with the patient on the treatment couch. Commercial dedicated image-guided radiation therapy
(IGRT) accelerators soon followed, at Elekta first
manifested in the SynergyTM linear accelerator (Amer
et al. 2007; Lehmann et al. 2007).
Today, Elekta markets a range of linear accelerators, including two (Synergy-S and Axesse) that were
developed explicitly for stereotactic use. This chapter
details the technology behind Elekta’s SBRT programs, including developments for on-board imaging,
MLC, advanced treatment tables and tabletops, techniques for respiratory motion management, and
finally the integration of these technologies into the
Synergy-S and Axesse platforms.

2

Elekta Image-Guided Radiation
Therapy for SBRT

The Elekta IGRT solution provides imaging tools
including 2D KV imaging for standard planar images,
2D real-time fluoroscopic imaging for moving targets,
and 3D volumetric cone beam imaging (CBCT) for soft
tissue visualization. CBCT in particular, combined
with advanced patient immobilization technology,
enables the precision required to reduce margins and
increase SRS/stereotactic radiotherapy (SRT)/SBRT
doses while minimizing does to adjacent organs at risk.

2.1

Elekta CBCT Technology

The Elekta CBCT system is gantry mounted perpendicular to the beam line. CBCT images are formed by
rotating the gantry around the patient with the couch
stationary prior to treatment delivery. The kV source
is pulsed and image frames are captured by an
amorphous silicon panel as the gantry rotates. Typical
values for a CBCT are: 120 kV (available range
100–150 kV), 40 mA per pulse, 40 ms pulse time,
650 frames captured in 360° of gantry rotation, scan
time less than one minute and real-time image
reconstruction as the CBCT is reconstructed continuously as the frames are acquired. The CBCT is
automatically registered to the planning CT scan,
based on either bony anatomy or soft tissue. The
translations (plus rotations in the case of the Elekta
Axesse unit) are then automatically performed by the
treatment couch prior to beam delivery.

Elekta System

81

Fig. 1 Winston Lutz test performed digitally with the Elekta on-board imaging system (Performed at UC Davis)

2.2

Elekta CBCT and SBRT

One of the first ‘‘off-the-shelf’’ Elekta Synergy systems was installed and investigated at university of
california (UC) Davis (Lehmann et al. 2007). To
commission the CBCT, the UC Davis team tested
safety, geometric accuracy, image quality, registration accuracy, and dose. They reported that the
megavoltage and kilovoltage isocenters could be
aligned within 0.25 mm, the CBCT system could
resolve 9 line pairs/mm with a contrast resolution of
1.8%, and that the system could reposition a phantom
which was moved with predefined shifts with a better
than 1 mm accuracy.
One conclusion the group made from this work
was that the Synergy platform was accurate enough to
serve as a basis for commissioning SBRT. Perks et al.
(2010) demonstrated on a Beam ModulatorTMequipped linac that the precision alignment of the MV
and kV isocenters could be utilized to enhance the
Winston Lutz test (Lutz et al. 1988; Winston and Lutz
1988), the gold standard for SRS/SBRT alignment
quality assurance (QA) (Fig. 1). The cone beam CT
system was also used to confirm the end-to-end test of
the SBRT commissioning by irradiating the standard
phantoms provided by the Radiological Physics
Center (MD Anderson, TX, USA).

2.3

Elekta Ultrasound Guidance

For certain SBRT applications such as prostate cancer, ultrasound is a popular choice of imaging
modality because of its better soft-tissue contrast
relative to CT, and its ability to image in real-time
(Feigenberg et al. 2007; Fung et al. 2005; Lattanzi
et al. 2000). Elekta has partnered with Resonant

Medical (Montreal, Canada) to create a tracked
ultrasound guidance system called ClarityTM. The
Clarity system uses an optically tracked ultrasound
probe to allow the resulting 3D ultrasound images to
be automatically co-registered with the treatment
planning CT, even providing a beam’s-eye view of
the position of the ultrasound target relative to the
planned field. Patient alignment can therefore be
completed using the real-time ultrasound and the
current positions of the patient anatomy. As ultrasound is non-ionizing, repeated scans become safe
and practical, allowing the physician to increase the
frequency of positional surveillance.

2.4

4D Image-Guidance

Elekta continues to improve and innovate its SBRT
program. Elekta has added a phase binning feature to
the CBCT acquisition (Rit et al. 2008, 2009; Sonke
et al. 2009). This feature, branded as Symmetry TM,
uses 4D CBCT to capture respiratory motion and
account for baseline shifts from fraction to fraction.
The scan time is extended to approximately 4 min to
capture a number of respiratory cycles and the motion
is displayed as a set of ten positions, in a cine loop.
The system does not display a maximum intensity
projection (MIP) (Bradley et al. 2006) that is common
to many 4D CT concepts, but rather the displacement
of the tumor about the isocenter. The final shift is
determined from a time-weighted average position
(Wolthaus et al. 2008). The phase closest to the
average is exported to the planning system for treatment planning. Interfraction baseline changes can be
corrected for by performing a scan, and then shifting
the new average position so that it is in the planned
position.

82

J. R. Perks et al.

Fig. 2 Elekta Beam
Modulator accelerator with
CBCT system and MV portal
imaging panel deployed.
Photo from UC Davis

3

Elekta Multileaf Collimators
and SBRT

3.1

Elekta MLC Technology

The ability to precisely target tumors with small fields
is a mainstay of SBRT. The development of the MLC
was vital to the increasingly widespread adoption of
SBRT techniques. Elekta markets a range of MLC
solutions, both built-in and upgradeable, that make
possible small-field delivery.

3.1.1 Beam ModulatorTM MLC
The mainstay of dedicated linacs for Elekta SRT/
SBRT has been Elekta SynergyÒ S which includes an
integrated MLC with 16 x 22 cm field size (Beam
ModulatorTM MLC and treatment head). The MLC is
comprises 80 individually controlled leaves, mounted
approximately 39 cm from the target (Figs. 2 and 3).
Each leaf is made of tungsten, is approximately
7.5 cm thick, and projects to a 4 mm leaf width at
isocenter. Each leaf has a travel range of 22 cm, and
opposing leaves can interdigitate. Small non-contiguous openings in the MLC are therefore possible,
allowing clinicians to be able to create a range of
high-resolution subfields within one treatment beam.
Unlike older Elekta MLC designs, the Beam
Modulator design does not have moveable backup

collimators. Instead, a fixed set of diaphragms are
included to reduce beam transmission through closed
leaves. Rather than a tongue-and-groove design to
reduce interleaf leakage, the Beam Modulator design
slightly tilts the leaves relative to the actual beam
divergence (Patel et al. 2005).
Individual rack and pinion drives move each
individual leaf. Leaf positioning is based on a feedback loop between a camera in the linac head and
reflectors on the upstream surface of each MLC leaf.
The advantage of this system is that it automatically
corrects for the gravity sag effect when the gantry is
rotated to treat from a lateral aspect.
While the Beam Modulator MLC is standard equipment on a Synergy S platform, the treatment head is
available as an upgrade on PreciseTM and SynergyÒ linacs.

3.1.2 AgilityTM MLC
Elekta recently introduced a next-generation MLC
package called AgilityTM (Fig. 4). The Agility treatment
head is specifically designed for volumetric modulated
arc therapy (VMAT) treatments which have the potential
to reduce the treatment time for SBRT. Agility is a 160
leaf design, with each leaf projecting to 5 mm width at
isocenter. The treatment head provides 45 cm clearance
to isocenter. The system is capable of 40 x 40 cm field
sizes, and like the Beam Modulator system, the leaves can
interdigitate, allowing for non-contiguous field shapes.
Leaf speed has been increased to accommodate the

Elekta System

83

Fig. 3 Elekta Beam
Modulator accelerator with
CBCT system and MV portal
imaging panel with imaging
panels folded away. Photo
from UC Davis

Fig. 4 Elekta Agility MLC
with 4 mm interdigitating
leaves. Photo courtesy of
Elekta

increase in modulation required for VMAT treatments
without compromising dose rate. The Agility system has
dynamic jaws orthogonal to the direction of leaf movement (Schmidhalter et al. 2007) that reduce MLC transmission to less than \0.5 %. It also features an upgraded
leaf position monitoring system that equips each leaf with
a ruby tip. Near-ultraviolet light illuminating the ruby tips
causes infrared fluorescence. Optical tracking of the

fluorescent tips allows for precise control of leaf positions
(Brown and Thompson 2010; Cosgrove et al. 2009).

3.1.3 Add-On Dynamic Micro MLCs (DMLCs)
Elekta also markets add-on MLCs that can be used for
small-field delivery such as that required for SBRT. These
can be used on accelerators manufactured by other vendors, as well as Elekta machines where a finer leaf width is

84

J. R. Perks et al.

Fig. 5 Elekta Axesse
stereotactic treatment linear
accelerator which offers six
dimensions of alignment
when the planning CT as
aligned to the on set CBCT;
the treatment couch accounts
for longitudinal, lateral,
anterior-posterior, pitch, yaw,
and rolls offsets. Photo
courtesy of Elekta

desired. One example is the ApexTM DMLC, which features a 12 x 14 cm field and 2.5 mm leaf widths.

4

Elekta Treatment Tables,
Couchtops, and IMRT

Historically, it has been the treatment table that has
been the least precise piece of the linac collimator/
gantry/couch system (Klein et al. 2009). As IGRT was
increasingly being used for patient setup corrections, it
became increasingly important that the treatment table,
in effect the patient treatment platform, was designed to
be as immovable as possible. The development of more
rigid treatment tables such as the Elekta Precise (TM)
Table was a first step in reducing the uncertainty
components contributed by the treatment table (Riis
and Zimmermann 2009; Riis et al. 2010).
The next step was to improve the ability to reposition patients via couchtops. This was first accomplished using only translations. For many situations
however, IGRT would show the patient to be out of
position via one or more rotations; a situation not
always easy to compensate for with pure translations.
Six-degree-of-freedom robotic couchtops that mounted directly on top of the standard Precise Table, such
as the HexaPOD (TM) were developed to try to

overcome these limitations (Meyer et al. 2007). These
tables are capable of both translations and rotations
along the major axes (pitch, yaw, roll) (Fig. 5). While
the benefit of such rotational shifts is fairly small for
many lung and liver SBRT cases, the benefit is more
substantial with the often irregularly shaped vertebral
target volumes adjacent to the cord in spinal SBRT.
Elekta improved the original HexaPOD system by
adding infrared tracking to the system, resulting in the
HexaPOD evo RT tabletop. They also developed a
metal-free couchtop, the iBEAMÒ evo Couchtop, for
use with the HexaPOD tabletop. The increased radio
translucency of the iBeam couchtop helps to maximize image quality for IGRT treatments.

5

Elekta Strategies for Motion
Management and Improved
Patient Positioning

5.1

Full-Body Immobilization

The first Elekta body frames were based on the original
designs from the Karolinska experience (Blomgren
et al. 1995; Lax et al. 1994) (Fig. 6). These were
wooden shells with separate liners which held the
patient support vacuum formed bag. The original frame

Elekta System

85

Fig. 6 Elekta wooden body
frame showing abdominal
compression. Photo of
volunteer at UC Davis

Fig. 7 Patient in Elekta body
frame being prepared for
SBRT treatment. Photo from
UC Davis

design had a fiducial marker system consisting of
copper wires buried in the sides of the frame; a wire ran
at the anterior edge of the frame and another at the
posterior at a 45° slope between the two. The frame
offered abdominal compression by means of a plastic
plate, held above the patient by an adjustable screw.
The screw was scaled for reproducible compression
with multiple fittings (Benedict et al. 2010).
Due to the small dimensions of the wooden body
frame, the large body habitus of the typical patient

(particularly the North American patient population), and
the emergence of on-board image guidance, this style of
frame has been discontinued. It has been replaced by the
BodyFIX system. The BodyFIX has no side rails so the
patient size is less of a problem. The patient is held into
the system by a vacuum formed ‘‘wrap’’ that holds them
throughout the treatment and provides abdominal compression (Fig. 7). Targeting off of fiducials embedded in
the frame has been replaced with targeting off of internal
patient anatomy via image guidance.

86

J. R. Perks et al.

Fig. 8 Dual vacuum system
to immobilize patient and
integrated paddle to induce
shallow breathing. Photo
courtesy of Elekta

5.2

Motion Management Solutions:
Abdominal Compression, Active
Breathing Control, and Laser-Based
Positioning Solutions

Motion management is an important aspect of SBRT
for certain anatomic sites, including lung, liver,
pancreas, and adrenal (Benedict et al. 2010). When
performing SBRT with Elekta equipment, motion
management is achieved with abdominal compression
or breath-hold systems, and can be monitored by laserbased systems. No respiratory gating capabilities are
available with Elekta equipment due to limitations with
the linac control systems. Although gating is becoming
quite popular, and a lack of gating available would
seem at first to be a limitation for Elekta’s SBRT
strategy, in fact there is some disagreement on the
efficacy of the technique (Li et al. 2007), especially for
pulmonary-challenged patients who may have irregular
respiratory rhythms.
Abdominal compression reduces diaphragmatic
excursion with inspiration and, correspondingly dampens tumor motion throughout the respiratory cycle to a
degree dependent both on the organ of interest and the
degree of compression (Fig. 8) (Heinzerling et al. 2008).
Abdominal compression is well-tolerated by most
patients, although it may pose problems for those with
particularly poor pulmonary function and may prove

uncomfortable for some. In addition, some patients will
have medical conditions or comorbidities precluding the
use of abdominal compression, such as placement of a
percutaneous gastrostomy tube, large abdominal aortic
aneurysms, or other significant abdominal pathology.
Patient tolerance is often improved with coadministration of oxygen via nasal canella. Theoretical concerns
exist about liver target volume deformation with
abdominal compression for liver SBRT, but a study from
Princess Margaret Hospital suggests that such interfraction variability in liver shape is quite minimal
(Eccles et al. 2011).
Active breathing control systems (Fig. 9) operate by
pausing the patient’s breathing at a precisely indicated
tidal volume and coordinating delivery with this pause
(Benedict et al. 2010). The Elekta active breathing
coordinator (ABC) and similar devices may allow clinicians to reduce margins of their planning target volumes (Gong et al. 2012). This is best achieved in
combination with image-guidance for verification
(Brock et al. 2011; Eccles et al. 2006; Gong et al. 2011).
However, ABC approaches are only an alternative
option for select group of cooperative patients, and
many elderly or infirm patients may have difficulty
following breathing commands.
Respiratory gating, abdominal compression, and
active breathing control systems all attempt to address
respiratory motion. But other types of patient motion

Elekta System

87

Fig. 9 The Elekta automated
breathing coordinator (ABC)
system. Photo courtesy of
Elekta

are possible as well. The Elekta Sentinel position
monitoring system addresses this problem by monitoring patient movement throughout the treatment.
After patient positioning, a baseline scan of the
patient’s surface is acquired. During treatment, Sentinel monitors patient movement, alerting the operator if
motion exceeds a defined threshold. The operator then
has the option of pausing treatment delivery, repositioning the patient, and resuming position monitoring.

5.3

Head and Neck Immobilization

5.3.1 HeadFix
The Elekta HeadFix solution is a vacuum-assisted
bite-block system appropriate for lower cranial and
head and neck patients. A dental impression is vacuum-bonded to the upper palate of the patient and
attached to a rigid carbon-fiber treatment frame. This
system may have some advantages over thermoplastic

mask systems, including better radio translucency and
a lack of radiation build-up effect (Ali et al. 2010).

5.3.2 Fraxion System
The Fraxion System is the linear accelerator version of
the Extend System which was introduced for the Gamma
Knife Perfexion unit (Sayer et al. 2011). Fraxion is a
relocatable head frame system based around a vacuumassisted dental fixation device (Fig. 10). Fraxion (and
Extend) are currently indicated for cranial irradiations
but have the potential for hypofractionated extracranial
indications, e.g., nasopharynx and C-spine.

6

The Elekta Linear Accelerator SBRT
Platforms

Elekta linear accelerators use a common accelerating
structure assembly, bending magnet assembly and
digital control system. The stability of the core

88

J. R. Perks et al.

Fig. 10 The Fraxion
relocatable head frame
system. Photo courtesy of
Elekta

platform is enhanced by the drum design housed
behind the fascia wall of the treatment room. The
variety of the currently available linear accelerators is
based on the head assemblies, treatment couch
options, and immobilization technologies described
above. However, for SBRT applications, Elekta currently markets two primary system configurations, the
Synergy-S and Axesse.

6.1

The Synergy-S Linear Accelerator

The Synergy-S linear accelerator is a Synergy with
customizations to make it more closely dedicated for
SRS/SBRT procedures. Perhaps the most important
modification is the Beam Modulator treatment head.
This reduces the maximum field size to 16 x 22 cm,
but also reduces the leaf size to 4 mm, more appropriate for SRS/SBRT than the standard 1 cm leaves.
The Synergy-S is also compatible with the HexaPOD
evo RT couchtop, and the HeadFix and BodyFix
immobilization systems.

6.2

The Axesse Linear Accelerator

The latest example of the Elekta stereotactic linear
accelerator is the Axesse. Like the Synergy-S, this
accelerator includes a Beam Modulator treatment head
with fine (4 mm) MLC leaves. Also, like the Synergy-S

the Axesse unit offers CBCT from a gantry mounted kV
X-ray tube and amorphous silicon detector panel. The
CBCT system is mounted perpendicular to the treatment beam line and can be folded away flat to the gantry
cover plate when not in use.
What advances the Axesse beyond the capabilities
of the Synergy-S is the standard inclusion of many of
the technologies discussed earlier. To support highprecision patient setups, in its standard configuration,
the Elekta Axesse ships with a 6-degree-of-freedom
HexaPOD RT treatment couch and iBeam evo
couchtop. The couchtop supports the included
BodyFix system and the HeadFix systems for both
intracranial and extracranial SRS/SBRT procedures.
The control system comes standard with the capability for volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT).
The Axesse is also ‘‘Agility-ready’’, hence as this new
treatment head design is released to the clinical
market it should be possible to upgrade existing units.

7

Summary and Conclusion

Elekta was founded as a company to promote the idea
of radiosurgery, and throughout its history Elekta has
been quite interested in expanding the technologies and
indications for SRS and SBRT. Elekta’s linear accelerator lines reflect this, with technologies that provide a
range of solutions appropriate for the small fields
and precise delivery required for hypofractionated

Elekta System

treatments. As SRS and SBRT become more commoditized, it will be interesting to see how Elekta’s
products change to serve clinics that perform a full
range of treatments, including not only SRS and SBRT,
but also 3D and IMRT techniques.

References
Ali I, Matthiesen C, Algan O, Thompson S, Bogardus C, Herman T,
Ahmad S (2010) Quantitative evaluation of increase in surface
dose by immobilization thermoplastic masks and superficial
dosimetry using Gafchromic EBT film and Monte Carlo
calculations. J Xray Sci Technol 18(3):319–326. doi:11406722
QG780268 [pii], 10.3233/XST-2010-0263
Amer A, Marchant T, Sykes J, Czajka J, Moore C (2007)
Imaging doses from the Elekta Synergy X-ray cone beam
CT system. Br J Radiol 80(954):476–482. doi:80/954/
476[pii], 10.1259/bjr/80446730
Benedict SH, Bova FJ, Clark B, Goetsch SJ, Hinson WH,
Leavitt DD, Schlesinger DJ, Yenice KM (2008) Anniversary paper: the role of medical physicists in developing
stereotactic radiosurgery. Med Phys 35(9):4262–4277
Benedict SH, Yenice KM, Followill D, Galvin JM, Hinson W,
Kavanagh B, Keall P, Lovelock M, Meeks S, Papiez L, Purdie T,
Sadagopan R, Schell MC, Salter B, Schlesinger DJ, Shiu AS,
Solberg T, Song DY, Stieber V, Timmerman R, Tome WA,
Verellen D, Wang L, Yin FF (2010) Stereotactic body radiation
therapy: the report of AAPM task group 101. Med Phys
37(8):4078–4101
Blomgren H, Lax I, Naslund I, Svanstrom R (1995) Stereotactic
high dose fraction radiation therapy of extracranial tumors
using an accelerator. Clinical experience of the first thirtyone patients. Acta Oncol 34(6):861–870
Bradley JD, Nofal AN, El Naqa IM, Lu W, Liu J, Hubenschmidt J, Low DA, Drzymala RE, Khullar D (2006)
Comparison of helical, maximum intensity projection
(MIP), and averaged intensity (AI) 4D CT imaging for
stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) planning in lung
cancer. Radiother Oncol 81(3):264–268
Brock J, McNair HA, Panakis N, Symonds-Tayler R, Evans PM,
Brada M (2011) The use of the active breathing coordinator
throughout radical non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 81(2):369–375. doi:S03603016(10)00761-3[pii], 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.05.038
Brown K,Thompson G (2010) Agility: intelligent design.
Elekta Whitepaper
Cosgrove V, Thompson C, Christophides D, Wetson S, Thwaites D,
Evans C, Thomas M, Warrington A, Reynaert N,Wagter CD
(2009). Physical characterisation of a new concept design of an
Elekta radiation head with integrated 160-leaf multi-leaf
collimator. ASTRO 51st Annual Meeting
Eccles C, Brock KK, Bissonnette JP, Hawkins M, Dawson LA
(2006) Reproducibility of liver position using active
breathing coordinator for liver cancer radiotherapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 64(3):751–759. doi:S03603016(05)02821-X[pii], 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2005.05.066

89
Eccles CL, Dawson LA, Moseley JL,Brock KK (2011) Interfraction liver shape variability and impact on GTV position
during liver stereotactic radiotherapy using abdominal compression. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 80(3):938–946
Feigenberg SJ, Paskalev K, McNeeley S, Horwitz EM, Konski A,
Wang L, Ma C, Pollack A (2007) Comparing computed
tomography localization with daily ultrasound during imageguided radiation therapy for the treatment of prostate cancer:
a prospective evaluation. J Appl Clin Med Phys 8(3):2268
Fung AY, Enke CA, Ayyangar KM, Raman NV, Zhen W,
Thompson RB, Li S, Nehru RM, Pillai S (2005) Prostate
motion and isocenter adjustment from ultrasound-based
localization during delivery of radiation therapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 61(4):984–992. doi:S03603016(04)02133-9[pii], 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2004.07.727
Gong G, Yin Y, Xing L, Guo Y, Chen J, Liu T, Lu J, Ma C, Sun T,
Bai T, Zhang G, Deng W (2011) Comparison of internal target
volumes for hepatocellular carcinoma defined using 3DCT with
active breathing coordinator and 4DCT. Technol Cancer Res
Treat 10(6):601–606. doi:c4318/Comparison-of-Internal-TargetVolumes-for-Hepatocellular-Carcinoma-Defined-Using-3DCTwith-Active-Breathing-Coordinator-and-4DCT-601-606-p17901
.html [pii]
Gong GZ, Yin Y, Xing LG, Guo YJ, Liu T, Chen J, Lu J, Ma C,
Sun T, Bai T, Zhang G, Wang R (2012) RapidArc combined
with the active breathing coordinator provides an effective
and accurate approach for the radiotherapy of hepatocellular
carcinoma. Strahlenther Onkol 188(3):262–268. doi:
10.1007/s00066-011-0044-5
Heinzerling JH, Anderson JF, Papiez L, Boike T, Chien S,
Zhang G, Abdulrahman R, Timmerman R (2008) Fourdimensional computed tomography scan analysis of tumor
and organ motion at varying levels of abdominal compression during stereotactic treatment of lung and liver. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 70(5):1571–1578
Jaffray DA, Siewerdsen JH, Wong JW, Martinez AA (2002)
Flat-panel cone-beam computed tomography for imageguided radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
53(5):1337–1349
Klein EE, Hanley J, Bayouth J, Yin FF, Simon W, Dresser S,
Serago C, Aguirre F, Ma L, Arjomandy B, Liu C, Sandin C,
Holmes T (2009) Task group 142 report: quality assurance
of medical accelerators. Med Phys 36(9):4197–4212
Lattanzi J, McNeeley S, Donnelly S, Palacio E, Hanlon A,
Schultheiss TE, Hanks GE (2000) Ultrasound-based stereotactic guidance in prostate cancer—quantification of organ
motion and set-up errors in external beam radiation therapy.
Comput Aided Surg 5(4):289–295. doi:10.1002/10970150(2000)5:4\289::AID-IGS7[3.0.CO;2-D [pii], 10.1002/
1097-0150(2000)5:4\289::AID-IGS7[3.0.CO;2-D
Lax I, Blomgren H, Naslund I, Svanstrom R (1994) Stereotactic
radiotherapy of malignancies in the abdomen. Methodological aspects. Acta Oncol 33(6):677–683
Lehmann J, Perks J, Semon S, Harse R, Purdy JA (2007)
Commissioning experience with cone-beam computed
tomography for image-guided radiation therapy. J Appl
Clin Med Phys 8(3):2354
Leksell L (1951) The stereotaxic method and radiosurgery of
the brain. Acta Chir Scand 102(4):316–319
Letourneau D, Wong JW, Oldham M, Gulam M, Watt L,
Jaffray DA, Siewerdsen JH, Martinez AA (2005) Cone-

90
beam-CT guided radiation therapy: technical implementation. Radiother Oncol 75(3):279–286
Li XA, Keall PJ, Orton CG (2007) Point/counterpoint.
Respiratory gating for radiation therapy is not ready for
prime time. Med Phys 34(3):867–870
Linthout N, Verellen D, Van Acker S, Van de Vondel I,
Coppens L, Storme G (2002) Assessment of the acceptability of the Elekta multileaf collimator (MLC) within the
Corvus planning system for static and dynamic delivery of
intensity modulated beams (IMBs). Radiother Oncol
63(1):121–124. doi:S0167814002000312 [pii]
Lutz W, Winston KR, Maleki N (1988) A system for
stereotactic radiosurgery with a linear accelerator. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 14(2):373–381
McGarry RC, Papiez L, Williams M, Whitford T, Timmerman RD
(2005) Stereotactic body radiation therapy of early-stage nonsmall-cell lung carcinoma: phase I study. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 63(4):1010–1015. doi:S0360-3016(05)008321[pii], 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2005.03.073
Meyer J, Wilbert J, Baier K, Guckenberger M, Richter A, Sauer O,
Flentje M (2007) Positioning accuracy of cone-beam computed tomography in combination with a HexaPOD robot
treatment table. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
67(4):1220–1228. doi: S0360-3016(06)03373-6[pii], 10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2006.11.010
Nakagawa K, Aoki Y, Tago M, Terahara A, Ohtomo K (2000)
Megavoltage CT-assisted stereotactic radiosurgery for thoracic tumors: original research in the treatment of thoracic
neoplasms. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 48(2):449–457.
doi:S0360-3016(00)00617-9 [pii]
Oldham M, Letourneau D, Watt L, Hugo G, Yan D, Lockman D,
Kim LH, Chen PY, Martinez A, Wong JW (2005) Conebeam-CT guided radiation therapy: a model for on-line
application. Radiother Oncol 75(3):271–278
Patel I, Glendinning AG, Kirby MC (2005) Dosimetric characteristics of the Elekta beam modulator. Phys Med Biol 50(23):
5479–5492. doi:S0031-9155(05)02725-9[pii], 10.1088/00319155/50/23/004
Perks J, Lehmann J, Narayan S, Semon S, Stern S, Vijayakumar S,
Purdy J (2010) Utilization of image-guided radiation therapy
equipment to enhance stereotactic body radiation therapy
commissioning. Radiosurgery 7:397–402. McDermott, Karger
Pouliot J, Bani-Hashemi A, Chen J, Svatos M, Ghelmansarai F,
Mitschke M, Aubin M, Xia P, Morin O, Bucci K, Roach M
3rd, Hernandez P, Zheng Z, Hristov D, Verhey L (2005)

J. R. Perks et al.
Low-dose megavoltage cone-beam CT for radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 61(2):552–560
Riis HL, Zimmermann SJ (2009) Elekta precise table characteristics
of IGRT remote table positioning. Acta Oncol 48(2):267–270.
doi:902010344[pii], 10.1080/02841860802311007
Riis HL, Zimmermann SJ, Riis P (2010) Isocentric rotational
performance of the Elekta precise table studied using a
USB-microscope. Phys Med Biol 55(24):7597–7614.
doi:S0031-9155(10)58127-2[pii],
10.1088/0031-9155/55/24/014
Rit S, Wolthaus J, van Herk M, Sonke JJ (2008) On-the-fly motioncompensated cone-beam CT using an a priori motion model.
Med Image Comput Comput Assist Interv 11(Pt 1):729–736
Rit S, Wolthaus JW, van Herk M, Sonke JJ (2009) On-the-fly
motion-compensated cone-beam CT using an a priori model
of the respiratory motion. Med Phys 36(6):2283–2296
Sayer FT, Sherman JH, Yen CP, Schlesinger DJ, Kersh R,
Sheehan JP (2011) Initial experience with the eXtend system:
a relocatable frame system for multiple-session gamma knife
radiosurgery. World Neurosurg 75(5–6):665–672. doi:S18788750(11)00025-8[pii], 10.1016/j.wneu.2010.12.051
Schmidhalter D, Fix MK, Niederer P, Mini R, Manser P (2007)
Leaf transmission reduction using moving jaws for dynamic
MLC IMRT. Med Phys 34(9):3674–3687
Sonke JJ, Rossi M, Wolthaus J, van Herk M, Damen E,
Belderbos J (2009) Frameless stereotactic body radiotherapy for lung cancer using four-dimensional cone beam CT
guidance. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 74(2):567–574
Timmerman R, Papiez L, McGarry R, Likes L, DesRosiers C,
Frost S, Williams M (2003) Extracranial stereotactic radioablation: results of a phase I study in medically inoperable stage I
non-small cell lung cancer. Chest 124(5):1946–1955
Van de Walle J, Martens C, Reynaert N, Palmans H, Coghe M,
De Neve W, De Wagter C, Thierens H (2003) Monte Carlo
model of the Elekta SLiplus accelerator: validation of a new
MLC component module in BEAM for a 6 MV beam. Phys
Med Biol 48(3):371–385
Winston KR, Lutz W (1988) Linear accelerator as a neurosurgical
tool for stereotactic radiosurgery. Neurosurgery 22(3):454–464
Wolthaus JW, Sonke JJ, van Herk M, Belderbos JS, Rossi MM,
Lebesque JV, Damen EM (2008) Comparison of different
strategies to use four-dimensional computed tomography in
treatment planning for lung cancer patients. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 70(4):1229–1238. doi:S0360-3016(07)04592-0[pii],
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.11.042

Treatment Planning for Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy
Moyed Miften, Shiva K. Das, Indrin J. Chetty,
and David Westerly

6
Plan Evaluation........................................................ 109
6.1 Evaluation Metrics..................................................... 109

Contents
1

Introduction..............................................................

2

Immobilization/Simulation, Imaging,
and Segmentation ....................................................

92
92

Beam Arrangements................................................ 101

4
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5

Plan Optimization....................................................
General Principles .....................................................
Normal Tissue Dose Tolerances ...............................
Forward Versus Inverse Planning .............................
Plan Classifications ...................................................
IMRT Planning and Respiratory Motion..................

102
102
103
103
103
105

5
5.1
5.2
5.3

Dose Computations..................................................
Accuracy Requirements.............................................
Calculation Algorithms .............................................
Effects of Treatment Site Inhomogeneities on Dose
Calculations ...............................................................

106
106
106
107

Author’s Contribution M. Miften, S.K. Das, I. Chetty,
D. Westerly made substantial contributions to the conception,
design, drafting, and writing of this book chapter. This book
chapter has been seen, read, and agreed upon in its content by
all the designated authors.

S. K. Das
Department of Radiation Oncology,
Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
I. J. Chetty
Department of Radiation Oncology,
Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI, USA

Summary................................................................... 109

References.......................................................................... 110

3

M. Miften (&)  D. Westerly
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Colorado School of Medicine,
MS F706 1665 Aurora Court,
Ste 1032, Aurora, CO 80045, USA
e-mail: Moyed.Miften@ucdenver.edu

7

Abstract

Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a novel
cancer treatment strategy where ultra-high doses per
fraction are used, generally in the range of 8–20 Gy
per fraction in a hypofractionated regimen of five or
fewer fractions, to achieve a high biologically effective dose (BED). Such high doses per treatment were
unimaginable in the past because of concerns about
radiation-induced injury to organs at risk (OARs) if
large volumes of OARs were irradiated to high doses.
However, with recent technical advancements in
highly conformal treatment planning, image-guided
radiotherapy, and delivery technologies, it has become
possible to safely deliver very large fractional doses of
radiation to lesions in the lung, liver, spine, pancreas,
and other disease sites. SBRT involves technically
sophisticated treatment planning processes consisting
of a chain of activities including: immobilization/
simulation, motion management, imaging for treatment planning, segmentation, beam-setup and optimization, and plan verification. Clinicians are usually
concerned of a possible compromise in treatment
efficacy for any weak link in the planning chain
process. A further cause for concern is the influence
that errors or inaccuracies in the dose calculation may
have on the treatment efficacy. Such errors arise from
inherent limitations in the calculation algorithm used,
which are more significant in some anatomical sites
than others. In this chapter, treatment planning for

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2012_615,  Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

91

92

M. Miften et al.

linac-based delivery systems for lung, liver, spine, and
pancreas is reviewed. In addition, the impact of the
choice of calculation algorithm on the accuracy of
dose distributions is discussed.

1

Introduction

With revolutionary technological advances in treatment planning, radiation delivery—including motion
management, and on-board imaging systems that
enable accurate delivery of highly conformal plans,
stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is being
increasingly used for many cancerous disease sites
(Timmerman et al. 2003; Schefter et al. 2005; Koong
et al. 2004; Teh et al. 2010; Timmerman 2006; Sahgal
et al. 2009). When treating a cancer patient with
SBRT, the radiation oncologist is faced with the
challenging task of devising a radiation treatment
with ultra-high doses per fraction, often 8–20 Gy in a
hypofractionated regimen of five or fewer fractions, to
potentially control the lesion while not causing serious normal tissue complications. However, irrespective of which treatment regimen is used, treatment
management decisions are made based on the planned
dose distributions, which ultimately reflect the treatment planning techniques used. These decisions may
include, for example, the choice of one plan over
another, treatment safety margins, field arrangement,
optimization technique, type of calculation algorithm,
and ultimately the level of dose conformity.
Given the increased risk of toxicity caused by dose
fall off into surrounding normal tissues, special care is
required in both the planning and delivery of SBRT to
ensure the safety and efficacy of this emerging treatment
paradigm. Avoiding normal tissue requires treatment
plans with isodose lines tightly enclosing the target
volume to achieve a high conformity level (Benedict
et al. 2010). Despite the technical advances in treatment
planning systems, treatment planning for SBRT is a
complex process, which involves the use of information
from CT, PET and/or MRI examinations in order to
localize the target volume and surrounding normal
structures, including defining treatment margins. One
then determines the treatment delivery technique and
beam setup, optimizes the plan (beam directions, fieldshapes, intensity distributions…etc.), performs the
dose calculation, evaluates and reoptimizes the plan if

needed, and verifies the plan on the treatment machine.
Also as part of this process, dose calculation and treatment plan evaluation depend strongly on the accuracy of
the dose calculation algorithm in the treatment planning
system, especially when treating small lesions with
narrow beams passing through low-density regions, such
as lung (Das et al. 2008; Ding et al. 2007).
The process of planning an SBRT patient is a chain
involving all these activities. Any weak link in the
chain reduces the efficacy of making the other steps
more precise. Radiation oncologists are usually concerned of a possible compromise in treatment efficacy
for any weak link in the planning chain process.
Practice guideline documents on the safe development and ongoing maintenance of SBRT programs,
including treatment planning, is central to the success
of such programs (Benedict et al. 2010; Potters et al.
2010; Solberg et al. 2012). The American Association
of Physicists in Medicine (AAPM) Task Group
Report No. 101 (TG-101) provides comprehensive
guidelines on SBRT planning margins, beam configurations, dosimetric considerations, and normal tissue
tolerance doses for various healthy tissues in the
hypofractionated setting (Benedict et al. 2010).
In this chapter, treatment planning for linac-based
systems for lung, liver, spine, and pancreas is discussed. Useful strategies for plan simulation, segmentation, optimization and delivery, and evaluation
are reviewed. Furthermore, the influence of the dose
calculation algorithms on the accuracy of dose distributions is discussed.

2

Immobilization/Simulation,
Imaging, and Segmentation

The primary modality for imaging in SBRT is computed tomography (CT). FDG Positron emission
tomography (FDG-PET) and Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (MRI) are used to a lesser extent (see
Table 1 for itemized explanation).
In lung tumors, 4DCT is widely used to determine
the internal target volume (ITV) by contouring clinical target volume (CTV) on some or all of the phase
images and combining them into a single volume
(Taremi et al. 2012; Stephans et al. 2012; Li et al.
2011; Takeda et al. 2011; Bral et al. 2011; Schellenberg et al. 2011; Ong et al. 2010; Guckenberger

Institution

University of
Rochester

University of
Toronto

Cleveland
Clinic,
Washington
University

Japan–multiinstitution

Japan–multiinstitution

Site

Lung (Dhakal
et al. 2012)

Lung (Taremi
et al. 2012; Li
et al. 2011)

Lung (Stephans
et al. 2012)

Lung (Onishi
et al. 2011)

Lung (Takeda
et al. 2011)

CT (free breathing with
slow acquistion 6–8 s per
slice)

CT (\= 3 mm thickness)

CT (3 mm slice thickness)

CT

CT, MR/PET if available

Imaging

Table 1 SBRT parameters for lung, liver, spine and pancreas

ITV outlined with CT window
level –600 and width of 1,500.
PTV = ITV ? 6–8 mm
margin

Contoured on CT scan.
GTV ? 7–15 mm
margin = PTV

Contoured on CT scan at endinspiration and end-expiration

4DCT end-exhale and endinhale contours merged (ITV),
isotropic margin of 5 mm for
PTV. If excursion exceeded
10 mm, abdominal
compression used to restrict
motion

GTV on CT, MR/PET.
PTV = GTV ? 10 mm craniocaudal, 7 mm elsewhere

Segmentation

corset used to
reduce respiratory
motion

BodyFix;
Abdominal
compression
device to reduce
respiratory
movement,
adjusted under
fluoroscopy

VacLok or chest
board device. If
excursion
exceeded 10 mm,
abdominal
compression used
to restrict motion.
CBCT was
acquired prior to
RT, after coplanar
beams (prior to
noncoplanar
beams). CBCT
repeated until
within ± 3 mm
and 3

Vacuum bag, endexpiratory breathhold,
NovalisExacTrac
patient positioning

Immobilization

Oligometastics lung
tumor and primary
lung tumor

Operable Stage 1
NSCLC (patient
refused surgery)

dynamic
arcs, multiple
noncoplanar
beams
dynamic
conformal
arcs

Isolated lesions

Inoperable
nonsmall cell lung
ca

Pulmonary
metastases from
soft tissue sarcomas

Site—specific

1–7 dynamic
arcs (6 MV)

9–12
multiple
nonopposing
coplanar/
noncoplanar
beams

conformal
arcs, multiple
fixed
coplanar
beams

Beam
orientation

(continued)

2.5 cm
(0.7–5.0)

\5 cm

2.4 cm
(0.9–
5.7 cm)

Lesion
size

Treatment Planning for Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy
93

Institution

University
Hospital,
Brussels,
Belgium

MD
Anderson
Cancer
Center

MD
Anderson
Cancer
Center

VU Medical
Center,
Netherlands

University of
Wurzburg,
Germany

Washington
University

Cleveland
Clinic,
Washington
University

Lung (Bral
et al. 2011)

Lung (Peng
et al. 2011;
Kelly et al.
2010)

Lung
(Ikushima et al.
2011)

Lung (Ong
et al. 2010)

Lung
(Guckenberger
et al. 2010)

Lung (Bradley
et al. 2010)

Lung (Videtic
et al. 2010)

(continued)

Site

Table 1

CT (free breathing), CT
(end inspiration), CT (end
expiration)

CT ? 4DCT

4DCT

4DCT (2.5 mm slice
thickness)

CT, 4DCT

4DCT. If tumor motion on
4DCT [1 cm and patient
able to hold breath, take
multiple breath-hold scans.
If breath-hold scans show
minimal tumor movement,
treat with BH

CT (contrasted), FDG-PET,
CT end-expiration and endinspiration

Imaging

CTV = ITV = union of tumor
on all images,
PTV = ITV ? 3–5 mm
margin

ITV = union of CT tumor and
tumor segmented on 4DCT
MIP

ITV = union of end-exhalation
and end-inhalation CTVs,
PTV = ITV ? 5 mm margin

ITV = 4DCT GTV,
PTV = ITV ? 5 mm. Other
OARs = lung, spinal cord,
chest wall, trachea, esophagus,
heart

ITV drawn from 4DCT MIP
with isotropic 8 mm expansion,
PTV = ITV ? 3 mm isotropic
expansion

GTVs on all BH images union,
margin of 8 mm for CTV, and
further margin of 3 mm for
PTV. Critical structures: spinal
cord, esophagus, trachea, main
bronchus, heart, lung

GTV drawn on CT. If
motion [8 mm, ITV created
from end-expiration and endinspiration sets. PTV = GTV/
ITV ? isotropic 5 mm margin

Segmentation

BodyFix with
abdominal
compression

Elekta SBF or
BodyFix.
Diaphragm
compression if
tumor motion
was [ 5 mm

average of
seven
noncoplanar,
nonopposing
IMRT beams

8–11 beams

5–7 coplanar
and
noncoplanar
6 MV beams

At least 2
VMAT arcs

no immbolization,
arms above head

Elekta SBF or
BodyFix

6–9 6 MV
coplanar
beams

5–8 6 MV
beams,
dynamic
wedges

7 coplanar,
static,
nonIMRT
beams

Beam
orientation

VacLok cradle or
BodyFix cradle

Hemi-body
vacuum bag, arms
above head. RPM
for respiratory
monitoring and
MV beam contro

Platinum coil
fiducials, low
density cradle, 6–
8 infrared markers
on thorax

Immobilization

Inoperable early
stage lung cancer

Early stage NSCLC

Primary or
metastatic NSCLC

Large stage 1
NSCLC

Stage 1 NSCLC,
metastatic lung
cancer, local
recurrence of lung
cancer

Early stage lung
cancer

Early stage NSCLC

Site—specific

(continued)

9 cc (1–
149 cc)

75 cc (40–
165 cc)

Lesion
size

94
M. Miften et al.

Institution

Indiana
University

Korea–multiinstitution

Netherlands
Cancer
Institute,
Netherlands

Memorial
SloanKettering
Cancer
Center

Lung (Fakiris
et al. 2009)

Lung (Song
et al. 2009)

Lung Sonke
et al. (2009)

Lung (Hoppe
et al. 2008)

(continued)

Site

Table 1

4DCT

CT, 4DCBCT

CT

CT and PET

Imaging

ITV = union of GTV from
4DCT ? 0–2 mm margin,
PTV = CTV ? 5 mm margin

PTV = mid-ventilation
GTV ? margins to account for
residual error from 4DCBCT

CTV = GTV,
PTV = CTV ? 5 mm radially
and 1 cm superior–inferior

CTV = GTV from CT,
PTV = CTV ? 5 mm in the
radial direction and 1 cm in the
superior–inferior direction

Segmentation

16
noncoplanar,
nonopposing
treatment
beams (10
MV)

3–7 coplanar
IMRT beams

CBCT used to
correct tumor
positioning

10–12
coplanar,
nonopposing
conformal
beams.

Beam
orientation

Supine, free
breathing with
arm and knee
support (no other
immobilization or
abdominal
compression).
Residual motion
(tumor
misalignment)
measured from 2
4DCBT scans
prior to treatment

Elekta SBF with
abdominal
compression/
active breathing
control/gating.
Tumor position
verified initially
with fluorscopy
and then with CT
on day 1 and day 3
of treatment

Elekta SBF with
abdominal
compression

Immobilization

Stage 1 NSCLC

Peripheral lung
tumors

Medically
inoperable stage 1
lung cancer
adjacent to large
bronchus

Early stage NSCLC

Site—specific

(continued)

\=5 cm in
size

2.3 cm
(1.2–
4.5 cm)

Lesion
size

Treatment Planning for Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy
95

Institution

Sweden,
Norway,
Denmark multiinstitution

University of
Marburg,
Germany

University of
Colorado

Memorial
SloanKettering
Cancer
Center

Korea
Institute of
Radiological
and Medical
Sciences

Lung
(Baumann
et al. 2008)

Lung (Fritz
et al. 2008)

Lung/Liver
(McCammon
et al. 2009)

Liver
(Goodman
et al. 2010)

Liver (Seo
et al. 2010)

(continued)

Site

Table 1

slow CT (2 mm slice
thickness), 5–7 days after
fiducial implantation

biphasic CT (1.25 mm slice
thickness) ± 4DCT
(2.5 mm slice thickness)

slow CT (single 3 mm slice
every 4 s), MR and/or PET
when available

4DCT

CT

Imaging

AlphaCradle, 6
fiducials, belts to
compress
abdomen

AlphaCradle with
arms above head,
3–5 gold fiducial
seeds

CTV = GTV from biphasic CT
or ITV from union of biphasic
CT and 4DCT end-inhalation
and end-exhalation;
PTV = CTV ? 3–5 mm
margin (if from 4DCT),
CTV ? 5–10 mm margin (if no
4DCT)
ITV is considered to be GTV
segmented on the slow CT,
PTV = ITV ? 4 mm margin

VacLok or
AlphaCradle.
ABC or
abdominal
compression with
hard plastic plate
(unable to comply
with ABC).
Exactrac tumor
positioning

Elekta SBF.
Second CT scan
immediately
before treatment
for verification

Elekta SBF;
abdominal
compression if
motion [10 mm

Immobilization

GTV from slow CT, expanded
5 mm radially and 10 mm
craniocaudally

CTV = GTV defined on endexhale, end-inhale and midventilation, ITV = union of
CTVs on the 3 scans,
PTV = ITV ? 10 mm in axial
plan or 15 mm in craniocaudal
plane

CTV = GTV ? 1–2 mm
margin, PTV = CTV ? 5 mm
radial margin and 10 mm
craniocaudal margin

Segmentation

Cyberknife

Cyberknife

Single or
multiple
dynamic
conformal
arcs or
multiple
coplanar
static beams

5–8 coplanar
fields

5–9 coplanar
or
noncoplanar
beams,
conformal to
the PTV

Beam
orientation

Primary or
metastatic liver
lesions

Stage 1 NSCLC

Inoperable stage 1
NSCLC

Site—specific

(continued)

50 c–
500 cc

\=10 cm

16 cc (1–
51 cc)

Lesion
size

96
M. Miften et al.

CT or 4DCT

CT (end-exhale) and MRI

Aarhus
University
Hospital,
Denmark

USA–multiinstitution

University of
Toronto

Stanford

Liver (Kopek
et al. 2010)

Liver
(Rusthoven
et al. 2009)

Liver (Lee
et al. 2009)

Pancreas
(Schellenberg
et al. 2011)

CT (1.25 mm slice
thickness) ? 4DCT ? PET

CT (5 mm slice thickness
with 4 mm interslice
separation), PET/CT if
available

biphasic (arterial and
venous phase) CT for tumor
definition and large volume
CT for planning

Erasmus
University
Medical
Center,
Netherlands

Liver (van der
Pool et al.
2010)

Imaging

Institution

(continued)

Site

Table 1

GTV drawn on CT, adjusted to
ITV on 4DCT, expanded 2–
3 mm for PTV. Critical
structures: duodenum, cord,
liver, kidney

GTV from end-exhale CT,
CTV = GTV ? 8 mm margin,
PTV = CTV ? variable
margins based on motion

GTV (CT) or ITV (from
4DCT). PTV = GTV/ITV
expanded by 5 mm radially and
10 mm cranio-caudally if ABC,
else 7 mm radially and 15 mm
craniocaudally if using
abdominal compression

GTV on CT and PET if
available,
CTV = GTV ? diagnostic
uncertainty,
PTV = CTV ? 5 mm radial
margin and 10 mm in the
cranial-caudal direction.

GTV = contrast enhancement
on biphasic CT.
PTV = CTV ? individualized
margins based on fiducial
motion assessed with
fluoroscopy

Segmentation

Supine, arms
above head in
AlphaCradle.
Fiducial markers

customized body
mold, active
breathing control,
abdominal
compression if
motion [5 mm.
CBCT and KV
fluoroscopy used
to localize tumor
at treatment

Vacuum type or
synthetic body
mold, with or
without
abdominal
compression.
Orthogonal X rays
(exactrac) or
CBCT used for
localizition

BodyFix with
abdominal
compression
(abdominal
compression
device attached to
BodyFix)

Elekta SBF with
maximum
possible
abdominal
compression

Immobilization

nine equally
spaced
nonopposed
beams

3–10 IMRT
beams with
up to 3
noncoplanar
beams

multiple
dynamic arcs
or multiple
([=7)
noncoplanar
beams

5–8 coplanar
or
noncoplanar
beams

4–10 fixed
beams

Beam
orientation

Locally advanced
nonmetastatic
pancreatic
adenocarcinoma

Liver metastases

Liver metastases

cholangiocarcinoma

Colorectal liver
metastases

Site—specific

(continued)

75.2 cc
(1.19–
3,090 cc)

32 cc (9–
205 cc)

maximum
size 6 cm,
maximum
of 3
lesions

Lesion
size

Treatment Planning for Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy
97

Institution

University of
Pittsburgh

Beth Israel
Deaconess

Stanford

Beth Israel
Deaconess

Stanford

University of
Toronto

MD
Anderson
Cancer
Center

Pancreas
(Rwigema
et al. 2011)

Pancreas
(Mahadevan
et al. 2010)

Pancreas
(Chang et al.
2009)

Spine
(Mahadevan
et al. 2011)

Spine (Daly
et al. 2011)

Spine (Foote
et al. 2011)

Spine (Nguyen
et al. 2010)

(continued)

Site

Table 1

CT and MRI

CT (1 mm slice
thickness) ? T1/T2
weighted MRI

CT (1.25 mm slice
thickness) ? MR (2 mm
slice thickness)

CT (1 mm
thickness) ± MRI

biphasic CT (1.25 mm slice
spacing), 4DCT, PET

CT

4DCT

Imaging

GTV = gross tumor on MRI,
CTV = entire vertebral body up
to and including endplates
excluding the disc and posterior
elements

GTV = from CT ? MR. CTV
(if no surgery) = entire
vertebral body if partially
involved and pedicles, lamina
and posterior spinous process.
CTV(if surgery) = GTV.
PTV = GTV ? 2 mm. Critical
structures = true spinal cord,
thecal sac

PTV = GTV, critical
structures = brainstem
(cervical lesion), kidney, liver,
lungs, bowel (lumbar/thoracic
lesion)

GTV from biphasic CT with
modifications to account for the
end-inhale and end-exhale
4DCT. PTV = GTV ? 2–
3 mm

CTV = GTV,
PTV = CTV ? margin
(\ 5 mm). Other
OARs = stomach, duodenum,
kidney, liver, spinal cord

ITV = 4DCT GTV ? 2 mm
margin

Segmentation

Elekta SBF.
Pretreatment CT
scanning using
ExaCT (CT on
rails and linear
accelerator)

Elekta SBF

Vacuum moldable
cushion (thoracic/
lumbar lesions),
aquaplast
(cervical spine
lesions)

VacLok; spine
tracking with
Cyberknife

cradle
immobilization
(Alpha cradle)

VacLok, 3–5 gold
fiducial seeds

AlphaCradle or
BodyFix

Immobilization

nine coplanar
beams with
collimator
rotation for
spinal cord
shielding

Cyberknife

Cyberknife

Cyberknife

Beam
orientation

Spinal metastases
from renal cell
carcinoma

Spinal mestastases

Spinal
hemangioblastomas

Spine metastasis

Unresectable
adenocarcinoma of
pancreas

Locally advanced
nonmetastatic
pancreatic cancer

Site—specific

(continued)

0.16 cc
(0.06–
9.80 cc)

79 cc (16–
223 cc)

Lesion
size

98
M. Miften et al.

Memorial
SloanKettering
Cancer
Center

UCSF

Duke
University

Spine (Gomez
et al. 2009)

Spine (Sahgal
et al. 2009)

Spine (Nelson
et al. 2009)

CT

CT and MRI (not fused,
just used as guidance for
the CT)

CT

Imaging

GTV = entire vertebral body
(including para-vertebral and
soft-tissue components), CTV
included entire vertebral body
and anterior one third of
pedicles

PTV = GTV

CTV = GTV ? 3–5 mm
margin PTV = CTV ? 1–
3 mm margin

Segmentation

custom cradle.
Orthogonal KV
images followed
by CBCT for
treatment
alignment

supine, patients
with cervical
spine tumors also
had a
thermoplastic
immobilization
mask.
CyberknifeXsight
skeletal tracking

custom cradle

Immobilization

VacLok Vacuum shaped moldable cushion for patient immobilization (CIVCO Medical Solutions, Kalona, IA)
NovalisExacTrac Image-guided positioning system (BrainLab AG, Feldkirchen, Germany)
BodyFix Patient immobilization system (Elekta AB, Stockholm, Sweden)
Cyberknife Robotic Radiosurgery system (Accuray, Sunnyvale, CA)
AlphaCradle Foam mold for patient immobilization (Smithers Medical Products, North Canton, OH)
RPM Real-time position management (Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto, CA)
Elekta SBF Stereotactic body frame (Elekta AB, Stockholm, Sweden)
ExaCT Integrated CT and linear accelerator (Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto, CA)
ABC Active breathing control

Institution

(continued)

Site

Table 1

multiple
dynamic
conformal
arcs, multiple
static
conformal
beams or
multiple
intensity
modulated
beams

Cyberknife

5–9
posteriorly
directed
IMRT beams

Beam
orientation

Spinal metastases

Spinal metastases

Parspinal tumors

Site—specific

PTV:
51 cc (8–
205 cc)

Lesion
size

Treatment Planning for Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy
99

100

M. Miften et al.

Fig. 1 Comparison of maximum intensity projection (MIP),
slow-CT (average), and end-of-exhale (EOE) coronal CT
images for a lung tumor with more than 2 cm motion. In the
left panel the coronal cut through the tumor using the MIP

image series is shown. In the next panel the same coronal cut is
displayed, but using the average image series. The right panel
shows the same cut, but using the EOE CT images. The red
contour depicts the ITV

et al. 2010; Hoppe et al. 2008). In some instances,
only the CTVs from the end-inhale and end-exhale
volumes are combined (Taremi et al. 2012; Stephans
et al. 2012; Li et al. 2011; Bral et al. 2011; Schellenberg et al. 2011; Videtic et al. 2010; Guckenberger
et al. 2010; Fritz et al. 2008), or segmented on a
maximum intensity projection (MIP) image (Ikushima et al. 2011). Slow CT scanning (4 s per slice
(McCammon et al. 2009), 6–8 s per slice (Takeda
et al. 2011) has also been used in an attempt to capture the tumor at all phases in each CT slice. Figure 1
shows an example of a lung tumor along with the ITV
contour on MIP, slow CT (average), and end-ofexhale (EOE) coronal slices. In this example, the
patient has a tumor motion of more than 2 cm with
hysteresis, and the MIP image was used to contour the
ITV.
CT slice thicknesses ranging from 2.5 to 3 mm
have been used (Stephans et al. 2012; Onishi et al.
2011; Ong et al. 2010; Takeda et al. 2011). European
Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer
(EORTC) recommends a slice thickness of 2–3 mm
(De Ruysscher et al. 2010), preferably with 4DCT and
FDG-PET. Planning treatment volume (PTV) margins
can range from 3 to 5 mm around the ITV, and as

high as 10–15 mm. Mid-ventilation scans have also
been used to define CTV, though PTV margins were
then been based on residual motion assessed with 4D
cone-beam CTs (4DCBCTs) (Sonke et al. 2009).
Breath-hold CT scanning has also been used, with
multiple breath-hold scans to assess tumor position
reproducibility (Peng et al. 2011; Kelly et al. 2010).
In general, the choice of ITV-to-PTV margin
reflects the extent of uncertainty in tumor motion on a
day-to-day basis. To reduce uncertainty, patients are
typically immobilized with, in order from least to
most immobilization: molded cradle (Taremi et al.
2012; Li et al. 2011; Ikushima et al. 2011; McCammon et al. 2009), stereotactic body frames, and vacuum bag systems (Dhakal et al. 2012; Stephans et al.
2012; Bignardi et al. 2011; Peng et al. 2011; Ikushima
et al. 2011; Kelly et al. 2010; Guckenberger et al.
2010; Bradley et al. 2010; Videtic et al. 2010; Song
et al. 2009; Fritz et al. 2008), stereotactic body frames
or vacuum bags in combination with abdominal
compression or active breathing control to reduce
tumor motion (Stephans et al. 2012; Bignardi et al.
2011; Bradley et al. 2010; Videtic et al. 2010;
Song et al. 2009; Lee et al. 2009; McCammon et al.
2009). Fiducials, though rarely used for lung SBRT

Treatment Planning for Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy

101

localization (perhaps because of migration and/or
complications issues), show promise of high retention
rates when in the form of coils (Hong et al. 2011).
Interestingly, EORTC recommendations (De Ruysscher et al. 2010) state that there is no need for rigid
immobilization [examples of minimal immobilization
have been implemented at VU Medical Center (Ong
et al. 2010) and the Netherlands Cancer Institute
(Sonke et al. 2009)], but encourages methods to
reduce tumor motion. While FDG-PET is often used
to aid lung tumor delineation [also recommended by
EORTC (De Ruysscher et al. 2010)], caution should
be exercised owing to partial volume effects, tumor
motion and, most importantly, possible misalignment
between the DICOM-registered CT and PET acquired
in the same session. The latter is mostly due to patient
motion between the time of CT acquisition and the
relatively extended time period for PET acquisition.
In liver and pancreatic tumors, CT is used with/
without 4DCT and fiducial markers. FDG-PET and
MRI have also aided tumor delineation (De Ruysscher et al. 2010). Biphasic CTs can aid in better
delineating the tumor (Goodman et al. 2010; Chang
et al. 2009). 4DCT phases or just end-exhale and/or
end-inhale have been used to demarcate ITVs
(Schellenberg et al. 2011; Rwigema et al. 2011;
Goodman et al. 2010; Rusthoven et al. 2009; Lee
et al. 2009; Chang et al. 2009), as also slow CTs that
attempt to capture the tumor on each slice in all
respiratory phases (Seo et al. 2010; McCammon et al.
2009). CT and 4DCT slice thicknesses ranging from
1.25 to 5 mm have been used (Schellenberg et al.
2011; Goodman et al. 2010; Seo et al. 2010; Kopek
et al. 2010; McCammon et al. 2009). As in lung
tumors, 4DCT is very useful in assessing respirationinduced tumor motion. The CTV/ITV-to-PTV
expansion varies from institution to institution ranging from 5 to 15 mm, typically larger in the craniocaudal direction (Schellenberg et al. 2011; Goodman
et al. 2010; Seo et al. 2010; Kopek et al. 2010; Rusthoven et al. 2009; Chang et al. 2009). A popular
margin recipe is 5 mm in the radial (axial) direction
and 10 mm in the craniocaudal direction (Kopek et al.
2010; Rusthoven et al. 2009; McCammon et al. 2009).
The types of immobilization for liver SBRT are the
same as that used for lung tumors (previous paragraph), including abdominal compression to reduce

tumor motion. Intrafraction motion for liver tumors
under abdominal compression has been shown to be
small (\0.13 mm) (Eccles et al. 2011). Fiducials are
also used to localize the tumor since they tend be less
migratory in liver and pancreas than lung (Schellenberg et al. 2011; Mahadevan et al. 2010; Goodman
et al. 2010; Seo et al. 2010).
In spinal tumors, CT is routinely used in conjunction with MRI to delineate tumor (Mahadevan
et al. 2011; Daly et al. 2011; Foote et al. 2011;
Nguyen et al. 2010; Sahgal et al. 2009). Typically, the
GTV is considered to be either the tumor as visible on
CT/MRI or the entire vertebral body. CTV expansion
can range from none to a few millimeters. Further,
PTV expansion can again range from 0 to 5 mm.
Thus, in some cases, PTV might be considered
identical to GTV. The CT slice thickness used is
approximately 1 mm (Mahadevan et al. 2011; Daly
et al. 2011; Foote et al. 2011). Immobilization types
range from vacuum-shaped molds to stereotactic body
frames. Pretreatment CBCTs or CTs may be used to
ensure setup accuracy (Nguyen et al. 2010; Nelson
et al. 2009).

3

Beam Arrangements

Table 1 includes itemized explanations of beam
arrangements used for SBRT treatment for lung, liver,
spine, and pancreas. Beam arrangements used in lung
treatment planning are either coplanar, noncoplanar
or a mixture of coplanar, and noncoplanar (Dhakal
et al. 2012; Taremi et al. 2012; Onishi et al. 2011; Li
et al. 2011; Bral et al. 2011; Ikushima et al. 2011;
Guckenberger et al. 2010; Videtic et al. 2010; Fakiris
et al. 2009; Sonke et al. 2009; McCammon et al.
2009; Hoppe et al. 2008; Baumann et al. 2008; Fritz
et al. 2008). In some cases, the beams are static
conformal (Dhakal et al. 2012; Taremi et al. 2012;
Onishi et al. 2011; Li et al. 2011; Ikushima et al.
2011; Guckenberger et al. 2010; Fakiris et al. 2009;
Sonke et al. 2009; McCammon et al. 2009; Baumann
et al. 2008; Fritz et al. 2008), while in others they are
intensity modulated (Bral et al. 2011; Videtic et al.
2010; Hoppe et al. 2008). Beam directions are
sometimes purposefully chosen to be nonopposing
(Taremi et al. 2012; Li et al. 2011; Videtic et al. 2010;

102

Fakiris et al. 2009). The number of beams ranges
from 5 to 16. EORTC recommends coplanar beam
arrangements for lung SBRT (De Ruysscher et al.
2010). However, a study comparing beam arrangements concluded that noncoplanar beams were best
when compared to coplanar beams or arcs (volumes at
high doses were equivalent between all, but volumes
at low doses were better with noncoplanar) (Lim et al.
2010). The noncoplanar arrangements studied used
either 2 noncoplanar beams (gantry 30, 330 with
couch 90) or 4 noncoplanar beams (gantry 30, 330
with couch 45, 315) and added coplanar beams to
bring the total to 7–11 beams. Arcs have also been
used, either as dynamic conformal arcs (DCA)
(Dhakal et al. 2012; Stephans et al. 2012; Onishi et al.
2011; Takeda et al. 2011; McCammon et al. 2009) or
volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT) (Ong
et al. 2010; Diot et al. 2012). The number of arcs used
can range from 1 to 7.
Liver and pancreas SBRT have utilized coplanar
and noncoplanar static beam arrangements (Schellenberg et al. 2011; van der Pool et al. 2010; Kopek
et al. 2010; Rusthoven et al. 2009; Lee et al. 2009;
McCammon et al. 2009). In some cases, these
arrangements are conformal and in others intensity
modulated (Schellenberg et al. 2011; van der Pool
et al. 2010; Kopek et al. 2010; Rusthoven et al. 2009;
Lee et al. 2009; McCammon et al. 2009). The typical
number of beams used for 3D conformal and intensity
modulated plans can range from 7 to 13 nonopposing
coplanar or noncoplanar fields. A planning study
suggested that computer optimized noncoplanar beam
directions could improve intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) for liver SBRT (de Pooter et al.
2008). Multiple dynamic conformal arcs (DCAs) have
also been utilized (Rusthoven et al. 2009; McCammon et al. 2009).
Spine SBRT has used multiple coplanar or noncoplanar beams with and without intensity modulation, as well as dynamic conformal arcs, and the
number of beams can range from 5 to 9 (Foote et al.
2011; Gomez et al. 2009; Nelson et al. 2009). Typically, beam directions are posteriorly directed for
reasons of low path length and reduced irradiation of
critical structures such as lung. A comparison of
VMAT versus IMRT showed that 2 full arcs were
comparable to IMRT (8–12 beams posteriorly directed, 100–150 span with separation of 15–25) in
spinal cord sparing (Wu et al. 2009).

M. Miften et al.

4

Plan Optimization

4.1

General Principles

As with conventionally fractionated therapies, the
goal in SBRT planning is to irradiate the target volume to conformal doses while minimizing the dose to
surrounding normal tissues. For SBRT, the importance of this task is magnified by the increased risk of
normal tissue injury associated with larger fraction
sizes (Hall and Giaccia 2006; Thames et al. 1982).
SBRT plans are characterized by highly conformal
dose distributions which are achieved by using a large
number of ideally nonoverlapping treatment beams or
arcs as described in Sect. 3. In general, dose prescriptions are specified at the 80 % (or lower) isodose
line with minimal or no margin for beam penumbra at
the PTV edge, in order to create a sharper dose gradient and thereby offer more sparing of healthy tissues
in comparison to conventional RT plans (Cardinale
et al. 1999; Jin et al. 2007; Benedict et al. 2010). This
also results in a large degree of dose heterogeneity
(i.e. hotspots); however, such hotspots are often
considered acceptable if they occur within the gross
tumor volume (Benedict et al. 2010).
As described in Sect. 2, the use of more than five
conformal beams is typically utilized for SBRT planning and beam arrangements can be either coplanar or
noncoplanar, with one or multiple iso-centers. In
addition, intensity modulation methods are often used
in SBRT planning and lower beam energies (e.g. 4–
6 MV) are typically used to avoid the larger penumbra
seen with higher energy beams caused by increased
lateral electron transport (Timmerman et al. 2005,
2007; Chang and Timmerman 2007; Papiez et al. 2003;
Benedict et al. 2010). The AAPM TG-101 report recommends that the entrance dose of individual beams be
limited to less than 30 % of the cumulative dose in
order to circumvent possible acute skin reactions
(Benedict et al. 2010).
SBRT is currently performed using a variety of
commercially available treatment devices (Chang and
Timmerman 2007). These can be multi-purpose (i.e.
also used for conventionally fractionated therapy) or
dedicated specifically for SBRT treatments. A technical brief prepared by the ECRI Institute Evidencebased Practice Center in 2011 found that of 124
centers reporting SBRT experiences for disease sites

Treatment Planning for Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy

103

including lung, liver, pancreas and spine, more than
50 % use conventional (i.e. C-arm type) linear
accelerator (linac)-based systems for SBRT delivery
(Tipton et al. 2011).

Niemierko et al. 1992; Wang et al. 1995; Alber and
Nusslin 1999). While forward planning allows users
more direct control when manipulating particular
aspects of a given plan (e.g. adjusting the location of a
hotspot appearing in unspecified normal tissue),
inverse planning can provide a more efficient means
of finding an acceptable planning solution.

4.2

Normal Tissue Dose Tolerances

Normal tissue dose tolerances vary widely and
depend on both the organ being irradiated and the
dose fractionation schedule. As a result, extrapolation
of normal tissue dose limits from data obtained using
conventionally fractionated treatment regimens is not
recommended. Unfortunately, normal tissue tolerance
data for SBRT remains somewhat limited. The
AAPM TG-101 report (Benedict et al. 2010) contains
a table of normal tissue dose tolerances for SBRT
delivered in one, three, and five fractions compiled
from SBRT experiences reported by the University of
Texas Southwestern (Timmerman 2008), the University of Virginia (Dunlap et al. 2009), and other
institutions. While providing a valuable resource, the
authors of TG-101 are careful to state that many of
the dose limits have not been independently validated
and that some of the data contains a certain measure
of educated guessing. It is, therefore, recommended
that the normal tissue dose tolerances adhered to
outside the setting of IRB approved clinical trials, be
derived from clinical experiences published in the
peer reviewed literature.

4.3

Forward Versus Inverse Planning

Linac-based planning techniques can be either forward or inverse and both are commonly used for
SBRT planning. With forward planning, treatment
parameters, including: field geometry, beam modifying devices, and beam weights are selected by the
treatment planner and manually adjusted to achieve
the desired dose distribution. This is, in contrast, to
inverse planning where the user specifies a set of plan
objectives and allows the computer to determine the
optimal set of parameters based on iterative optimization of a cost function. This cost function compares
the dose calculated in a given iteration with userdefined plan objectives and constraints, and can be
based on physical dose or various radiobiological
models (Bortfeld 1999; Palta and Mackie 2003;

4.4

Plan Classifications

4.4.1

Three-dimensional Conformal
Radiation Therapy
Three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy (3DCRT) uses beam modifying devices such as cerrobend
blocks or multi-leaf collimators (MLCs) to define the
shapes of field openings, so that they match the projection of the target volume from each gantry angle.
With MLC defined fields, the dose resolution depends
on the size of the MLC leaves. MLC leaf widths of
2.5–10 mm have been reported for use in SBRT planning (Nelson et al. 2009; Tanyi et al. 2009) and wedges
(either physical or virtual) are often employed. 3DCRT treatments are usually forward planned, though
some software applications allow for the use of inverse
planning methods to determine beam angles and/or
beam weights (Liu et al. 2004; de Pooter et al. 2008).
3D-CRT planning is well suited for SBRT. The
confluence of unmodulated beams at the center of
smaller lesions with 3D-CRT results in a high degree of
dose heterogeneity which contributes to steeper dose
gradients at the target edge and may be desirable in
terms of normal tissue sparing and dose escalation to
the gross tumor volume (GTV). In addition, for sites
that exhibit nonnegligible intra-fraction motion, such
as the lung and liver, the use of static beams eliminates
the possibility of interplay effects between the moving
target and moving MLC leaves, which can result in
under dosing of the target when only a few fractions are
delivered (Jiang et al. 2003; Bortfeld et al. 2002).
4.4.2

Intensity-Modulated Radiation
Therapy
With fixed-gantry Intensity-Modulated Radiation Therapy
(IMRT), the spatial intensity distribution of each treatment
field is modulated to produce the desired dose distribution.
This modulation is determined from the treatment plan,
which can be generated in a forward manner (as with fieldin-field planning), or more commonly using inverse

104

planning. In the latter case, the fluence for each beam is
divided into a large number of discrete beam elements
(beamlets)—each measuring only a few mm in size. The
dose resulting from these beamlets is calculated and the
relative weights of all beamlets are optimized simultaneously until the desired dose distribution is obtained.
Once the optimization is completed, optimized
fluence maps are used to generate either a physical
compensator for each beam or MLC leaf sequences to
be delivered at the treatment machine. The use of
stationary compensators for IMRT eliminates MLC/
target motion interplay effects; however, the additional cost and effort associated with creating separate
compensators for each treatment field has resulted in
most centers opting to use MLCs for IMRT delivery.
MLC leaf sequences generated for IMRT can either
be step-and-shoot, where the beam is turned off while
the leaves move between static positions, or dynamic,
where the MLC motion occurs while the beam is on.
The main advantage of fixed-gantry IMRT compared to 3D-CRT for SBRT treatments is the enhanced
ability to shape the dose distribution in order to improve
target coverage and/or avoid critical structures located
adjacent to the target volume. An example of this is
seen in Fig. 2 for a liver SBRT case where the target
volume is adjacent to the heart. In this Figure, the dose
distributions from a 3D-CRT plan with 10 co-planar
beams (Fig. 2a) and an IMRT plan with 10 co-planar
beams (Fig. 2b) are highly conformal, but in the case of
the IMRT plan the 30 Gy isodose line is steered away
more from the heart.

4.4.3 Rotational Therapies
Another approach to linac-based SBRT involves the
use of rotational treatments, including DCA and
VMAT therapies (Yu 1995; Otto 2008; Bzdusek et al.
2009; Solberg et al. 2001). With DCA therapy, the
gantry rotates through a given arc while the MLC
dynamically conforms the radiation field to the projection of the target volume at each gantry angle.
Typically, the dose rate of the treatment machine is
fixed for a given arc and multiple arcs can be used.
With VMAT, the gantry also rotates through a given
arc while the MLC dynamically shapes the field;
however, the MLC does not necessarily conform to
the projected target contour from each angle. Instead,
the MLC may cover parts of the target as seen from
certain angles in order to improve dose uniformity or
sparing of critical structures (Bortfeld and Webb

M. Miften et al.

2009). Additionally, certain VMAT planning and
delivery systems allow for modulation of the dose rate
and/or gantry speed during arc delivery.
Rotational SBRT plans typically use 1–7 coplanar
or noncoplanar arcs (i.e. the arcs may or may not
overlap one another). Arcs will often subtend less
than 360 degrees, with sections omitted to improve
avoidance of critical structures. The main advantages
of rotational therapy compared to fixed-gantry IMRT
are improved conformality of the dose distribution in
the high dose regions, as well as possible reduction of
the treatment time (Palma et al. 2008; Bortfeld and
Webb 2009; Rao et al. 2010; McGrath et al. 2010;
Diot et al. 2012). The former stems from the use of
more treatment angles, which allows for the dose
fall-off at any point on the edge of the target to be
defined more equally by the field edge (penumbra) as
well as the depth dose. The reduction in treatment
time stems from greater efficiency in the delivery of
arc treatments, as well as avoidance of unnecessarily
complicated leaf sequences with fixed-field IMRT
that can arise from mathematical degeneracy in the
optimization solution space (i.e. different intensity
maps give rise to near equivalent dose distributions)
(Bortfeld and Webb 2009). A study comparing 2–5
VMAT arcs to 10 conventional coplanar static beams
in the treatment of peripheral lung tumors reported
that VMAT had superior conformity and chest wall
sparing, with the additional advantage of faster
delivery time (Verbakel et al. 2009). Figure 3a shows
the dose distribution from a lung SBRT case treated
with 2 DCAs and Figure 3b shows the dose distribution from a T1 spine SBRT case treated with one
VMAT arc. Highly conformal plans are achieved with
optimal sparing of the normal lung and chest well in
the lung case, and cord in the spine case.
When deciding between rotational and fixed gantry
treatments, one, often, must choose between more
evenly distributing low doses over a large volume of
normal tissue with rotational therapy versus giving
smaller volumes of normal tissue higher doses with
fixed-gantry treatments. In cases where the PTV is
located, a sufficient distance away from high-risk
structures, as with many liver and lung SBRT cases, the
improved dose conformity and/or reduced treatment
time is preferable. However, in certain cases where highrisk critical structures are located directly adjacent to
the PTV, fixed gantry IMRT may allow for improved
normal tissue sparing and would be preferred.

Treatment Planning for Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy

105

Fig. 2 SBRT dose distributions for a liver case. The
prescription dose is 54 Gy (blue) to PTV (cyan line) in three
fractions. a 3D-CRT plan with 10 co-planar beams. b IMRT

plan with 10 co-planar beams. Both plans show highly
conformal dose but in the case of the IMRT plan the 30 Gy
isodose volume (yellow) is sculpted away more from the heart

Fig. 3 a SBRT dose distribution for a lung case treated with
DCAs. PTV (pink line) treated to 36 Gy (green) in three
fractions using 2 DCAs (gantry 20–160 and 340–20 at 90
couch angle; treatment time *6 min). Magenta, cyan, and
purple colors represent the 41, 30, and 18 Gy isodose lines.

b SBRT dose distribution for a T1 spine case treated with
VMAT. PTV (white line) treated to 16 Gy (green) in one
fraction using one arc (gantry 200–160; treatment time
*16 min). Red, light-blue, and dark-blue colors represent the
19, 12, and 9 Gy lines

An example of this is sometimes seen with certain
spine SBRT cases where one wishes to irradiate part
or all of a vertebral body while simultaneously
avoiding the spinal cord. The use of DCAs or VMAT
would likely produce a more conformal dose distribution at the higher dose levels; however, the greater
degree of modulation afforded by fixed gantry IMRT
may be required in order to meet the cord tolerance
(Yenice et al. 2003).

4.5

IMRT Planning and Respiratory
Motion

A major challenge with SBRT is intra-fraction target
motion caused by the patient’s breathing. For fixed
gantry and rotational IMRT-based planning of tumors
subject to respiratory motion, one must bear in mind the
interplay effect, which describes the interplay between
a given MLC position and instance of radiation delivery

106

M. Miften et al.

with the position of the tumor in the respiratoryinduced motion cycle at the same instance (Bortfeld
et al. 2002). The interplay effect has been shown to
average out over the course of 30 or more treatment
fractions (Yu et al. 1998; Bortfeld et al. 2002). However, in the SBRT setting, where 1–5 dose fractions are
delivered, the interplay effect may compromise the
planned dose distribution, suggesting that IMRT must
be used cautiously for SBRT, particularly in situations
where tumor motion is expected to be large. More
recently, VMAT is becoming more available for
SBRT-based treatments. The significant reduction in
treatment time made possible with VMAT is likely to
mitigate patient movement on the treatment table
caused by discomfort experienced during a long treatment procedure, and thereby improve delivery quality
(Matuszak et al. 2010; Diot et al. 2012). However, as
with fixed-gantry IMRT, VMAT-based plans are also
subject to the interplay effect, which must be considered depending on the mobility of the tumor and the
degree of modulation of the MLC fields.
Motion management strategies to reduce respiratory motion and improve the accuracy of treatment
planning/delivery have been reported. Generally, such
strategies can be divided into three categories: motion
suppression, respiratory gating, and tumor tracking
(Timmerman et al. 2005; Herfarth et al. 2000; Lax
et al. 1994; Wulf et al. 2000; McQuaid and Webb
2006; Zimmerman et al. 2009; Keall et al. 2006;
D’Souza et al. 2005). Methods aimed at motion suppression are the most common and usually involve
some form of abdominal compression, as described in
Sect. 2. Abdominal compression devices such as
compression paddles, bands, and pressurized compression belts seek to restrict diaphragm motion and
have demonstrated the ability to reduce the target
motion amplitude to less than 10 mm (Herfarth et al.
2000; Lax et al. 1994; Wulf et al. 2000).

5

Dose Computations

5.1

Accuracy Requirements

As with treatment planning for any treatment site or
fractionation scheme, the accuracy of the dose calculation algorithm is of paramount importance in the
clinical treatment process. The AAPM TG-85 report
(Papanikolaou et al. 2004) on Tissue Inhomogeneity

Corrections for Megavoltage beams notes that a 5 %
change in dose may result in a 10–20 % change in
tumor control probability (TCP) at a TCP of 50 and
20–30 % impact on normal tissue complication
probabilities (NTCP). The report further cites two
examples where a 7 % difference in dose delivered to
different groups of patients was discovered by a
radiation oncologist through clinical observations
(Papanikolaou et al. 2004). The AAPM TG-105 report
(Chetty et al. 2007) and the review article by Reynaert
et al. (Reynaert et al. 2007) provide examples of
numerous studies reported on the inaccuracies associated with conventional algorithms for dose calculations in patient-specific treatment sites, such as the
lung.
In the case of SBRT planning, one could argue that
dose computation accuracy requirements are even
higher given the fact that, in many instances, particularly those related to thoracic tumors, the radiation
field sizes are often much smaller than those used in
conventionally fractionated treatment plans. Specifically, the use of small field sizes is prevalent in SBRT
planning, including in treatment sites, such as the
lung, liver, pancreas, and spine (where elongated
fields with small field widths are often employed).

5.2

Calculation Algorithms

Comprehensive reviews of dose algorithms are provided in the AAPM TG-85 report as well as in the
article by Ahnesjo and Aspradakis (Ahnesjo and
Aspradakis 1999). The goal of a dose calculation
algorithm is to accurately predict dose deposition in
tissues, which occurs when photons interact with the
material, and liberate electrons which deposit dose
within the tissue. The discrepancies in accuracy
among algorithms can be attributed mainly to the
different approaches used to compute scatter dose
distributions, especially related to electron scatter,
which is central to accurate dose calculation under
regions of charged particle disequilibrium (CPD).
The development of dose calculation algorithms
began with empirically based approaches, where dose
was computed based on measurements in a water
phantom, without accounting for tissue heterogeneity.
Algorithms evolved and began incorporating inhomogeneity corrections, based on scaling of the primary beam according to the radiological path-length

Treatment Planning for Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy

of the tissue encountered. These methods, while
appropriate for primary beam attenuation, are limited
in accounting for photon and electron scattering.
Among the first ‘‘physics-based’’ algorithms for dose
calculation was the convolution method proposed by
Mackie et al. in 1985 (Mackie et al. 1985). In this
approach, the primary dose distribution within the
patient is convolved with a dose deposition kernel that
is precomputed for different mono-energetic beams
using Monte Carlo simulations (Mackie et al. 1985).
The convolution method was shown to produce
accurate results under conditions of electronic disequilibrium as well as in the vicinity of low density
tissues (Mackie et al. 1985; Ahnesjo 1989). The
convolution method was later modified to incorporate
density-based scaling of both the primary fluence and
dose spread arrays, thereby accounting for photon and
electron scatter more accurately in heterogeneous
media (Miften et al. 2001)—this technique is referred
to as the convolution/superposition method (Miften
et al. 2001; Papanikolaou et al. 2004).
More recently, the Monte Carlo (MC) method has
become available for clinical dose calculations due to
significant advances in algorithmic efficiency (Fippel
1999; Kawrakow 2001) and computer processing
speeds. With this approach, individual particle trajectories are tracked from the linear accelerator treatment
head to the point where dose is deposited within the
patient tissues. The development of the ETRAN (Berger and Seltzer 1973), EGS (Nelson et al. 1985), and
subsequently BEAM (Rogers et al. 1995) MC code
systems served as a catalyst for MC-based applications
in medical physics. As the MC method is the only
algorithm based on fundamental physical principles
(i.e. probabilities of particle interactions with matter), it
is able to properly account for primary photon attenuation as well as photon and electron scattering.
A critical component of the dose algorithm accuracy
is related to proper commissioning of the algorithm.
Commissioning of the algorithm by following recommendations of practice guidelines (Fraass et al. 1998),
and including experimental testing using small fields
(Chetty et al. 2007), relevant to SBRT planning, is
important. Since large uncertainties in the measurements will be propagated to the beam model, resulting
possibly in systematic uncertainties in dose calculations. Understanding the complexities associated with
small field measurements, and taking the necessary
precautions to limit the uncertainties is essential.

107

5.3

Effects of Treatment Site
Inhomogeneities on Dose
Calculations

5.3.1 Lung
SBRT has become a standard-of-practice for medically inoperable, early stage nonsmall cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) (Timmerman et al. 2003). The presence of
low-density lung tissue in the vicinity of or surrounding thoracic tumors significantly confounds the
radiation dose computation problem in lung cancer
treatment planning. Conditions of CPD at small field
sizes are exacerbated in low-density tissues, such as
the lung where the range of the electrons increases
significantly relative to unit-density like tissues.
Consequently, loss of charged particle equilibrium
(CPE) occurs at much larger field sizes in lung than in
water-equivalent tissues.
For SBRT lung treatment planning, where smaller
field sizes are often employed, the dose computation
problem is therefore even more complex. Because,
dose algorithms employing heterogeneity corrections
based on radiological path lengths do not account
explicitly for transport of secondary electrons, they
can be severely limited in accuracy under nonequilibrium conditions. Moreover in low density, lungequivalent tissues, the range of the secondary electrons contributes to the dose ‘‘build-down’’ effect at
the edges of the tumor (at the lung-tumor interface),
an effect which increases with beam energy. The
‘‘build-down’’ effect produces a ‘‘ring’’ of reduced
dose at the tumor boundary, which due to the
increasing electron range with energy, becomes more
severe with increasing energy. Based on the above
considerations, the Radiation Therapy Oncology
Group 2005 (RTOG) No. 0236 (Radiation Therapy
Oncology Group. RTOG 0236: a phase II trial of
SBRT in the treatment of patients with medically
inoperable stage i/ii nonsmall cell lung cancer. 2005)
excluded the use of radiation field sizes less than
3.5 cm and allowed energies in the range 4–10 MV,
with restrictions on the use of higher energy beams.
The AAPM TG-101 report (Benedict et al. 2010)
recommends that pencil-beam (PB) algorithms
incorporating 1-D scatter corrections not be used for
lung SBRT dose calculations. Rather, algorithms
including 3-D scatter integration such as convolution/
superposition, which have been found to perform
adequately in most clinical situations, including under

108

M. Miften et al.
Table 2 Percent dose differences in the PTV minimum dose
among MC and PB- (1-D, 3-D) and convolution-based algorithms (AAA and CCC), averaged over 11 patients treated with
SBRT. Algorithms were commissioned within the iPlan,
Eclipse and Pinnacle treatment planning systems

Fig. 4 PTV DVHs for a peripheral lung tumor planned with
6 MV photons using the pencil beam-type (1-D-PB, 3-D-PB),
convolution/superposition type (AAA and CCC) and Monte
Carlo (MC) algorithms. Algorithms were commissioned within
the iPlan, Eclipse, and Pinnacle treatment planning systems

circumstances of electronic disequilibrium such as the
lung tissue interface, are acceptable (Benedict et al.
2010). The TG-101 report also states that for the most
complex situations, involving small, peripheral lung
tumors, surrounded entirely by lung (‘‘island-like’’
lesions), the MC method would be ideal (Benedict
et al. 2010).
Figure 4 shows PTV DVHs for a peripheral lung
tumor. Doses were planned, initially, with the 1-D PB
method and then recomputed using the same MUs
with: 3-D PB (as implemented in Eclipse, Varian,
Palo Alto, CA), Analytical Anisotropic Algorithm
(AAA, convolution/superposition type algorithm, as
implemented in Eclipse), Collapsed Cone Convolution (CCC, convolution/superposition type algorithm
as implemented in Pinnacle, Philips Radiation
Oncology Systems, Madison, WI), and Monte Carlo
(iPlan). Significant differences were observed
between the PB and physics-based algorithms (convolution/superposition type and MC), likely related to
the location and size of the tumor as well as beam
arrangements. Substantial differences are also found
in the minimum PTV dose among the AAA (convolution/superposition-type) and the collapsed cone
convolution (convolution/superposition-type) and MC
algorithms, the latter two which are in good agreement. Table 2 shows results for minimum PTV dose
differences, averaged over 11 SBRT lung patient
plans among MC and the PB (1-D and 3-D) and the
convolution/superposition-type algorithms (AAA and
CCC). The standard deviations and maximum dose

% Diff.
DxDmc

1-DPB

3-DPB

AAA
Conv/
super.type

CCC
Conv/
super.type

Ave

29.2

21.6

1.5

–2.0

STD
dev

12.1

12.8

4.6

5.1

Max
diff

63.2

48.5

12.7

8.7

Fig. 5 Mean lung dose (MLD) computed with MC as a
function of MLD computed with 1-D-PB using the iPlan
treatment planning system

deviations in the minimum PTV doses are also shown.
In general, convolution/superposition-type algorithms
agreed with MC within 2 %, while the differences
between MC and PB algorithms were up to 30 %.
Figure 5 shows the correlation between mean lung
dose (MLD) in Gy computed with MC as a function
of MLD computed with the PB algorithm for 50
patients with early stage NSCLC treated with SBRT.
The correlation in MLDs between these algorithms is
very high; MC predicts a 10 % lower dose to the
normal lung than the PB method. This may suggest
that one could simply scale the doses by 10 % for an
equivalent dose distribution. However, that would be
entirely fallacious because it would not account for
the lateral constriction in the dose distribution (due to
lateral electron scattering) that affects the target and
results in a preferentially greater reduction in the dose

Treatment Planning for Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy

109

in the vicinity of the tumor (high isodose lines) relative to the lower isodose regions.

quality of SBRT plans. Dose statistics, such as the
minimum, maximum, and average doses received by a
particular structure, as well as dose/volume parameters
that specify the volume of an organ receiving a given
dose are commonly used. Other metrics include target
coverage, heterogeneity indices (e.g., the highest dose
received by 2 % of the target divided by the lowest dose
received by 98 % of the target), and conformity indices
such as the prescription isodose to target volume
(PITV) ratio, defined as the volume contained by the
prescription isodose surface divided by the planning
target volume (Shaw et al. 1993), and the conformation
number (CN) proposed by van’t Riet et al. (Riet et al.
1997) given by

5.3.2

Lower Thoracic and Upper
Gastrointestinal Tract
Application of SBRT in the treatment of liver
(Dawson et al. 2005; Schefter et al. 2005) and pancreas (Koong et al. 2004) cancers has been reported.
With the exception of liver tumors located at the
superior region of the liver, near the diaphragm/lung
interface, it is unlikely that substantial tissue heterogeneity will be encountered with liver lesions. Similarly, the variation in tissue density in the vicinity of
the pancreas is relatively small. Therefore, for SBRT
of liver and pancreas tumors, with PTV dimensions
larger than *3–4 cm, conventional algorithms
employing radiological path-length corrections may
be reasonably accurate. For treatment of tumors
smaller than 3 cm, PB algorithms will be limited in
accuracy and convolution-type algorithms may be
warranted.
5.3.3 Spine
Spine SBRT has been performed and results reported
at different institutions (Sahgal et al.; Yamada et al.
2008; Yin et al. 2002; Sahgal et al. 2009). The biggest
challenge for treatment planning of the spine is to
achieve an extremely sharp dose fall-off between the
vertebral body and the spinal cord. Pencil-beam-type
algorithms have been shown to be reasonably accurate; however, caution must be exercised when using
elongated fields with small field widths. For treatment
with a 6 MV beam, it is advisable to use field widths
not smaller than 3 cm to mitigate loss of CPE. If
smaller field sizes are required, it is prudent to consider using a convolution-type algorithm for dose
computation.

6

Plan Evaluation

6.1

Evaluation Metrics

Careful review of the target and normal tissue doses
during the treatment planning evaluation process is
essential. A number of practice guidelines have been
published and can aid the treatment planner in plan
evaluation process (Benedict et al. 2010; Solberg et al.
2012). A variety of metrics can be used to assess the

CN ¼

2
VT;pres
VT;pres VT;pres

¼
VT
Vpres
VT  Vpres

where Vpres is the volume of tissue receiving a dose
greater than or equal to the prescription dose, VT,pres is
the volume within the target receiving a dose greater
than or equal to the prescription dose, and VT is the
planning target volume. The CN ranges from zero to
one and takes into account both the dose conformity
and target coverage in a single value. Additionally,
the dose spillage outside of the target can be monitored by looking at the hottest dose within 2 cm of
planning target volume, while the conformity of lower
isodose lines can be evaluated using R50, defined as
the ratio of the 50 % isodose volume divided by the
planning target volume (Chang and Timmerman
2007).

7

Summary

Treatment planning plays an important role in the
clinical management of SBRT patients. Furthermore,
the safety requirements associated with SBRT
necessitate that the treatment planning and delivery
processes be as accurate as possible. Plans should be
developed with a careful understanding of the activities involved in the treatment process starting from
simulation to radiation delivery. SBRT is currently
undergoing rapid development, and major changes of
practice are being employed in the planning process.
Therefore, it is important that the implication of
choosing dose gradient requirements, beam configurations, planning margins, normal tissue constraints,

110

and limitations of the algorithms for dose computation under different circumstances is understood when
implementing new SBRT techniques in the clinic.
Practice guideline documents, RTOG protocols, and
the scientific literature are highly recommended as a
didactic educational tool for SBRT planning of the
lung, liver, spine, pancreas, and other disease sites.

References
Ahnesjo A (1989) Collapsed cone convolution of radiant
energy for photon dose calculation in heterogeneous media.
Med Phys 16(4):577–592
Ahnesjo A, Aspradakis MM (1999) Dose calculations for
external photon beams in radiotherapy. Phys Med Biol
44(11):R99–R155
Alber M, Nusslin F (1999) An objective function for radiation
treatment optimization based on local biological measures.
Phys Med Biol 44:479
Baumann P, Nyman J, Hoyer M, Gagliardi G, Lax I, Wennberg B,
Drugge N, Ekberg L, Friesland S, Johansson KA, Lund JA,
Morhed E, Nilsson K, Levin N, Paludan M, Sederholm C,
Traberg A, Wittgren L, Lewensohn R (2008) Stereotactic
body radiotherapy for medically inoperable patients with
stage I non-small cell lung cancer—a first report of toxicity
related to COPD/CVD in a non-randomized prospective
phase II study. Radiother Oncol 88(3):359–367. doi:
10.1016/j.radonc.2008.07.019
Benedict SH, Yenice KM, Followill D, Galvin JM, Hinson W,
Kavanagh B, Keall P, Lovelock M, Meeks S, Papiez L, Purdie T,
Sadagopan R, Schell MC, Salter B, Schlesinger DJ, Shiu AS,
Solberg T, Song DY, Stieber V, Timmerman R, Tome WA,
Verellen D, Wang L, Yin FF (2010) Stereotactic body radiation
therapy: the report of AAPM Task Group 101. Med Phys
37(8):4078–4101
Berger M, Seltzer S (1973) ETRAN Monte Carlo code system
for electron and photon transport through extended media.
Radiation Shielding Information Center (RSIC) Report
CCC-107. Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge
Bignardi M, Navarria P, Mancosu P, Cozzi L, Fogliata A, Tozzi A,
Castiglioni S, Carnaghi C, Tronconi MC, Santoro A, Scorsetti
M (2011) Clinical outcome of hypofractionated stereotactic
radiotherapy for abdominal lymph node metastases. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 81(3):831–838. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2010.05.032
Boike TP, Lotan Y, Cho LC, Brindle J, DeRose P, Xie XJ, Yan J,
Foster R, Pistenmaa D, Perkins A, Cooley S, Timmerman R
(2011) Phase I Dose-Escalation Study of Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy for Low- and Intermediate-Risk Prostate Cancer. J Clin Oncol 29: 2020–2026
Bortfeld T (1999) Optimized planning using physical objectives
and constraints. Semin in Radiat Oncol 9: 20–34
Bortfeld T, Webb S (2009) Single-arc IMRT? Phys Med Biol
54:N9
Bortfeld T, Jokivarsi K, Goitein M, Kung J, Jiang SB (2002)
Effects of intra-fraction motion on IMRT dose delivery:
statistical analysis and simulation. Phys Med Biol 47:2203

M. Miften et al.
Bradley JD, El Naqa I, Drzymala RE, Trovo M, Jones G,
Denning MD (2010) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for
early-stage non-small-cell lung cancer: the pattern of failure
is distant. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 77(4):1146–1150.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.06.017
Bral S, Gevaert T, Linthout N, Versmessen H, Collen C, Engels B,
Verdries D, Everaert H, Christian N, De Ridder M, Storme G
(2011) Prospective, risk-adapted strategy of stereotactic body
radiotherapy for early-stage non-small-cell lung cancer: results
of a phase II trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 80(5):1343–
1349. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.04.056
Bzdusek K, Friberger H, Eriksson K, HÃørdemark B, Robinson D,
Kaus M (2009) Development and evaluation of an efficient
approach to volumetric arc therapy planning. Med Phys 36:2328
Cardinale RM, Wu Q, Benedict SH, Kavanagh BD, Bump E,
Mohan R (1999) Determining the optimal block margin on
the planning target volume for extracranial stereotactic
radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 45(2):515–520
Chang BK, Timmerman RD (2007) Stereotactic body radiation
therapy: a comprehensive review. Am J Clin Oncol 30(6):637
Chang DT, Schellenberg D, Shen J, Kim J, Goodman KA, Fisher GA,
Ford JM, Desser T, Quon A, Koong AC (2009) Stereotactic
radiotherapy for unresectable adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.
Cancer 115(3):665–672. doi:10.1002/cncr.24059
Chetty IJ, Curran B, Cygler JE, DeMarco JJ, Ezzell G,
Faddegon BA, Kawrakow I, Keall PJ, Liu H, Ma CM,
Rogers DW, Seuntjens J, Sheikh-Bagheri D, Siebers JV
(2007) Report of the AAPM Task Group No. 105: issues
associated with clinical implementation of Monte Carlobased photon and electron external beam treatment planning. Med Phys 34(12):4818–4853
Daly ME, Choi CYH, Gibbs IC, Adler JR, Chang SD,
Lieberson RE, Soltys SG (2011) Tolerance of the spinal
cord to stereotactic radiosurgery: insights from hemangioblastomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 80(1):213–220. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.01.040
Das IJ, Ding GX, Ahnesjo A (2008) Small fields: nonequilibrium radiation dosimetry. Med Phys 35(1):206–215
Dawson LA, Eccles C, Bissonnette JP, Brock KK (2005)
Accuracy of daily image guidance for hypofractionated
liver radiotherapy with active breathing control. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 62(4):1247–1252
de Pooter JA, Romero AM, Wunderink W, Storchi PRM,
Heijmen BJM (2008) Automated non-coplanar beam direction optimization improves IMRT in SBRT of liver
metastasis. Radiother Oncol 88(3):376–381. doi:10.1016/j.
radonc.2008.06.001
De Ruysscher D, Faivre-Finn C, Nestle U, Hurkmans CW, Le
Pechoux C, Price A, Senan S (2010) European organisation
for research and treatment of cancer recommendations for
planning and delivery of high-dose, high-precision radiotherapy for lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 28(36):5301–5310.
doi:10.1200/jco.2010.30.3271
Dhakal S, Corbin KS, Milano MT, Philip A, Sahasrabudhe D,
Jones C, Constine LS (2012) Stereotactic body radiotherapy
for pulmonary metastases from soft-tissue sarcomas: excellent local lesion control and improved patient survival. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 82(2):940–945. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2010.11.052
Ding GX, Duggan DM, Lu B, Hallahan DE, Cmelak A,
Malcolm A, Newton J, Deeley M, Coffey CW (2007)

Treatment Planning for Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy

111

Impact of inhomogeneity corrections on dose coverage in
the treatment of lung cancer using stereotactic body
radiation therapy. Med Phys 34(7):2985–2994
Diot Q, Kavanagh B, Timmerman R, Miften M (2012)
Biological-based optimization and volumetric modulated
arc therapy delivery for stereotactic body radiation therapy.
Med Phys 39(1):237
D’Souza WD, Naqvi SA, Yu CX (2005) Real-time intrafraction-motion tracking using the treatment couch: a
feasibility study. Phys Med Biol 50:4021
Dunlap NE, Cai J, Biedermann GB, Yang W, Benedict SH,
Sheng K, Schefter TE, Kavanagh BD, Larner JM (2009)
Chest wall volume receiving [30 Gy predicts risk of severe
pain and/or rib fracture after lung stereotactic body
radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 76(3):796–801
Eccles CL, Dawson LA, Moseley JL, Brock KK (2011)
Interfraction liver shape variability and impact on GTV
position during liver stereotactic radiotherapy using abdominal compression. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 80(3):938–
946. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.08.003
Fakiris AJ, McGarry RC, Yiannoutsos CT, Papiez L, Williams M,
Henderson MA, Timmerman R (2009) Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for early-stage non-small-cell lung carcinoma: four-year results of a prospective phase II study. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 75(3):677–682. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2008.11.042
Fippel M (1999) Fast Monte Carlo dose calculation for photon
beams based on the VMC electron algorithm. Med Phys
26(8):1466–1475
Foote M, Letourneau D, Hyde D, Massicotte E, Rampersaud R,
Fehlings M, Fisher C, Lewis S, La Macchia N, Yu E,
Laperriere NJ, Sahgal A (2011) Technique for stereotactic
body radiotherapy for spinal metastases. J Clin Neurosci
18(2):276–279. doi:10.1016/j.jocn.2010.04.033
Fraass B, Doppke K, Hunt M, Kutcher G, Starkschall G, Stern R,
Van Dyke J (1998) American Association of Physicists in
Medicine Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 53:
quality assurance for clinical radiotherapy treatment planning. Med Phys 25(10):1773–1829
Fritz P, Kraus HJ, Blaschke T, Muhlnickel W, Strauch K, EngelRiedel W, Chemaissani A, Stoelben E (2008) Stereotactic, high
single-dose irradiation of stage I non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) using four-dimensional CT scans for treatment
planning. Lung Cancer 60(2):193–199. doi:10.1016/j.
lungcan.2007.10.005
Gomez DR, Hunt MA, Jackson A, O’Meara WP, Bukanova EN,
Zelefsky MJ, Yamada Y, Rosenzweig KE (2009) Low rate of
thoracic toxicity inn palliative paraspinal single-fraction
stereotactic body radiation therapy. Radiother Oncol
93(3):414–418. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2009.10.017
Goodman KA, Wiegner EA, Maturen KE, Zhang ZG, Mo QX,
Yang G, Gibbs IC, Fisher GA, Koong AC (2010) Doseescalation study of single-fraction stereotactic body radiotherapy for liver malignancies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
78(2):486–493. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.08.020
Guckenberger M, Baier K, Polat B, Richter A, Krieger T,
Wilbert J, Mueller G, Flentje M (2010) Dose-response
relationship for radiation-induced pneumonitis after pulmonary stereotactic body radiotherapy. Radiother Oncol
97(1):65–70. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2010.04.027

Hall EJ, Giaccia AJ (2006) Radiobiology for the radiologist.
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia
Herfarth KK, Debus J, Lohr F, Bahner ML, Fritz P, Hoss A,
Schlegel W, Wannenmacher MF (2000) Extracranial stereotactic radiation therapy: set-up accuracy of patients
treated for liver metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
46(2):329–335
Hong JC, Yu Y, Rao AK, Ditererich S, Maxim PG, Le QT,
Diehn M, Sze DY, Kothary N, Loo BW (2011) High
retention and safety of percutaneously implanted endovascular embolization coils as fiducial markers for imageguided stereotactic ablative radiotherapy of pulmonary
tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 81(1):85–90. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.04.037
Hoppe BS, Laser B, Kowalski AV, Fontenla SC, PenaGreenberg E, Yorke ED, Lovelock DM, Hunt MA, Rosenzweig KE (2008) Acute skin toxicity following stereotactic
body radiation therapy FOr stage I non-small-cell lung
cancer: who’s at risk? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
72(5):1283–1286. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.08.036
Ikushima H, Balter P, Komaki R, Hunjun S, Bucci MK, Liao ZX,
McAleer MF, Yu ZQH, Zhang YB, Chang JY, Dong L (2011)
Daily alignment results of in-room computed tomographyguided stereotactic body radiation therapy for lung cancer. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 79(2):473–480. doi:10.1016/j.
ijrobp.2009.11.009
Jiang SB, Pope C, Jarrah KMA, Kung JH, Bortfeld T, Chen GTY
(2003) An experimental investigation on intra-fractional organ
motion effects in lung IMRT treatments. Phys Med Biol 48:1773
Jin L, Wang L, Li J, Luo W, Feigenberg SJ, Ma CM (2007)
Investigation of optimal beam margins for stereotactic
radiotherapy of lung-cancer using Monte Carlo dose
calculations. Phys Med Biol 52:3549
Kawrakow I (2001) VMC++, electron and photon Monte Carlo
calculations optimized for radiation treatment planning. In:
Kling A, Barao F, Nakagawa M, Tavora L, Vaz P (eds)
Advanced Monte Carlo for radiation physics, particle transport simulation and applications: proceedings of the Monte
Carlo 2000 meeting Lisbon. Springer, Berlin, pp 229–236
Keall PJ, Cattell H, Pokhrel D, Dieterich S, Wong KH, Murphy
MJ, Vedam SS, Wijesooriya K, Mohan R (2006) Geometric
accuracy of a real-time target tracking system with dynamic
multileaf collimator tracking system. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 65(5):1579–1584
Kelly P, Balter PA, Rebueno N, Sharp HJ, Liao ZX, Komaki R,
Chang JY (2010) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for
patients with lung cancer previously treated with thoracic
radiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 78(5):1387–1393.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.09.070
Koong AC, Le QT, Ho A, Fong B, Fisher G, Cho C, Ford J,
Poen J, Gibbs IC, Mehta VK, Kee S, Trueblood W, Yang G,
Bastidas JA (2004) Phase I study of stereotactic radiosurgery in patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 58(4):1017–1021
Kopek N, Holt MI, Hansen AT, Hoyer M (2010) Stereotactic body
radiotherapy for unresectable cholangiocarcinoma. Radiother
Oncol 94(1):47–52. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2009.11.004
Lax I, Blomgren H, Naslund I, Svanstrom R (1994) Stereotactic
radiotherapy of malignancies in the abdomen: methodological aspects. Acta Oncol 33(6):677–683

112
Lee MT, Kim JJ, Dinniwell R, Brierley J, Lockwood G, Wong R,
Cummings B, Ringash J, Tse RV, Knox JJ, Dawson LA
(2009) Phase I study of individualized stereotactic body
radiotherapy of liver metastases. J Clin Oncol 27(10):
1585–1591. doi:10.1200/jco.2008.20.0600
Li WN, Purdie TG, Taremi M, Fung SR, Brade A, Cho BCJ,
Hope A, Sun A, Jaffray DA, Bezjak A, Bissonnette JP
(2011) Effect of immobilization and performance status on
intrafraction motion for stereotactic lung radiotherapy:
analysis of 133 patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
81(5):1568–1575. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.09.035
Lim DH, Yi BY, Mirmiran A, Dhople A, Suntharalingam M,
D’Souza WD (2010) Optimal beam arrangement for stereotactic body radiation therapy delivery in lung tumors. Acta
Oncol 49(2):219–224. doi:10.3109/02841860903302897
Liu R, Wagner TH, Buatti JM, Modrick J, Dill J, Meeks SL
(2004) Geometrically based optimization for extracranial
radiosurgery. Phys Med Biol 49:987
Mackie TR, Scrimger JW, Battista JJ (1985) A convolution
method of calculating dose for 15-MV X rays. Med Phys
12(2):188–196
Mahadevan A, Jain S, Goldstein M, Miksad R, Pleskow D,
Sawhney M, Brennan D, Callery M, Vollmer C (2010)
Stereotactic body radiotherapy and gemcitabine for locally
advanced pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
78(3):735–742. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.08.046
Mahadevan A, Floyd S, Wong E, Jeyapalan S, Groff M, Kasper E
(2011) Stereotactic body radiotherapy reirradiation for
recurrent epidural spinal metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 81(5):1500–1505. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.08.012
Matuszak MM, Yan D, Grills I, Martinez A (2010) Clinical
applications of volumetric modulated arc therapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 77(2):608–616
McCammon R, Schefter TE, Gaspar LE, Zaemisch R, Gravdahl D,
Kavanagh B (2009) Observation of a dose-control relationship
for lung and liver tumors after stereotactic body radiation
therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 73(1):112–118. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.03.062
McGrath SD, Matuszak MM, Yan D, Kestin LL, Martinez AA,
Grills IS (2010) Volumetric modulated arc therapy for
delivery of hypofractionated stereotactic lung radiotherapy:
a dosimetric and treatment efficiency analysis. Radiother
Oncol 95(2):153–157
McQuaid D, Webb S (2006) IMRT delivery to a moving target
by dynamic MLC tracking: delivery for targets moving in
two dimensions in the beam’s eye view. Phys Med Biol
51:4819
Miften M, Wiesmeyer M, Kapur A, Ma CM (2001) Comparison
of RTP dose distributions in heterogeneous phantoms with
the BEAM Monte Carlo simulation system. J Appl Clin
Med Phys 2(1):21–31
Nelson WR, Hirayama H, Rogers DWO (1985) The EGS4 code
system. Report SLAC-265. Stanford linear accelerator,
Stanford CA
Nelson JW, Yoo DS, Sampson JH, Isaacs RE, Larrier NA,
Marks LB, Yin FF, Wu QJ, Wang ZH, Kirkpatrick JP
(2009) Stereotactic body radiotherapy for lesions of the
spine and paraspinal regions. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
73(5):1369–1375. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.06.1949
Nguyen QN, Shiu AS, Rhines LD, Wang H, Allen PK, Wang
XS, Chang EL (2010) Management of spinal metastases

M. Miften et al.
from renal cell carcinoma using stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 76(4):1185–1192. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.03.062
Niemierko A, Urie M, Goitein M (1992) Optimization of 3D
radiation therapy with both physical and biological end points
and constraints. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 23(1):99–108
Ong CL, Palma D, Verbakel W, Slotman BJ, Senan S (2010)
Treatment of large stage I-II lung tumors using stereotactic
body radiotherapy (SBRT): Planning considerations and early
toxicity. Radiother Oncol 97(3):431–436. doi:10.1016/j.
radonc.2010.10.003
Onishi H, Shirato H, Nagata Y, Hiraoka M, Fujino M, Gomi K,
Karasawa K, Hayakawa K, Niibe Y, Takai Y, Kimura T,
Takeda A, Ouchi A, Hareyama M, Kokubo M, Kozuka T,
Arimoto T, Hara R, Itami J, Araki T (2011) Stereotactic
body radiotherapy (SBRT) for operable stage I non smallcell lung cancer: can SBRT be comparable to surgery? Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 81(5):1352–1358. doi:10.1016/j.
ijrobp.2009.07.1751
Otto K (2008) Volumetric modulated arc therapy: IMRT in a
single gantry arc. Med Phys 35:310
Palma D, Vollans E, James K, Nakano S, Moiseenko V, Shaffer R,
McKenzie M, Morris J, Otto K (2008) Volumetric modulated
arc therapy (VMAT) for delivery of prostate radiotherapy:
Reduction in treatment time and monitor unit requirements
compared to intensity modulated radiotherapy. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 72(1):S312–S312
Palta JR, Mackie TR (eds) (2003) Intensity Modulated radiation
therapy: the state of the art. Medical Physics Publishing, Madison
Papanikolaou N, Battista J, Boyer A, Kappas C, Klein E,
Mackie T, Sharpe M, Van Dyk J (2004) AAPM Report No.
85: tissue inhomogeneity corrections for megavoltage
photon beams. AAPM report No. 85. Medical Physics
Publishing, Madison, pp 1–135
Papiez L, Timmerman R, Desrosiers C, Randall M (2003)
Extracranial stereotactic radioablation physical principles.
Acta Oncol 42(8):882–894
Peng Y, Vedam S, Chang JY, Gao S, Sadagopan R, Bues M,
Balter P (2011) Implementation of feedback-guided voluntary breath-hold gating for cone beam CT-based stereotactic
body radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 80(3):909–
917. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.08.011
Potters L, Kavanagh B, Galvin JM, Hevezi JM, Janjan NA,
Larson DA, Mehta MP, Ryu S, Steinberg M, Timmerman R,
Welsh JS, Rosenthal SA (2010) American Society for
Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology (ASTRO) and American College of Radiology (ACR) practice guideline for the
performance of stereotactic body radiation therapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 76(2):326–332. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2009.09.042
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (2005) RTOG 0236: a phase
II trial of stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) in the
treatment of patients with medically inoperable stage I/II nonsmall cell lung cancer. http://wwwrtogorg/ClinicalTrials/
ProtocolTableaspx
Rao M, Yang W, Chen F, Sheng K, Ye J, Mehta V, Shepard D,
Cao D (2010) Comparison of Elekta VMAT with helical
tomotherapy and fixed field IMRT: plan quality, delivery
efficiency and accuracy. Med Phys 37:1350
Reynaert N, van der Marck SC, Schaart DR, Van der Zee W, Van
Vliet-Vroegindeweij C, Tomsej M, Jansen J, Heijmen B,

Treatment Planning for Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy

113

Coghe M, De Wagter C (2007) Monte Carlo treatment
planning for photon and electron beams. Radiat Phys Chem
76:643–686
Riet A, Mak ACA, Moerland MA, Elders LH, van der Zee W
(1997) A conformation number to quantify the degree of
conformality in brachytherapy and external beam irradiation: application to the prostate. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 37(3):731–736
Rogers DWO, Faddegon BA, Ding GX, Ma CM, We J, Mackie TR
(1995) BEAM: a Monte Carlo code to simulate radiotherapy
treatment units. Med Phys 22(5):503–524
Rusthoven KE, Kavanagh BD, Cardenes H, Stieber VW, Burri SH,
Feigenberg SJ, Chidel MA, Pugh TJ, Franklin W, Kane M,
Gaspar LE, Schefter TE (2009) Multi-institutional phase I/II
trial of stereotactic body radiation therapy for liver metastases.
J Clin Oncol 27(10):1572–1578. doi:10.1200/jco.2008.19.6329
Rwigema JCM, Parikh SD, Heron DE, Howell M, Zeh H, Moser
AJ, Bahary N, Quinn A, Burton SA (2011) Stereotactic body
radiotherapy in the treatment of advanced adenocarcinoma of
the pancreas. Am J Clin Oncol-Cancer Clin Trials 34(1):
63–69. doi:10.1097/COC.0b013e3181d270b4
Sahgal A, Ames C, Chou D, Ma LJ, Huang K, Xu W, Chin C,
Weinberg V, Chuang C, Weinstein P, Larson DA (2009)
Stereotactic body radiotherapy is effective salvage therapy
for patients with prior radiation of spinal metastases. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 74(3):723–731. doi:10.1016/j.
ijrobp.2008.09.020
Sahgal A, Ma L, Gibbs I, Gerszten PC, Ryu S, Soltys S,
Weinberg V, Wong S, Chang E, Fowler J, Larson DA
Spinal cord tolerance for stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 77(2):548–553
Schefter TE, Kavanagh BD, Timmerman RD, Cardenes HR,
Baron A, Gaspar LE (2005) A phase I trial of stereotactic
body radiation therapy (SBRT) for liver metastases. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 62(5):1371–1378
Schellenberg D, Kim J, Ciristman-Skieller C, Chun CL,
Columbo LA, Ford JM, Fisher GA, Kunz PL, Van Dam J,
Quon A, Desser TS, Norton J, Hsu A, Maxim PG, Xing L,
Goodman KA, Chang DT, Koong AC (2011) Singlefraction stereotactic body radiation therapy and sequential
gemcitabine for the treatment of locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 81(1):181–188.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.05.006
Seo YS, Kim MS, Yoo SY, Cho CK, Choi CW, Kim JH, Han
CJ, Park SC, Lee BH, Kim YH, Lee DH (2010) Preliminary
result of stereotactic body radiotherapy as a local salvage
treatment for inoperable hepatocellular carcinoma. J Surg
Oncol 102(3):209–214. doi:10.1002/jso.21593
Shaw E, Kline R, Gillin M, Souhami L, Hirschfeld A, Dinapoli R,
Martin L (1993) Radiation therapy oncology group: radiosurgery quality assurance guidelines. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 27(5):1231–1239
Solberg TD, Boedeker KL, Fogg R, Selch MT, DeSalles AAF
(2001) Dynamic arc radiosurgery field shaping: a comparison with static field conformal and noncoplanar circular
arcs. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 49(5):1481–1491
Solberg TD, Balter JM, Benedict SH, Fraass BA, Kavanagh B,
Miyamoto C, Pawlicki T, Potters L, Yamada Y (2012)
Quality and safety considerations in stereotactic radiosurgery and stereotactic body radiation therapy: executive
summary. Pract Radiat Oncol 2:2–9

Song SY, Choi W, Shin SS, Lee SW, Do Ahn S, Kim JH, Je
HU, Il Park C, Lee JS, Choi EK (2009) Fractionated
stereotactic body radiation therapy for medically inoperable
stage I lung cancer adjacent to central large bronchus. Lung
Cancer 66(1):89–93. doi:10.1016/j.lungcan.2008.12.016
Sonke JJ, Rossi M, Wolthaus J, van Herk M, Damen E,
Belderbos J (2009) Frameless stereotactic body radiotherapy for lung cancer using four-dimensional cone beam CT
guidance. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 74(2):567–574. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.08.004
Stephans KL, Djemil T, Tendulkar RD, Robinson CG, Reddy CA,
Videtic GMM (2012) Prediction of chest wall toxicity from
lung stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT). Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 82(2):974–980. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.12.002
Takeda A, Kunieda E, Ohashi T, Aoki Y, Koike N, Takeda T
(2011) Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for oligometastatic lung tumors from colorectal cancer and other primary
cancers in comparison with primary lung cancer. Radiother
Oncol 101(2):255–259. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2011.05.033
Tanyi JA, Summers PA, McCracken CL, Chen Y, Ku LC, Fuss
M (2009) Implications of a high-definition multileaf collimator (HD-MLC) on treatment planning techniques for
stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT): a planning
study. Radiat Oncol 4:22
Taremi M, Hope A, Dahele M, Pearson S, Fung S, Purdie T,
Brade A, Cho J, Sun A, Bissonnette JP, Bezjak A (2012)
Stereotactic body radiotherapy for medically inoperable
lung cancer: prospective, single-center study of 108 consecutive patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 82(2):967–
973. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.12.039
Teh BS, Ishiyama H, Mathews T, Xu B, Butler EB, Mayr NA,
Lo SS, Lu JJ, Blanco AI, Paulino AC, Timmerman RD
(2010) Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) for
genitourinary malignancies. Discov Med 10(52):255–262
Timmerman RD (2006) Development of a phase I/II clinical
trial using sterotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) for the
treatment of localized prostate carcinoma. DTIC Document
Timmerman RD (2008) An overview of hypofractionation and
introduction to this issue of seminars in radiation oncology.
Semin Radiat Oncol 18:215–222
Timmerman R, Papiez L, McGarry R, Likes L, DesRosiers C,
Frost S, Williams M (2003) Extracranial stereotactic radioablation: results of a phase I study in medically inoperable
stage I non-small cell lung cancer. Chest 124(5):1946–1955
Timmerman RD, Forster KM, Chinsoo Cho L (2005) Extracranial stereotactic radiation delivery. Semin in Radiat
Oncol 15:202–207
Timmerman RD, Kavanagh BD, Cho LC, Papiez L, Xing L
(2007) Stereotactic body radiation therapy in multiple organ
sites. J Clin Oncol 25(8):947–952
Tipton KN, Sullivan N, Bruening W, Inamdar R, Launders J, Uhl
S, Schoelles KM (2011) Stereotactic body radiation therapy.
Compare Effectiveness Technical Report Briefs, No. 6,
Agency for Health Care Research and Quality, Rockville.
van der Pool AEM, Romero AM, Wunderink W, Heijmen BJ,
Levendag PC, Verhoef C, Ijzermans JNM (2010) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for colorectal liver metastases.
Br J Surg 97(3):377–382. doi:10.1002/bjs.6895
Verbakel W, Senan S, Cuijpers JP, Slotman BJ, Lagerwaard FJ
(2009) Rapid delivery of stereotactic radiotherapy for
peripheral lung tumors using volumetric intensity-modulated

114
arcs. Radiother Oncol 93(1):122–124. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.
2009.05.020
Videtic GMM, Stephans K, Reddy C, Gajdos S, Kolar M,
Clouser E, Djemil T (2010) Intensity-modulated radiotherapy based stereotactic body radiotherapy for medically
inoperable early-stage lung cancer: excellent local control.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 77(2):344–349. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2009.05.004
Wang XH, Mohan R, Jackson A, Leibel SA, Fuks Z, Ling CC
(1995) Optimization of intensity-modulated 3D conformal
treatment plans based on biological indices. Radiother
Oncol 37(2):140–152
Wu QJ, Yoo S, Kirkpatrick JP, Thongphiew D, Yin FF (2009)
Volumetric arc intensity-modulated therapy for spine body
radiotherapy: comparison with static intensity-modulated
treatment. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 75(5):1596–1604.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.05.005
Wulf J, HÃ¤dinger U, Oppitz U, Olshausen B, Flentje M
(2000) Stereotactic radiotherapy of extracranial targets: CTsimulation and accuracy of treatment in the stereotactic
body frame. Radiother Oncol 57(2):225–236
Yamada Y, Bilsky MH, Lovelock DM, Venkatraman ES, Toner S,
Johnson J, Zatcky J, Zelefsky MJ, Fuks Z (2008) High-dose,

M. Miften et al.
single-fraction image-guided intensity-modulated radiotherapy for metastatic spinal lesions. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
71(2):484–490
Yenice KM, Lovelock DM, Hunt MA, Lutz WR, FournierBidoz N, Hua CH, Yamada J, Bilsky M, Lee H, Pfaff K
(2003) CT image-guided intensity-modulated therapy for
paraspinal tumors using stereotactic immobilization. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 55(3):583–593
Yin FF, Ryu S, Ajlouni M, Zhu J, Yan H, Guan H, Faber K,
Rock J, Abdalhak M, Rogers L, Rosenblum M, Kim JH
(2002) A technique of intensity-modulated radiosurgery
(IMRS) for spinal tumors. Med Phys 29(12):2815–2822
Yu CX (1995) Intensity-modulated arc therapy with dynamic
multileaf collimation: an alternative to tomotherapy. Phys
Med Biol 40:1435
Yu CX, Jaffray DA, Wong JW (1998) The effects of intrafraction organ motion on the delivery of dynamic intensity
modulation. Phys Med Biol 43(1):91–104
Zimmerman J, Korreman S, Persson G, Cattell H, Svatos M,
Sawant A, Venkat R, Carlson D, Keall P (2009) DMLC
motion tracking of moving targets for intensity modulated
arc therapy treatment-a feasibility study. Acta Oncol
48(2):245–250

Launching a Stereotactic Body Radiation
Therapy Program
Michael Lamba

Contents

Abstract

1

Introduction.............................................................. 116

2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6

Personnel...................................................................
Radiation Oncologist .................................................
Medical Physicist.......................................................
Dosimetrist.................................................................
Therapist ....................................................................
Administration ...........................................................
Team Work ................................................................

116
116
117
117
118
118
118

3
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4

Equipment and Processes .......................................
Imaging ......................................................................
CT-Simulation and Immobilization ..........................
Planning .....................................................................
Image-Guidance and Treatment Delivery ................

118
118
118
118
120

4
Safety......................................................................... 121
4.1 Equipment Quality Assurance................................... 121
4.2 Process Quality Assurance ........................................ 121
5

Conclusion ................................................................ 122

References.......................................................................... 122

Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) delivers very high, very conformal doses of radiation to
well-defined targets with inhomogeneous doses
with small or no margins to potentially heterogeneous and potentially physiologically moving
targets in the thorax, abdomen, or paraspinal
regions in few fractions. Embarking on SBRT
requires a significant investment of personnel and
equipment and should be undertaken after a
thorough review of goals and allocation of personnel and equipment resources. In order to deliver
SBRT accurately, all phases of the treatment
process are integrated into the SBRT delivery
system and controlled to the greatest degree
possible. There are a number of American Association of Physicist in Medicine (AAPM) Task
Group reports, American College of Radiology
(ACR) practice guidelines, and American Society
for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) white papers to
draw upon for guidance in implementing each
phase of SBRT. The phases include imaging for
target definition, immobilization, simulation, planning, motion management, imaging for alignment,
and beam delivery. In each phase, the appropriate
equipment is applied by trained personnel using
processes developed during implementation to
deliver the treatment as established by the quality
assurance program.

M. Lamba (&)
Radiation Oncology, University of Cincinnati,
234 Goodman St ML 0757,
Cincinnati, OH 45267-0757, USA
e-mail: Michael.Lamba@uc.edu

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2012_653, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

115

116

M. Lamba

Table 1 Recommendations from ASTRO for planning a SRS/SBRT program (1)
Essential planning aspects for developing a new SBRT program and/or considering new disease sites
Recommendation

Duration or Frequency

Establish clinical program goals, specify disease sites, identify program specialists,
develop guidelines for treatment, follow-up and assessment

Initially

Identify required resources: expertise, personnel, technology, time

Initially, and for each new technology
and/or disease site

Perform technology assessment commensurate with clinical goals, identify equipment,
and processes for simulation, immobilization, image guidance, management of organ
motion, treatment delivery

Initially, and for each new technology
and/or disease site

Perform assessment of staffing levels, develop processes for initial and ongoing
training of all program staff

Initially, and for each new technology
and/or disease site

Develop and use checklists for all aspects of SRS/SBRT processes.
Provide documentation for a culture and environment fostering clear and open
communication

Initially, and for each new technology
and/or disease site
Ongoing

Develop quality assurance processes that encompass all clinical and technical SBRT
program aspects, clearly following available guidance, with regard to procedures and
tolerances

Initially, and for each new technology
and/or disease site

Conduct clinical SBRT patient conferences for pre-treatment planning and posttreatment review

Ongoing

Develop processes for documentation and reporting, peer review, regular review of
processes and procedures, updating clinical guidelines and recommendations, ongoing
needs assessment, and continuous quality improvement

Ongoing

Reprinted from Practical Radiation Oncology, 2(1), Supplementary Materials, (Solberg et al. 2012a), (Solberg et al.2012b), with
permission from Elsevier

1

Introduction

A stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) program is a
major endeavor requiring dedicated personnel, equipment, training, and quality assurance, with appropriate
time and resources. SBRT requires a high degree of
confidence in the ability to accurately identify a target;
align that target and normal tissues on a treatment unit;
design and deliver highly conformal radiation fields,
often very small and always with high dose gradients; all
while maintaining a high degree of confidence in the
accuracy of the dose delivered. Embarking on such a
program requires evaluation of personnel, evaluation of
equipment, procurement of additional resources as
required, acceptance and quality assurance of the
equipment, training of all personnel involved, establishing procedures for all phases of SBRT, and safety
analysis. Table 1, taken from the American Society for
Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) Quality and Safety
Considerations in Stereotactic Radiosurgery and
Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Supplemental
Material (Solberg et al. 2012a), contains a list of eight
essential recommendations for planning and developing

a new SBRT program. The clinical implementation of
SBRT as described in American Association of Physicist
in Medicine (AAPM) Task Group 101 Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy (Benedict et al. 2010) consists of
seven steps. These include (1) establishing the scope of
the program, such as treatment sites and clinical goals;
(2) determining the treatment modality, dose-fractionation, planning goals; (3) establishing the equipment
requirements; (4) establishing the personnel requirements; (5) performing acceptance and commissioning of
the SBRT equipment; (6) establishing written procedures for all phases of SBRT; and (7) conduct training
for all relevant personnel.

2

Personnel

2.1

Radiation Oncologist

All radiation oncologists are, by definition, familiar
with the fractionated delivery of radiation to cancer
patients. SBRT is the delivery of large doses in few
fractions, which utilizes a somewhat different
knowledge base. According to the American College

Launching a Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy Program

117

Fig. 1 Example SBRT planning checklist reprinted from Practical Radiation Oncology, 2(1), Supplementary Materials, (Solberg
et al. 2012a), (Solberg et al. 2012b), with permission from Elsevier

of Radiology (ACR)–ASTRO Practice Guideline for
the Performance of Stereotactic Body Radiation
Therapy (Potters et al. 2010), radiation oncologists
performing SBRT shall be board certified or have
completed a residency in radiation oncology, and
specific training in SBRT. The responsibilities of the
radiation oncologists include the supervision of the
overall treatment regimen; the patient position
method; recommendations to account for potential
target motion; supervision of the simulation; identification of the target (including methods to address
motion uncertainty) and normal tissues; prescription
of the radiation dose to the target volumes and organs
at risk; and to attend and supervise treatment process.

2.2

include acceptance testing and commissioning of all
components of the system, including localization,
imaging, motion management, immobilization, and
treatment delivery systems. The commissioning
should explicitly account for the delivery of small
radiation fields with high dosimetric and spatial
accuracy. The medical physicist is responsible for
implementing and managing a quality control program
for all aspects of SBRT, as well as developing detailed
checklists to follow in simulation, planning, and
delivery process. On the day of treatment, the medical
physicist verifies patient positioning and ensures that
the delivery is in accordance with the prescription with
minimal chance of error. The medical physicist is
present for the entire treatment (Solberg et al. 2012a).

Medical Physicist
2.3

The medical physicist is responsible for all technical
aspects governing the simulation and delivery of
SBRT. The medical physicist must be certified by the
appropriate boarding agency in radiation therapy and
have specific training in SBRT. Responsibilities

Dosimetrist

The dosimetrist, working with the radiation oncologist
and the physicist, is responsible for developing a plan
that meets the dose and volume constraints of that
required for SBRT. The dosimetrist can assist with the

118

M. Lamba

patient position, immobilization, and motion management during simulation. The dosimetrist also ensures that
the plan information is documented in the patient’s chart
and transferred to the treatment unit, and that the therapists understand how treatment plan is to be delivered.

2.4

Therapist

The therapist must follow the local licensing
requirements and be certified in radiation therapy.
The therapist is involved with the immobilization and
simulation of the patient, as well as the alignment of
the patient prior to treatment, and the treatment itself.
It is crucial for the therapist to maintain attention in
detail in reproducing the setup, aided by immobilization devices and copious alignment marks.

2.5

Administration

Administration plays a vital role in SBRT in ensuring
that appropriate time, resources, education and training, and communication are supported. While SBRT
can be accomplished without the appropriate support,
that lack of support increases the likelihood of errors.

2.6

Team Work

The radiation oncologists, physicists, dosimetrists, and
therapists operate as team. Communication among all
these professionals is crucial, particularly when it
comes to expressing concerns or suggestions for
improvement in a patient’s setup, plan, or treatment.
Communication is also important after the fact to
accumulate expertise, such as determining what has
been learned from each patient treated. It is important to
recognize that most opportunities to learn result from
the difficulties that occur during the treatment process.

3

Equipment and Processes

3.1

Imaging

SBRT requires a well-defined target, typically identified on computerized tomography (CT), magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission

tomography (PET), or some combination of multimodality imaging. In order to assure good spatial fidelity
of the multimodality images, the patient should be
imaged whenever possible with the treatment immobilization devices in place. The images can be fused to
the CT that is acquired for simulation. A careful
assessment of the images spatial fidelity should be
performed, particularly with MR where spatial
encoding is dependent upon linear gradients. If the
target or organs at risk are not well-defined, suffer from
significant artifacts that obscure anatomy, or suffer
from significant motion artifacts, it is recommended
that SBRT not be pursued (Benedict et al. 2010).

3.2

CT-Simulation and Immobilization

Immobilization of the patient is more stringent in SBRT
than normal radiotherapy. Treatments can be lengthy,
so patient comfort is important for patient stability.
Liberal use of vacuum-lock bags encompassing the
planning treatment volume (PTV) can be used, along
with head and knee sponges, T-bars and other devices.
Respiratory compression devices can be used to minimize motion. There are a number of commercial whole
body immobilization systems available.
In addition to the normal treatment CT-simulation,
SBRT requires an assessment of the motion of the target
in all targets in the thorax and abdomen. This requires the
capability of performing 4DCT. Imaging must be
performed at least 5–10 cm beyond the treatment fields,
or at least 15 cm if non-coplanar fields are used. CT
slices can be generated in 1–3 mm slice thickness.
Quality assurance (QA) on the CT simulator
should follow the recommendations of the AAPM
Task Group 66 Report Quality Assurance for Computed-Tomography Simulators and the ComputedTomography Simulation Process (Mutic et al. 2003).
The management of respiratory motion should follow
the recommendations of AAPM Task Group 66
Report on the Management of Respiratory Motion
(Kissick and Mackie 2009).

3.3

Planning

The treatment planning system must accurately predict dose with small fields in heterogeneous media.
Pencil beam algorithms do not fulfill these criteria and

Launching a Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy Program

119

Table 2 Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) conformality of prescribed dose for calculations based on deposition of
photon beam energy in heterogeneous tissue (Bezjak et al. 2012)
PTV volume (cc)

1.8

Ratio of prescription
isodose volume to the
PTV volume

Ratio of 50 %
prescription isodose
volume to the PTV
volume, R50 %

Maximum dose (in % of
dose prescribed) @ 2 cm
from PTV in Any Direction,
D2 cm (Gy)

Percent of lung
receiving 20 Gy Total
or More, V20 (%)

Deviation

Deviation

Deviation

Deviation

None

Minor

None

Minor

None

Minor

None

Minor

\1.2

\1.5

\5.9

\7.5

\50.0

\57.0

\10

\15

3.8

\1.2

\1.5

\5.5

\6.5

\50.0

\57.0

\10

\15

7.4

\1.2

\1.5

\5.1

\6.0

\50.0

\58.0

\10

\15

13.2

\1.2

\1.5

\4.7

\5.8

\50.0

\58.0

\10

\15

22.0

\1.2

\1.5

\4.5

\5.5

\54.0

\63.0

\10

\15

34.0

\1.2

\1.5

\4.3

\5.3

\58.0

\68.0

\10

\15

50.0

\1.2

\1.5

\4.0

\5.0

\62.0

\77.0

\10

\15

70.0

\1.2

\1.5

\3.5

\4.8

\66.0

\86.0

\10

\15

95.0

\1.2

\1.5

\3.3

\4.4

\70.0

\89.0

\10

\15

126.0

\1.2

\1.5

\3.1

\4.0

\73.0

[91.0

\10

\15

163.0

\1.2

\1.5

\2.9

\3.7

\77.0

[94.0

\10

\15

Table 3 Example normal tissue constraints for three fractionation schemes. Taken from AAPM Report 101 (Benedict et al.
2010), with permission from AAPM.
Tissue

Max volume
above
threshold (cc)

One fraction

Three fraction

Five fraction

Threshold
dose (Gy)

Max
point
dose
(Gy)

Threshold
dose (Gy)

Max
point
dose
(Gy)

Threshold
dose (Gy)

Max
point
dose
(Gy)

End point

Brainstem

\0.5

10

15

18

23.1

23

31

Cranial
neuropathy

Spinal
Cord

\0.35

10

14

18

21.9

23

30

Myelitis

Bronchus

\4

10.5

20.2

15

30

16.5

40

Stenosis/fistula

Rib

\1
\30

22

30

28.8
30

36.9

35

43

Pain/fracture

26

39

33

36.5

39.5

Skin

\10

23

Lung

1500
1000

7
7.4

11.6
12.4

12.5
13.5

Lung function
Pneumonitis

Liver

700

9.1

19.2

21

Liver function

Kidney

200

8.4

16

17.5

Renal function

should not be used. The more advanced algorithms,
such as some form of convolution-superposition,
Monte Carlo, or the linear Boltzman transport equation, are acceptable. QA of the treatment planning
system should conform to the recommendation of the

Ulceration

AAPM Task Group 53 Report Quality Assurance for
Clinical Radiotherapy Treatment Planning (Fraass
et al. 1998). Due to the small dimension of the fields
used to treat SBRT, appropriate chambers should be
used to measure the dosimetry data. It is

120

Fig. 2 The number of papers published per year on stereotactic body radiotherapy

recommended (Benedict et al. 2010) that the inner
diameter of the detector should be less than half the
full width at half maximum of the smallest beam
measured. Detector response function can be deconvolved from the measurements, or very small sensitive volumes (\1 mm) can be used.
The target definitions should conform to ICRU 50/62
(Prescribing et al. 2001) in which the clinical target
volume (CTV) and the gross tumor volume (GTV) are
the same, consistent with a well-defined target. The
internal target volume (ITV) includes the range of
motion of the CTV. The PTV is further expanded, often
with asymmetric margins such that expansion is larger
in the direction of target motions. Similarly organs-atrisk are expanded to planning risk volume (PRV) to
account for motion and uncertainty. Typically 10–12
beams will be used, with no margins or small margins,
low prescription isodoses, with isotropic dose gradients
unless proximate critical structures are present. The
dose calculations should be performed with a 2 mm grid
size. 6–10 MV beams can be used. Higher energy
beams may be used selectively to compensate for deep
depths, but it should be recognized that the higher
energy photons produce higher energy secondary electrons, resulting in larger penumbras. Intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is acceptable provided
that motion is mitigated. Entrance dose should be
\30 %. Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG)
trials using SBRT have published treatment planning
constraints (Timmerman et al. 2007; Ryu et al. 2012;
Videtic et al. 2010; Bezjak et al. 2012). These constraints are stringent, requiring placement of beams that
are often difficult to achieve, manually adjusting margins and weights of beams, and generating highly heterogeneous doses to meet the PTV objectives and the

M. Lamba

organ at risk constraints. The plans are highly customized to the patient’s specific anatomy and the physicians planning objectives and constraints. Table 2 show
an example of objectives from RTOG 0813 (Bezjak
et al. 2012). Normal tissue constraints used by RTOG
trials are shown in Table 3 and are also covered in
more details in the chapter of ‘‘Normal Tissue
Constraints’’. AAPM Task Group 101 (Benedict et al.
2010) has published a synopsis of the current knowledge of SBRT dose constraints for organs-at-risk.
Table 3 excerpts some of that data. As the knowledge of
normal tissue tolerances at high fractional doses is still
evolving, timely literature reviews are of value.
The treatment plan should be analyzed and reported precisely in the patient’s chart, including the
prescription dose, the prescription isodose line, the
number of fractions, and the total treatment delivery
period. Assessment of target coverage should include
metrics such as heterogeneity index, conformity
index, and conformality number (Feuvret et al. 2006).
The rate of dose fall off, such as the ratio of the 50 %
dose volume to the PTV volume, notable areas of
high dose outside the PTV, and dose to organs-at-risk
should also be recorded.

3.4

Image-Guidance and Treatment
Delivery

The image-guided treatment aligns the patient to the
treatment volume using an image of the patient
acquired on the treatment unit. Imaging can be planar
MV, planar kV, CBCT, or some combination thereof.
The imaging should be a good surrogate for tumor
location. For example, if planar imaging of bony
anatomy is used, the PTV should be fixed spatially
with respect to the bony anatomy. If not, then soft
tissue imaging, such as cone beam CT (CBCT) should
be used. Radiopaque markers implanted close to the
tumor can be used as surrogates for the tumor.
It is always important to keep in mind that treatment
plan and the alignment for treatment assume that the
patient is a rigid-body—in exactly the same shape at the
time of treatment as at the time of simulation. For most
image-guided alignment outside the cranium, this
assumption is always violated to some degree. The
greater the violation of the assumption, the more difficult the fusion is, and the greater the difference between
the planned and delivered dose. Because the rigid body

Launching a Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy Program

121

assumption fails to some degree, it is important when
evaluating the fusion to evaluate most heavily those
regions closest to the treatment volume, with decreasing importance with increasing distance from that
volume. Image guidance using CT should follow the
AAPM Task Group 179 report Quality Assurance for
Image-Guided Radiation Therapy Utilizing CT-based
Technologies (Bissonnette et al. 2012).
Once the patient is aligned, a second image set can
be acquired to determine whether the patient is within
tolerance. If so, the treatment can commence. If not,
the process can be repeated. The patient should be
monitored carefully during treatment for any movement, which should trigger re-imaging.
Respiratory motion assessment can be performed
with fluoroscopy, gated radiographs, or CBCT. Since
CBCT acquisition times are on the order of a minute,
the image contains a time averaged range of motion
approximating the ITV. Monitoring of the patient can
be performed with optical tracking of infrared reflectors on the skin. If being used to monitor patient
position, placing the reflectors on a stable portion of the
anatomy is beneficial. If being used to monitor respiratory motion, placing the reflectors on areas of maximum motion is better. Optical surface tracking
technologies have been commercialized and can be
used for alignment and monitoring. Radiofrequency
tracking of implanted markers can be used. It is
important to note, whichever method is used, that
external tracking is a surrogate for internal target
position and motion.
Once the patient is aligned, confirmed, the motion
assessed, and monitoring in place, the treatment can
commence. In general, the shorter the treatment
duration the less opportunity for the patient to move.
Short treatments, on the other hand, require extremely
close monitoring of the patient’s position as, if the
patient shifts, a significant fraction of the dose can be
delivered in the wrong position.
The treatment unit should conform to the AAPM
Task Group 142 Report Quality Assurance of Medical
Accelerators (Klein et al. 2009).

at risk. Thus there is inherently greater risk in SBRT
than standard radiotherapy. Minimizing this risk
consists of two components—equipment QA, and
process QA.

4

Safety

SBRT demands that high doses are delivered with
steep dose gradients to potentially moving and relatively small targets, often in the proximity of organs

4.1

Equipment Quality Assurance

Equipment QA can be accomplished with aid of
previously described AAPM Task Groups. Task
Group 142 (Klein et al. 2009) report describes quality
assurance of medical accelerators. Task Group 53
(Fraass et al. 1998) reports on quality assurance of
planning systems. Task Group 66 (Mutic et al. 2003)
reports on CT-simulator quality assurance, while Task
Group 179 (Bissonnette et al. 2012) reports on CTbased image-guided alignment. Task Group 101
(Benedict et al. 2010) provides an excellent detailed
report of SBRT. ASTRO/ACR practice guidelines
(Potters et al. 2010) describe expectations for how
SBRT is accomplished. Quality and safety considerations are described in the ASTRO white paper
(Solberg et al. 2012a), with much detail in the supplemental material (Solberg et al. 2012a).
One of the most important QA tests is the end-toend alignment and dosimetric accuracy test. In this
test, a phantom is used to perform an entire treatment,
from CT to target definition to plan to alignment and
treatment delivery. This process tests all aspects of
the equipment to determine how accurately, in both
position and dose, the treatment can be delivered. The
Radiological Physics Center (MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston TX) employs SBRT type phantoms
and can provide this test as a final check prior to
treating patients, providing a completely independent
check of the ability to simulate, contour, plan, align,
and deliver an SBRT treatment.

4.2

Process Quality Assurance

Process QA is centered on the patient rather the
equipment. It consists of evaluation of the patient,
prescription protocols, positioning and immobilization, simulation, planning, treatment information
transfer, alignment, delivery, and monitoring (Solberg
et al. 2012a). Developing written procedures, centered
around checklists, can formalize and standardize the
process, reducing potential ‘‘non-standard’’ processes

122

M. Lamba

that may increase the likelihood of error. Figure 1
shows an example checklist of an SBRT simulation
and planning process (Solberg et al. 2012a).
An important component of any QA process is
ongoing review to see if it continues to meet objectives, and if there are improvements that sustain the
safety of the program over time. Changes in technology over time require these reviews. Ongoing
follow-up of patients can also show successes and
failures and lead to improved processes.

5

Conclusion

There is a growing body of literature regarding SBRT.
A literature search of journals containing the exact
words ‘‘stereotactic body radiotherapy’’ in the title
yields 456 articles, starting in the early 1990s. A
search of the words ‘‘stereotactic body radiotherapy’’
in the body of the paper yields 778 papers. As can be
seen in Fig. 2, since 2004, papers have been published
with approximately an annual doubling rate. (Ohiolink Electronic Journals Center search, author, May
2012). A number of these papers are reviews, task
group reports, white papers, and practice guidelines.
Regular and timely reviews of the literature will
ensure keeping current with the rapidly evolving
SBRT state-of-the-art.
Implementing an SBRT program requires planning, allocation of personnel and equipment resources, training, development of procedures, ongoing QA
for all phases of the treatment delivery process. There
are well-established resources that can be used for
guidance in implementing all phases of SBRT,
including imaging, simulation, planning, motion
management, image-guidance, and treatment delivery. Understanding and implementing that guidance
can help to ensure successful SBRT program.

References
Benedict SH, Yenice KM, Followill D, Galvin JM, Hinson W,
Kavanagh B et al. (2010) Stereotactic body radiation
therapy: the report of AAPM task group 101. Med Phys
37(8):4078 1 Jan 2010
Bezjak A, Bradley J, Gaspar L, Timmerman RD, Papiez L,
Gore E et al. (2012) RTOG 0813 seamless phase I/II study
of stereotactic lung radiotherapy (SBRT) for early stage,

centrally located, non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in
medically inoperable patients, pp 1–81
Bissonnette J-P, Balter PA, Dong L, Langen KM, Lovelock
DM, Miften M et al (2012) Quality assurance for imageguided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies: a
report of the AAPM TG-179. Med Phys 39(4):1946
Feuvret L, Noel G, Mazeron J, Bey P (2006) Conformity index:
a review. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 64(2):333–342
Fraass B, Doppke K, Hunt M, Kutcher G, Starkschall G, Stern
R et al. (1998) American association of physicists in
medicine radiation therapy committee task group 53: quality
assurance for clinical radiotherapy treatment planning. Med
Phys pp 1773–1829
Kissick MW, Mackie TR (2009) Task group 76 report on ‘‘the
management of respiratory motion in radiation oncology’’
[Med Phys 33:3874–3900 (2006)]. Med Phys 36(12):
5721–5722
Klein EE, Hanley J, Bayouth J, Yin F–F, Simon W, Dresser S
et al. (2009) Task Group 142 report: quality assurance of
medical accelerators. Med Phys pp 4197–4212
Mutic S, Palta JR, Butker EK, Das IJ, Huq MS, Loo L-ND et al
(2003) Quality assurance for computed-tomography simulators and the computed-tomography-simulation process:
report of the AAPM radiation therapy committee Task
Group No. 66. Med Phys 30(10):2762
Potters L, Kavanagh B, Galvin JM, Hevezi JM, Janjan NA,
Larson DA et al (2010) American society for therapeutic
radiology and oncology (Astro) and American College of
Radiology (Acr) Practice guideline for the performance of
stereotactic body radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 76(2):326–332
Prescribing, Recording and Reporting Photon Beam Therapy
(Supplement to ICRU Report 50), ICRU Report 62, 2001.
International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurement, Bethesda
Ryu S, Gerszten P, Yin F–F, Timmerman RD, Dicker A,
Movsas B et al (2012) RTOG 0631 phase II/III study of
image-guided radiosurgery/SBRT for localized spine metastasis. Radiat Therapy Oncol Group 3:1–65
Solberg TD, Balter JM, Benedict SH, Fraass BA, Kavanagh B,
Miyamoto C et al. (2012a) Quality and safety considerations
in stereotactic radiosurgery and stereotactic body radiation
therapy: Executive summary. Supplementary material. PRO
2(1):Supplemental pp 1–49
Solberg TD, Balter JM, Benedict SH, Fraass BA, Kavanagh B,
Miyamoto C et al. (2012b) Quality and safety considerations in stereotactic radiosurgery and stereotactic body
radiation therapy: Executive summary. PRO 2(1):2–9
Timmerman RD, Galvin J, Gore E, Bae K, Pass H, Edelman
MJ, et al. RTOG 0618 A Phase II Trial of Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy (SBRT) in the Treatment of Patients
with Operable Stage I/II Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. 17
May 2007:1–66
Videtic GMM, Singh AK, Chang JY, Le Q-T, Parker W,
Olivier KR, Schild SE, Bae K (2010) RTOG 0915 (NCCTG
N0927) A randomized phase II study comparing 2
stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) schedules for
medically inoperable patients with stage 1 peripheral nonsmall cell lung cancer, pp 1–66

Radiobiology of Stereotactic Body Radiation
Therapy/Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy
Michael D. Story, Chaitanya Nirodi, and Clinton Park

Contents
1

Introduction.............................................................. 124

2
Radioresponse at High Dose .................................. 124
2.1 Mammalian Survival Curves..................................... 124
2.2 Mathematical Models ................................................ 125
3

Overcoming Biological Impediments to the Use
of SBRT .................................................................... 126
3.1 Normal Tissue Response........................................... 126
3.2 SBRT and Tumor Hypoxia ....................................... 128
References.......................................................................... 133

M. D. Story (&)  C. Nirodi
Division of Molecular Radiation Biology,
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA
e-mail: Michael.Story@utsouthwestern.edu

Abstract

Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT)
or stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR) is
rapidly being adopted as a treatment modality,
particularly for liver and lung tumors, and because
of the dramatic improvements in tumor control,
the use of SBRT is being directed toward other
anatomical sites. The success of SBRT has been
primarily technology-driven; however, application
of fully potent SBRT regimes is now impeded by
biological limitations. While the use of SBRT will
continue to increase, there are aspects of both
normal tissue and tumor response to high dose per
fraction radiation exposures that require a further
understanding in order to augment the technology
gains as well as to minimize the potential harm
done by inappropriate application of fully potent
SBRT regimes. From a radiobiological perspective, there is a shift in thinking about the models
used to extrapolate biological effects at high
dose per fraction although the underlying mechanisms are not understood. There are also
potential scheduling benefits for SBRT that can
be exploited. As such, it may be appropriate to
re-examine radioprotective or hypoxic cell cytotoxic agents that were either abandoned or not
actively used given their considerable side effects.
This may be especially true for hypoxia as the
argument can be made on a mechanistic basis
that SBRT is inappropriate for use with hypoxic
tumors. However, we would challenge that notion.
We will discuss these topics from a radiobiological
perspective.

C. Park
Texas Oncology, Fort Worth TX 76104, USA

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2012_551, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

123

124

1

M. D. Story et al.

Introduction

Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT), which is
also known as stereotactic ablative radiotherapy
(SABR), uses advanced technologies that limit the
extent of normal tissue in a treatment field where very
high, ablative radiation doses are delivered to a targeted
tumor. SBRT is now recognized as a highly potent form
of targeted therapy that is rapidly being applied to treat
tumors in various anatomical sites. While SBRT has
shown great promise as a targeted therapy, its implementation was primarily facilitated by physical
geometric avoidance of dose enabled by advanced
technology. Unfortunately, there have been problematic
clinical consequences related to the surrounding normal
tissue including the major airways, bowel lumens and
ducts (Timmerman et al. 2006) and the ultimate impact
of technological innovation as a sole enabler of SBRT is
proving to be limited (Timmerman and Story 2006).
The question that remains is whether there are
biological consequences of exposure to ablative
radiation doses that can be overcome or exploited that
would enhance either tumor killing or limit normal
tissue response that would allow us to overcome the
adverse consequences of ablative radiation exposures.
Biological exploitation includes the notion of so
called threshold effects where little to no response is
seen in a given tumor until a threshold dose is reached at
which time the effect is significantly enhanced. This
can be a macroscopic effect, or an immune modulated
effect that is not ordinarily seen at conventional therapeutic doses. These threshold effects may constitute a
major opportunity to exploit SBRT by modulating
response in tumor and normal tissue. Standing in the
way of SBRT is the notion that when short course
ablative fractionation schemes are used, the consequences of tumor hypoxia will become a significant
impediment to adoption of SBRT to some tumor sites.
Conventional fractionated radiotherapy (CFRT) is
based upon decades of practical experience in sparing
normal tissue. The earliest practitioners of radiotherapy used large doses of limited numbers but it was the
work of Claudius Regaud in 1906 that showed that the
skin was spared when radiation was delivered in
multiple doses rather than as a single dose when the
testes of rams were sterilized by radiation. This
was followed by many experiments examining
fractionated dosing regimens in the 1920s and 1930s.

Subsequently, Strandquist (1944) isoeffect plots, and
the nominal standard dose system of Ellis (1971)
standardized the concept of using fractionated
regimens in radiation oncology. Basic radiobiology
provided cellular evidence for the use of fractionated
schemes by positing that the shoulders of in vitro
survival curves explained the sparing of normal tissue
when radiation exposures were fractionated. While
this could certainly be applied to tumor cells,
the therapeutic benefit was provided by tumor cell
cycle re-assortment and re-oxygenation.
To be clear, fractionation schedules are not based
upon better tumor control per se, but upon the balance
between normal tissue sparing and tumor cure. After
all, historically, the volume of normal tissue in a radiation field was at least as large as and generally much
larger than the tumor volume itself. If the normal tissue
in the radiation field is restricted by technological
advances in dose delivery or selectively protected by
chemical or biologic means, one can begin to reevaluate the justification for 2 Gy fractionated therapeutic
regimens given over many weeks. Furthermore,
radiobiology supports this notion as radiation per unit
dose is more effective when given at doses beyond the
shoulder of the survival curve than doses generally
within the shouldered region of the survival curve.

2

Radioresponse at High Dose

This leads to the question of shapes of survival curves
at high dose. One is interested in knowing clonogenic
survival rate because cell kills due to radiationinduced chromosomal aberrations leading to reproductive death is thought to be proportional to, and
most predictive of, the desired effect of tumor control.
Other effects which may also lead to tumor control
such as apoptosis, vascular injury, immunogenic
effect and abscopal effects are thought to be secondary, but nonetheless very important.

2.1

Mammalian Survival Curves

There is little dispute what mammalian cell survival
curves look like when exposed to high dose, high dose
rate, single fraction irradiation. Plotted on a semilog
plot (where the x-axis is the dose and y-axis is the
logarithm of clonogenic survival), it becomes a straight

Radiolobiology of Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy/Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

line. This was repeatedly confirmed in the setting of
tumor cells in vitro (Elkind and Sutton 1959; Puck and
Marcus 1956), tumor cells in vivo (Hewitt and Wilson
1959), and normal cells in vivo (Till and Mc 1961).
However, in the more clinically relevant dose range
typically used in CFRT, the survival curve is fitted well
when a curved fit to the data is applied.

2.2

Mathematical Models

A mathematical model is useful to simulate the reality of
experimental data because it helps us predict the
behavior of reality where data points are not readily
available. Various mathematical models have been used
to characterize mammalian survival curves. There are
two different philosophies in approaching this: (1) an
empiric approach and (2) a mechanistic approach. In the
empiric approach the emphasis is on being able to
describe experimental data using simple mathematical
functions. In a mechanistic approach the emphasis is on
being able to explain the underlying mechanism. The
historical mechanistic target theory parameters, D0 and
N, continue to be used empirically to describe high dose
survival curves although its original explanatory model,
multiple critical targets that lead to cell death, has been
discarded. Ideally, the best model would satisfy both
goals; that is, it is simple to use, provides a good fit to the
experimental data, and explains the underlying mechanism. Interestingly, we can argue that we really still do
not know how radiation kills cells, which is problematic
when trying to develop mechanistic models.

2.2.1 Linear Quadratic Model
Probably one of the most popular approaches to fitting
radiation survival cures is the Linear Quadratic model
(LQ model, also known as alpha–beta model).
It works very well in the CFRT range and up to
8–10 Gy. Initially developed as an empiric model
using a linear term and a quadratic term to describe
the survival curve, it offers an excellent fit to the
shoulder region of data and easily lends itself to
rational explanations of induction of chromosomal
aberrations by single or double events that ultimately
lead or not to cell death although this relationship is
likely overly simplistic. Its attraction lies in its
mathematical simplicity and association with an
effective dose equivalence relationship through a
biologically effective dose (BED) formalism.

125

There is the distinct possibility that the LQ model
may be appropriate in combined modality therapies or
where there are threshold effects, that is, effects not
seen in CFRT regimens because a threshold dose that
elicits a macroscopic tissue effect, an example of that
being the endothelial cells and microvacular function
as a regulator of tumor cell radiosensitivity (GarciaBarros et al. 2003, 2010; Maj et al. 2003), or where new
targets for immune modulation are provided mediating
antibody-dependent cytotoxicity (He et al. 2007, 2009;
Saha et al. 2010). The revealing of such threshold
effects and an increasing effectiveness per unit dose as
this threshold dose is crossed may, in fact, cause the
shape of a survival curve to be better fit by an LQ model
with a supporting mechanism to justify its use.

2.2.2

Models Applicable to the SBRT
Dose Range
For the SBRT dose range, the LQ model in its basic form
cannot do an adequate job to describe the curve because
it requires a continuously bending curve. There have
been numerous attempts to construct a mathematical
model to describe survival in high dose range typically
used in SBRT (Astrahan 2008; Fowler 2008; Guerrero
and Li 2004; Kavanagh and Newman 2008; McKenna
and Ahmad 2009; Park et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2010).
Again, there are two different approaches. One approach
tries to retain mathematical simplicity, while potentially
sacrificing the ability to explain the underlying mechanism. This may still be useful because, even without the
ability to explain the mechanism, it may characterize and
compare radiosensitivity and predict outcomes when
parameters are altered. The other approach is to modify
the LQ model to expand its explanatory power more
suitable to the SBRT situation, but abdicate mathematical simplicity in the process. This is typically done by
modifying the beta term that results in a straightening of
the LQ curve. This manipulation is typically mathematically complicated, but its value lies in being able to
offer additional insight of the mechanism.
One model that took the first, descriptive, approach
was The Universal Survival Curve model (Park et al.
2008). It is a piecewise combination of the LQ model
in the shoulder and a straight line in the high dose
range by an abrupt, yet differentiable, junction at a
point called the transition dose. Its advantages include
preservation of the LQ model in the CFRT range, the
use of well-characterized target theory parameters D0
and N for the SBRT range, and extreme simplicity in

126

M. D. Story et al.

both regions. The strength of this model is the ability
to derive a simple, equivalent dose formalism that
compares two different SBRT dose-fractionation
schemes (Marks 1995; Park et al. 2008). It has,
however, been criticized for being mathematically
inelegant due to its abrupt transition as it is possible
that the data fit at the transition dose range may not be
as good as either clinically relevant regions.
One model that took the second, explanatory,
approach was the generalized linear quadratic model
(gLQ) (Wang et al. 2010). The derivation starts from
the mechanistic assumption that, in the SBRT dose
range, the pool of sublethal lesions gets depleted and
they are converted to irreparable damage. This introduces a reduction term in the dose rate factor that
straightens the curve. This model, and its more comprehensive forms, may offer insight as to why the survival curve straightens. Furthermore, using the more
comprehensive form allows one to predict the results of
altering other parameters in a computer simulation. As
with any mechanistic approach there is the pitfall of
over-interpreting experimental outcome and implying
overreaching or misleading mechanisms. For example,
we are still coming to terms with the application of
terminology such as sublethal lesions.
Whether one chooses an empirical or mechanistic
approach the models can be compared by goodness of
fit to available experimental data. The model should
fit data well throughout the relevant dose range, and a
good model should lead to accurate interpolation and
extrapolation from the available data points. More
importantly, however, is the intended use. It is clear
that a physician performing a back-of-an-envelope
calculation to derive an isoeffect dose-fractionation
scheme would prefer a different model than a programmer who is running a computer simulation on the
effect of a heterogeneous, ablative dose of radiation.

3

Overcoming Biological
Impediments to the Use of SBRT

While we will continue to see incremental improvements in dose delivery through advanced technology,
there are biological hurdles that, if overcome, would
lead to a greater implementation and effectiveness of
SBRT. Two of the most challenging biological hurdles are adverse normal tissue responses and tumor
hypoxia. Each will be discussed in detail.

3.1

Normal Tissue Response

Because of the inability to exclude certain normal tissues
within the lung, one result of the landmark Indiana
University study using SBRT to treat lung tumors
(McGarry et al. 2005) was the high rate of late toxicity
(Grade III) that appeared by the end of year two that
unfortunately may have factored in the death of four
patients with centrally located tumors (within two cm of
the bronchial tree) (Timmerman et al. 2006). In this
study, patients received up to 66 Gy in three fractions
over two weeks. Yet, in spite of these adverse events,
local tumor control was still over 80%. While the dose
per fraction can be reduced and the number of fractions
increased for centrally located tumors (5 fractions of
8–10 Gy), the local control rate is also reduced (Song
et al. 2009; Timmerman et al. 2007a, b, c). The argument
is made that such adverse responses can be due to the
architecture of the responding tissue in that ablation of
tubular tissues effect all downstream structures (Timmerman et al. 2007a, b, c). These severe side effects, which
limit the clinical application of full potency SBRT in the
treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), can
be caused by three factors: (1) Irradiation of an unacceptably large partial volume of a sensitive structure
with a dose equal to or lower than the mean dose
delivered to the target volume. Significant integral doses
in large volumes can occur when the optimization of the
dose distribution in the target volume is considered to be
more important than the integral dose delivered outside
the target volume; (2) Irradiation of a small volume of
the target structure with a high dose, due to inhomogeneity in the dose distribution, which is more pronounced
in SBRT than in CFRT settings; (3) Inter-individual
variations of cellular radiosensitivity.
Limiting therapy to distal tumors is, in the short
run, a solution to the normal tissue toxicity described
above. However, normal tissue toxicity can limit the
successful implementation of radiotherapy whether it
is through high dose per fraction therapy such as
SBRT or CFRT. A classic normal tissue response is
radiation pneumonitis. With CFRT, the risk for
pneumonitis increases with treatment volume and V20,
the lung volume receiving 20 Gy or more, is predictive of pneumonitis. However, in at least two trials
where SBRT was employed, the rate of pneumonitis
was unexpectedly quite low (Fujino et al. 2006;
Timmerman et al. 2006). The pneumonitis seen was
sporadic at all dose levels and this may be because the

Radiolobiology of Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy/Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

V20 levels for SBRT are very low compared to CFRT.
The same could be said for lung fibrosis. Lung fibrosis
at high dose per fraction can occur as a late reaction in
the area of lung parenchyma that surrounded the
treatment site, but it is just as likely to occur after
CFRT given at high doses.
Two approaches are possible to avoid normal tissue toxicity without sacrificing tumor control: (a) A
better understanding of the normal tissue reactions
occurring under SBRT conditions. This improved
understanding can lead to a more rational definition of
tolerated volumes and doses. (b) Use of drugs that
reduce normal tissue damage by protection from, or
mitigation of, adverse radiation effects without sacrificing tumor control.

3.1.1 Radioprotection
One of the oldest, and the only FDA-approved, radioprotectors is amifostine (Ethyol). A search of
clinicaltrials.gov identified 74 clinical trials where
amifostine was being used with either radiation
therapy, chemotherapy or combined therapy, mostly
outside the parameters of its FDA approval. The
cancers targeted include lung, head and neck, acute
myelogenous leukemia, breast and prostate as examples. Amifostine is considered the classic pharmacologic radioprotector. It is known to act as a radical
scavenger and so it must be present at or very close to
the time of irradiation. Moreover, it is also considered
to have anti-mutagenic effects (Grdina et al. 2002;
Kataoka et al. 1992, 1996). Amifostine is noted for its
toxicity when used with CFRT, (Rades et al. 2004) as
an example, and in rare cases an anaphylactic reaction
has been described (Lin and Lawrence 2006). Given
as a bolus or subcutaneously, just before each daily
radiation fraction, discontinuation rates have been
reported to be as high as 40% due to cumulative
exposure effects including severe hypotension, vomiting and allergic reactions or weakness, drowsiness,
erythema or fever (Rades et al. 2004). There has also
been some concern over the potential for tumor
sparing. This has led to at least two meta-analyses,
one on the extent to which amifostine reduced late
normal tissue effects (xerostomia) (Sasse et al. 2006)
and another determining the effect of amifostine on
response rates in NSCLC (Mell et al. 2007). The
former meta-analysis concluded that amifostine significantly reduced radiotherapy side effects, while the
latter concluded that amifostine did not affect tumor

127

response rates. Individual studies examining normal
tissue response outside of xerostomia are generally
positive (Antonadou et al. 2003a, b; Komaki et al.
2004; Koukourakis et al. 2007), although in (Buentzel
et al. 2006) no effect on normal tissue toxicity was
seen in a radio/chemotherapy trial for head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (Koukourakis et al. 2007).
There may be an additional advantage to the use of
amifostine with SBRT regimens. Because SBRT is not
a daily, protracted regimen, it is conceivable that
potential radioprotectors such as amifostine could be
better tolerated. This notion is bolstered by the use of
Amifostine in the study by Koukourakis (2002) where a
hypofractionated and accelerated radiotherapy schedule was used for the treatment of post-operative breast
cancer. In this case, a 1,000 mg infusion of amifostine
was delivered before each of 12 daily fractions. Patients
typically receive amifostine at concentrations of
300–500 mg/m2. The authors report that the amifostine
was discontinued in only 7% of patients. This study
suggests that high doses over short periods can be tolerated. Preclinical studies that test the efficacy of amifostine using large bolus or infusion on normal tissue
radioprotection after high dose per fraction seem
warranted as a mechanism to limit normal tissue
intolerance to SBRT regimes. However, a delayed
radioprotective effect through the upregulation of
MnSOD, a.k.a. SOD2, was identified in a C3H mouse
model (Grdina et al. 2009). While a delayed effect such
as this would be advantageous for normal tissue treated
by CFRT, in the same study, Grdina et al. also showed
elevated MnSOD levels in the transplantable murine
sarcoma SA-NH 24 h after amifostine administration.
Such a result opens the debate regarding potential
tumor radioprotection and it was suggested by Grdina
et al. that amifostine administration be limited to every
72 h to avoid the potential for tumor radioprotection
which suggests an advantage for SBRT.

3.1.2 Mitigation of Normal Tissue Damage
This approach is especially attractive for the development of new or better agents given the Department of
Homeland Security emphasis on radioprotection and
mitigation for first responders and the general population. Unlike amifostine, the initial burst of free radicals
produced by the radiation exposure is not the target
of a mitigating compound. Instead, mitigation can be
through stimulation of epithelial cells to proliferate
and differentiate. The example for this is keratinocyte

128

M. D. Story et al.

growth factor (Dorr et al. 2002a, b; Potten et al. 2001),
or by limiting pro-inflammatory cytokines or chemokines that recruit macrophages during the process of
late normal tissue damage (Anscher et al. 2005;
Vujaskovic et al. 2002). For review, see Anscher et al.
(2005); Moulder and Cohen (2007). These factors can
be sustained for periods of time well after the completion of radiotherapy (Fu et al. 2001; Rubin et al.
1995). Furthermore, while the emphasis in reducing
free radical damage has always been at the time of
radiation, we now know that oxidative stress and
hypoxia may be responsible for late radiation injury
[(Robbins and Diz 2006; Vujaskovic et al. 2001) and
(Li and Jackson 2002) for a review of hypoxia and
reoxygenation injury] and that attacking free radicals
well after the completion of therapy may be an appropriate strategy. The expression of superoxide dismutase
(SOD) has been shown to protect against radiation
injury (Delanian et al. 1994; Epperly et al. 1998; Kang
2003) as have compounds like AEOL10150 that mimic
SOD (Vujaskovic et al. 2002) but that can have other
chemistries that are not well understood.
There are logistical aspects of SBRT that may provide an advantage for the use of either a radioprotector or
a radio-mitigator including (1) the use of radiation doses
that ablate a tumor while restricting the inclusion of
normal tissue in the field; (2) a limited number of RT
fractions that result in therapy being concluded in
two weeks instead of six, which may allow the healing
process to begin earlier; and (3) RT fractions that are not
given daily, which likely allow normal tissue recovery
between fractions. With an overall shortened treatment
time without daily irradiation, radioprotective compounds that have toxicities of their own might be used
more effectively because a larger dose could be used and
that dose would not be given daily. A recovery time
between fractions might provide better tolerance. On the
other hand, mitigation agents could be given earlier as
the overall therapy time is reduced with SBRT.

3.2

SBRT and Tumor Hypoxia

Tumor hypoxia could present a significant challenge
in the effective treatment of lung tumors by high dose
per fraction radiotherapy. Early models of tumor
hypoxia were based on the view that large, locally
advanced, solid tumors are cut off from the surrounding normal vasculature and experience a chronic

decrease in oxygen concentration resulting in ‘diffusion-limited’ hypoxia. In recent years, this simplistic
view has been considerably refined by evidence that
in addition to diffusion-limited hypoxia, temporary
obstructions or dynamic changes in blood flow can
result in an acute type of hypoxic response termed
perfusion-limited hypoxia. It is now well accepted
that hypoxic tumors are significantly resistant to
radiation and chemotherapy. Since the initial discovery by Thomlinson and Gray (1955) more than
50 years ago, (Gray et al. 1953), our understanding of
tumor hypoxia and its influence on radiation sensitivity have considerably evolved. We now know that
tumor hypoxia is heterogeneous (Mueller-Klieser
et al. 1991) and dynamic and that tumor cells with
even moderate levels of hypoxia can be significantly
more radio- and chemo-resistant than oxic or severely
hypoxic cells (Cardenas-Navia et al. 2008). A considerable body of research has focused on how tumors
adapt to hypoxia. The emerging evidence indicates
that hypoxic tumors exhibit a unique spectrum of
DNA damage responses (DDR) (Chan et al. 2009;
Edwards et al. 2009) and gene expression patterns that
may influence, not only tumor resistance to radiation
or chemotherapy, but may also select for a more
malignant tumor type (Bristow and Hill 2008; Brizel
et al. 1996; Chan and Giaccia 2007; De Bock et al.
2011; Hill et al. 2009). Historically, conventional
hyper-fractionated radiotherapy has been the standard
for treating hypoxic tumors. The efficacy of hypofractionated radiotherapy regimens such as SBRT in
the context of tumor hypoxia has yet to be experimentally and clinically determined. However, the
prediction is that SBRT may be significantly less
effective than conventional hyper-fractionated radiotherapy in controlling hypoxic tumors (Carlson et al.
2011). Thus, hypoxic tumors present formidable
challenges for conventional and hypo-fractionated
radiotherapy. However, the hypoxia-adaptive
responses they exhibit may proffer unique opportunities which could be exploited to augment SBRT for
hypoxic tumors.

3.2.1

Tumor Hypoxia is a Potential Risk
Factor for SBRT Failure
One reason why SBRT may not be effective against
hypoxic tumors is that the number of fractions
involved is low (3–5). Traditionally, the logic has
been that multiple fractions of radiotherapy eliminates

Radiolobiology of Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy/Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

the relatively less hypoxic (and more radiosensitive)
regions of the tumor and exposes the more hypoxic,
radioresistant cores to oxygen gradients that progressively radiosensitize the tumor. This progressive
re-oxygenation and radiosensitization of tumors is
likely to be limited in the case of hypo-fractionated
radiotherapy. Thus hypo-fractionated regimens of
SBRT could be potentially less effective against
hypoxic tumors. Mathematical modeling predicts that
hypo-fractionated radiotherapy could be at least three
orders of magnitude less effective in decreasing clonogenic survival than multiple fractions of radiation
(Carlson et al. 2011).
A second factor that weighs against SBRT for
hypoxic tumors is the effect oxygen has on radiosensitivity, particularly at high doses. Ionizing radiation generates free radicals that chemically react with
DNA to produce DNA-radicals. In the presence of
oxygen, the DNA-radical is fixed (made permanent),
resulting in a number of DNA lesions, particularly
DNA double strand breaks (DSBs). The effect of
oxygen in sensitizing tumor cells to radiation is
quantified by the term, oxygen enhancement ratio
(OER), which is the ratio of the radiation dose
required to obtain a surviving fraction in the absence
of oxygen to the dose required to obtain the same
surviving fraction in the presence of oxygen. For
tumor cells, the OER ranges from 2.5 to 3.0. Studies
show that at high doses of radiation ([6–8 Gy), the
OER is significantly higher (Hornsey 1977). Standard
SBRT regimens employ few fractions (3–5) of very
high dose (22–30 Gy) per fraction. At these doses per
fraction, oxygen requirement for appreciable DNA
damage and radiosensitivity is greater. Moreover,
clinical trials have shown that even such high dose per
fraction regimens carry the risk of life-threatening
toxicity for patients with centrally located tumors.
Merely lowering the dose per fraction of SBRT
adversely affects tumor control. Thus, there is clearly
a need to augment SBRT through tumor-selective
inhibition of radioresistance. To be effective, such
radiosensitizing strategy must account for tumor
hypoxia.

3.2.2 Targeting Tumor Hypoxia
Over the last few decades, several strategies aimed at
sensitizing hypoxic tumors to radiotherapy have been
developed. Conceptually, these strategies can be
broadly divided into five categories: (1) Reversing

129

hypoxia by oxygen (2) Oxygen-mimicking agents (3)
Hypoxia-activated pro-drugs (4) HIF-1a targeting
agents and an emerging concept, (5) contextual synthetic lethality. It should be noted however, that most
of these studies featured combinations of the respective hypoxic cell radio-sensitizers and CFRT. Revisiting some of these strategies may uncover benefits
unique to SBRT that could be further evaluated in
preclinical or clinical settings (Fig. 1).
3.2.2.1 Oxygen and Oxygen-Mimicking Agents
to Target Hypoxia
The knowledge that hypoxic tumors are radioresistant
motivated a number of early clinical trials in which
patients were treated with fractionated radiotherapy in
hyperbaric oxygen chambers. The rationale at the
time was that an increase in blood oxygen level would
make more oxygen available for tumors and thus
produce a radiosensitizing effect. These trials were
met with marginal success, in part because they did
not account for dynamic changes in perfusion-limited
tumor hypoxia, a concept that was unknown at the
time. In early 1960s, interest shifted to the use of
chemical compounds that could act like oxygen and
achieve radiosensitization. The development of
nitroimidazole based drugs, including metronidazole,
misonidazole and etanidazole was based on the concept that these compounds had an electron affinity
similar to, or greater than, oxygen and could radiosensitize hypoxic tumors by reacting with, and
stabilizing, radiation-induced DNA free radicals.
In preclinical cell line-based and animal models, these
hypoxic cell sensitizers demonstrated remarkable
efficacy in reducing the OER of several tumors from
3.0–3.5 to 1.5, with no radiosensitizing effect on
normoxic cells (Begg et al. 1974). One notable
observation from these animal studies may be
particularly useful in the context of SBRT. In the
majority of experiments, dramatic effects on tumor
radiosensitivity were observed when metronidazole
was combined with a single large dose of radiation
([25 Gy), which was considered unthinkable at the
time for clinical application. When combined with
multiple fractions of low dose radiation, however,
only a modest effect could be observed depending on
the time between radiation fractions (Sheldon et al.
1976; Stone 1976). In clinical trials, when combined
with CFRT, the drugs did not significantly improve
radiotherapy and toxicity at effective concentration

130

M. D. Story et al.

Fig. 1 Augmenting SBRT for hypoxic tumors. In the presence
of oxygen, radiation-induced DNA-radical is fixed (made
permanent), resulting in a DNA double strand breaks among
other lesions. In hypoxic conditions, DSBs are limited but
nucleotide insufficiency leads to replication stress and a unique
pattern of DNA lesions. Hypoxic cells tend to down-regulate
many components of the homologous recombination (HR)
pathway with corresponding up-regulation of non-homologous
end joining (NHEJ) repair. Historically various strategies have
been employed to radiosensitize hypoxic tumors including

oxygen, oxygen mimics such as nimorazole, which enhance the
DNA damaging potential of radiation and hypoxic cell
radiosensitizers such as tirapazamine and AQ4N which are
inactivated by oxygen but potentiate DNA damage through
inhibition of topoisomerase. The unique pattern of DNA
damage response in hypoxic tumors is an attractive target for
contextual synthetic lethality where inhibition of NHEJ components such as PARP may have a dramatic radiosensitizing
effect in the context of hypoxia-repressed HR pathway

was a major limitation (Brown 1984). Subsequent
meta-analysis did uncover a small but statistically
significant benefit in local control with nitroimidazole
and radiotherapy compared to radiotherapy alone
(Overgaard 1994). A second generation nitroimidazole compound, nimorazole, has generated renewed
interest particularly in Denmark for two reasons: the
radiosensitizing effect was independent of fraction
size (Overgaard et al. 1982) and has a less steep doseresponse relationship compared with other radiosensitizers (Skov and MacPhail 1994). Because of its
water solubility, nimorazole can also be used at very
low, non-toxic concentrations. Clinical trials have
shown remarkable benefit with nimorazole and
radiotherapy in head and neck cancer (Henk et al.
2003; Overgaard et al. 1998, 1991; Sugie et al. 2005;
Timothy et al. 1984). A multi-center double-blind
Phase III trial with 422 patients with head and neck
cancer found that the five-year loco-regional control

was significantly improved with minimal toxicity in
patients receiving nimerazole and CFRT compared
to patients who received placebo along with
radiotherapy (Overgaard et al. 1998). While, drugs
like nimorazole may benefit conventional hyperfractionated radiotherapy, radiosensitizers that were
effective at single high doses could be potentially
more effective in augmenting SBRT and require
further evaluation.
3.2.2.2 Targeting Tumor Hypoxia with
Pro-Drugs
Due to the high toxicity associated with the first
generation nitroimidazole drugs, interest shifted to
agents that were inactive pro-drugs in oxic cells but
exhibited toxicity selective to hypoxic tumors upon
conversion to an active state in the absence of oxygen.
In oxic cells, these drugs form superoxides in the
presence of molecular oxygen. In the absence of

Radiolobiology of Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy/Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

oxygen they form substrates for one electron reductases and are converted to free radicals. Three such
pro-drugs are currently in various phases of clinical
trials, tirapazamine (Brown 1993; Rischin et al.
2010), AQ4N (Albertella et al. 2008; Papadopoulos
et al. 2008), and NLCQ-1 (Papadopoulou and
Bloomer 2003; Papadopoulou et al. 2007, 2001)
although toxicity issues have been reported for AQ4N
and NLCQ-1. Phase II clinical trials in 54 patients
with Stage III and IV squamous cell head and neck
carcinoma selected for hypoxia showed that patients
who received tirapazamine in combination with
radiotherapy or cisplatin had significantly lower
loco-regional control compared to patients that had
radiotherapy or chemotherapy alone (Rischin et al.
2005). However, a randomized multi-national Phase
III study with nearly 861 head and neck cancer
patients, not selected for hypoxia, failed to demonstrate any benefit of adding tirapazamine to chemo- or
radiation-therapy (Rischin et al. 2010). The evidence
suggests that synergistic activity of pro-drugs with
conventional radiotherapy may be limited to tumors
with pronounced hypoxia; in oxic tumors the drug is
inactive and conventional radiotherapy is only marginally effective in tumor control. The possibility
exists that these pro-drugs may be more effective
when combined with high dose per fraction radiotherapy, where the radiotherapy component of SBRT
alone has demonstrated a superior loco-regional
control compared to conventional radiotherapy.
3.2.2.3 Targeting HIF-1 in Hypoxic Tumors
Tumor cells adapt to hypoxia in multiple ways. A key
step in the adaptive response to hypoxia involves the
stabilization and activation of the transcription factor,
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) (Semenza 2007).
HIF-1 induces dramatic changes in global gene
expression and metabolic pathways (Semenza et al.
2006), activates p21/p27 mediated cell cycle arrest at
G1/S checkpoint (Hackenbeck et al. 2009), and triggers
p53-dependent and p53-independent apoptosis and
necrosis (Greijer and van der Wall 2004; Hammond
and Giaccia 2005). Because of its predominant role in
tumor hypoxia, HIF-1a has been an attractive target for
therapeutic intervention. However, although many
candidate HIF-1a inhibitors show significant sensitization of hypoxic tumors to chemotherapy and radiotherapy in pre-clinical studies with cell lines and animal
models, clinical evidence showing a clear benefit

131

of adding HIF-1a inhibitors to chemotherapy or
radiotherapy has yet to merge (Semenza 2007).

3.2.3

Targeting DNA Damage Response
Unique to Hypoxic Tumors
A potential solution to hypoxia-associated radiation
resistance may involve the exploitation of the DDR
pathways unique to hypoxic tumors. In response to
genotoxic stress-induced DNA DSBs, cells orchestrate
complex networks of survival mechanisms that are
collectively termed DDR and include DNA repair, cell
cycle arrest, apoptosis, senescence and necrosis. Two
main DSB repair pathways complement each other, the
non-homologous end-joining repair (NHEJ) and
homologous recombination (HR). NHEJ, which operates in all phases of the cell cycle, involves processing
and ligation of broken DNA ends by activities of the
DNA-end binding Ku complex, the protein kinaseDNA-PKcs, potential DNA-end processing enzymes
(e.g. Artemis, Wrn, Tpd1), and the DNA ligase, IV/
XRCC4/XLF complex (Burma et al. 2006; Weterings
and Chen 2008). HR is a slow, more accurate method
but requires the presence of an intact sister chromatid,
and can operate only in the late S/G2 cell cycle phases
(Thompson and Schild 2002). HR involves initial DSB
recognition by the Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1 (MRN) complex, single strand binding of RPA, Rad52 loading and
RPA-displacement, and strand-invasion and D-loop
formation through Rad54, Rad51 and Rad51 paralogs.
Additional factors such as Brca1, Brca2, and CtIP
(Kawase et al. 2007; Sung and Klein 2006) have supportive roles. The complexity of tumor DDR differs
significantly between low and very high doses of
radiation. In addition, the Ataxia telangiectasia mutated
protein (ATM) and the ATM and Rad3-related (ATR)
proteins play pivotal roles in initiation, maintenance
and release of radiation-induced cell cycle arrest
[reviewed in Abraham (2001, 2004)].
Many groups have identified a unique spectrum of
DDR in hypoxic tumors that dramatically differs from
oxic cells (Bristow and Hill 2008; Chan et al. 2009).
First, multiple lines of evidence indicate that DNA
DSBs do not occur in hypoxic cells. Second, during
conditions of transient hypoxia (\12 h) HR, but not
NHEJ, is critical for survival (Sprong et al. 2006). By
contrast, during prolonged hypoxia ([12 h), many
components of the HR pathway, most notably MRE11
and RAD50, are down-regulated with a significant
up-regulation of several NHEJ components such as

132

DNA-PKcs (Chan et al. 2009). In response to
hypoxia, decrease in ribonucleotide reductase activity
(Muniyappa et al. 2009) causes nucleotide insufficiency resulting in a rapid halt in DNA synthesis and
cell cycle arrest through replication fork-bound RPA
and activation of the ATR/Chk1/Cdc25 pathway
(Hammond et al. 2002, 2003), and ATM is phosphorylated in a DSB- and MRN-complex independent
manner and activates Chk2 kinase but interestingly
the ATM-Chk2 pathway stops short of inducing cell
cycle arrest. In striking contrast to IR, which induces
the formation of both 53BP1 and cH2AX foci at DNA
DSBs, in response to hypoxia, 53BP1 foci are not
formed due to lack of DNA DSBs, while cH2AX foci
can be detected at sites of stalled replication forks.
The cumulative evidence from these studies indicates
that chronic hypoxia triggers a DDR shift toward
which involves a significant down-regulation of HR
enzymes.

3.2.4

Contextual Synthetic Lethality
Approach to Radiosensitize Hypoxic
Tumors
Cancers with mutations in BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 are
significantly compromised in the HR DNA repair
pathway. Two landmark studies demonstrated significant synthetic lethality associated with inhibitors
of Poly ADP-Ribose Polymerase (PARP) in the specific context of HR deficiency. The groups of Bryant
et al. (2005) and Farmer et al. (2005) showed that
PARP inhibition had dramatic and selective anticancer activity in BRCA1- and BRCA2-deficient cancers.
More recently, Patel et al. (2011) demonstrated that
NHEJ up-regulation is the driving force behind the
conditional lethality of PARP inhibition in HR-deficient cells. A third pivotal finding by Johnson et al.
(2011) indicates that compromised CDK1 activity
sensitizes BRCA-proficient cells to PARP inhibition.
The unique DDR in hypoxic tumors is remarkably
analogous to the HR-deficient condition prevalent in
BRCA-deficient cancers. The rationale for targeting
hypoxic tumors with a synthetic lethality approach
similar to PARP inhibition is compelling. First,
chronic hypoxia significantly down-regulates HR
enzymes, leading to an HR compromised state similar
to BRCA-deficient cells. Second, the selective upregulation of NHEJ enzymes in hypoxic tumor cells
could further favor a synthetic lethality effect
similar to PARP inhibition. Third, because multiple

M. D. Story et al.

components of HR are simultaneously down-regulated in hypoxia, synthetic lethality would not be
restricted to a select subset of mutations such as
BRCA but could also include a broader range of
tumors that show an HR defect in the context of
hypoxia. Finally, ChK1 down-regulation in hypoxic
tumors could potentially simulate the conditions
favorable for synthetic lethality observed in BRCAproficient cells (Johnson et al. 2011). Such a contextual synthetic lethality approach could be significantly
synergistic with radiotherapy. The prediction is that,
when combined with high dose per fraction SBRT, a
synthetic lethality approach could be particularly
effective in tumor control because SBRT would be
effective on oxic regions of the tumor while hypoxic
regions can be radio-sensitized through synthetic
lethality.
Toxicity, particularly in the context of centrally
located lung tumors, is the major limiting factor in the use
of SBRT in the treatment of lung cancers. Dose
de-escalation with the intent to minimize toxicity runs the
risk of compromising tumor control especially in the
context of tumor hypoxia. Tumor hypoxia could pose a
unique challenge in the treatment of lung cancers with
SBRT because the reduced fraction number could
potentially compromise re-oxygenation. The benefits of
combining hypoxic cell radiosensitizers could pave the
way for safe and effective management of lung cancers
with reduced safer dose per fraction SBRT. There is
compelling rationale to exploit the DNA damage
response unique to hypoxic tumors. At least in the case of
PARP inhibition, minimal toxicity was noted. However,
more studies at the preclinical and clinical level are
clearly needed to verify if such an approach combined
with SBRT is indeed safe and effective in control of
hypoxic tumors. Meanwhile, other strategies, such as
HIF1a inhibitor or oxygen mimic, nimerazole, may also
be worth investigation. At least from the Danish Head
and Neck cancer experience, it appears that nimerazole is
the only hypoxic cell radiosensitizer that is effective and
safe when combined with radiotherapy. Drugs such as
metronidazole appeared to be ineffective with hyperfractionated radiotherapy, except at very high toxic doses
of the compounds. However, their effectiveness when
combined with SBRT may need to be revisited. At least
in preclinical studies, these drugs showed dramatic
activity at low, non-toxic concentrations when combined
with a single large dose of radiation. Advances in noninvasive hypoxia tumor imaging could lead to better

Radiolobiology of Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy/Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy

assessment of tumor hypoxia and its contribution to
radiotherapy failure. Clinical evaluation of the efficacy of
any of these hypoxia-radiosensitizing strategies should
ideally be performed in patients selected for tumor
hypoxia. Randomized trials in mixed populations with
hypoxic and well-oxygenated tumors could yield misleading results on outcome as was the case with tirapazamine. A strategy that overcomes hypoxia-associated
tumor radioresistance could significantly improve
reduced-dose SBRT options for lung cancer patients at
risk for toxicity.

References
Abraham RT (2001) Cell cycle checkpoint signaling through
the ATM and ATR kinases. Genes Dev 15:2177–2196
Abraham RT (2004) PI 3-kinase related kinases: ‘big’ players
in stress-induced signaling pathways. DNA Repair (Amst)
3:883–887
Albertella MR, Loadman PM, Jones PH, Phillips RM,
Rampling R, Burnet N, Alcock C, Anthoney A, Vjaters E,
Dunk CR, Harris PA, Wong A, Lalani AS, Twelves CJ
(2008) Hypoxia-selective targeting by the bioreductive
prodrug AQ4N in patients with solid tumors: results of a
phase I study. Clin Cancer Res 14:1096–1104
Anscher MS, Chen L, Rabbani Z, Kang S, Larrier N, Huang H,
Samulski TV, Dewhirst MW, Brizel DM, Folz RJ, Vujaskovic Z
(2005) Recent progress in defining mechanisms and potential
targets for prevention of normal tissue injury after radiation
therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 62:255–259
Antonadou D, Petridis A, Synodinou M, Throuvalas N, Bolanos N,
Veslemes M, Sagriotis A (2003a) Amifostine reduces radiochemotherapy-induced toxicities in patients with locally
advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Semin Oncol 30:2–9
Antonadou D, Throuvalas N, Petridis A, Bolanos N,
Sagriotis A, Synodinou M (2003b) Effect of amifostine on
toxicities associated with radiochemotherapy in patients
with locally advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 57:402–408
Astrahan M (2008) BED calculations for fractions of very high
dose: in regard to Park et al. (Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
2007;69:S623–S624) Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 71:963;
author reply 963–964
Begg AC, Sheldon PW, Foster JL (1974) Demonstration of
radiosensitization of hypoxic cells in solid tumours by
metronidazole. Br J Radiol 47:399–404
Bristow RG, Hill RP (2008) Hypoxia and metabolism.
Hypoxia, DNA repair and genetic instability. Nat Rev
Cancer 8:180–192
Brizel DM, Scully SP, Harrelson JM, Layfield LJ, Bean JM,
Prosnitz LR, Dewhirst MW (1996) Tumor oxygenation
predicts for the likelihood of distant metastases in human
soft tissue sarcoma. Cancer Res 56:941–943
Brown JM (1984) Clinical trials of radiosensitizers: what
should we expect? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 10:425–429

133

Brown JM (1993) SR 4233 (tirapazamine): a new anticancer
drug exploiting hypoxia in solid tumours. Br J Cancer
67:1163–1170
Bryant HE, Schultz N, Thomas HD, Parker KM, Flower D,
Lopez E, Kyle S, Meuth M, Curtin NJ, Helleday T (2005)
Specific killing of BRCA2-deficient tumours with inhibitors
of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. Nature 434:913–917
Buentzel J, Micke O, Adamietz IA, Monnier A, Glatzel M, de Vries
A (2006) Intravenous amifostine during chemoradiotherapy for
head-and-neck cancer: a randomized placebo-controlled phase
III study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 64:684–691
Burma S, Chen BP, Chen DJ (2006) Role of non-homologous
end joining in the repair of DNA double-strand breaks book:
DNA repair, genetic instability, and cancer. DNA Repair
(Amsterdam) 5:1042–1048
Cardenas-Navia LI, Mace D, Richardson RA, Wilson DF, Shan S,
Dewhirst MW (2008) The pervasive presence of fluctuating
oxygenation in tumors. Cancer Res 68:5812–5819
Carlson DJ, Keall PJ, Loo BW Jr, Chen ZJ, Brown JM (2011)
Hypofractionation results in reduced tumor cell kill compared to conventional fractionation for tumors with regions
of hypoxia. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 79:1188–1195
Chan DA, Giaccia AJ (2007) Hypoxia, gene expression, and
metastasis. Cancer Metastasis Rev 26:333–339
Chan N, Koch CJ, Bristow RG (2009) Tumor hypoxia as a
modifier of DNA strand break and cross-link repair. Curr
Mol Med 9:401–410
De Bock K, Mazzone M, Carmeliet P (2011) Antiangiogenic
therapy, hypoxia, and metastasis: risky liaisons, or not? Nat
Rev Clin Oncol 8:393–404
Delanian S, Baillet F, Huart J, Lefaix JL, Maulard C, Housset
M (1994) Successful treatment of radiation-induced fibrosis
using liposomal Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase: clinical trial.
Radiother Oncol 32:12–20
Dorr W, Spekl K, Farrell CL (2002a) Amelioration of acute
oral mucositis by keratinocyte growth factor: fractionated
irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 54:245–251
Dorr W, Spekl K, Farrell CL (2002b) The effect of keratinocyte
growth factor on healing of manifest radiation ulcers in
mouse tongue epithelium. Cell Prolif 35(Suppl 1):86–92
Edwards RA, Witherspoon M, Wang K, Afrasiabi K, Pham T,
Birnbaumer L, Lipkin SM (2009) Epigenetic repression of
DNA mismatch repair by inflammation and hypoxia in
inflammatory bowel disease-associated colorectal cancer.
Cancer Res 69:6423–6429
Elkind MM, Sutton H (1959) X-ray damage and recovery in
mammalian cells in culture. Nature 184:1293–1295
Ellis F (1971) Nominal standard dose and the ret. Br J Radiol
44:101–108
Epperly M, Bray J, Kraeger S, Zwacka R, Engelhardt J,
Travis E, Greenberger J (1998) Prevention of late effects of
irradiation lung damage by manganese superoxide dismutase gene therapy. Gene Ther 5:196–208
Farmer H, McCabe N, Lord CJ, Tutt AN, Johnson DA,
Richardson TB, Santarosa M, Dillon KJ, Hickson I,
Knights C, Martin NM, Jackson SP, Smith GC, Ashworth A
(2005) Targeting the DNA repair defect in BRCA mutant
cells as a therapeutic strategy. Nature 434:917–921
Fowler JF (2008) Linear quadratics is alive and well: in regard to
Park et al. (Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2008;70:847–852) Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 72:957; author reply 958

134
Fu XL, Huang H, Bentel G, Clough R, Jirtle RL, Kong FM,
Marks LB, Anscher MS (2001) Predicting the risk of
symptomatic radiation-induced lung injury using both the
physical and biologic parameters V(30) and transforming
growth factor beta. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 50:899–908
Fujino M, Shirato H, Onishi H, Kawamura H, Takayama K,
Koto M, Onimaru R, Nagata Y, Hiraoka M (2006)
Characteristics of patients who developed radiation pneumonitis requiring steroid therapy after stereotactic irradiation for lung tumors. Cancer J 12:41–46
Garcia-Barros M, Paris F, Cordon-Cardo C, Lyden D, Rafii S,
Haimovitz-Friedman A, Fuks Z, Kolesnick R (2003) Tumor
response to radiotherapy regulated by endothelial cell
apoptosis. Science 300:1155–1159
Garcia-Barros M, Thin TH, Maj J, Cordon-Cardo C, HaimovitzFriedman A, Fuks Z, Kolesnick R (2010) Impact of stromal
sensitivity on radiation response of tumors implanted in SCID
hosts revisited. Cancer Res 70:8179–8186
Gray LH, Conger AD, Ebert M, Hornsey S, Scott OC (1953) The
concentration of oxygen dissolved in tissues at the time of
irradiation as a factor in radiotherapy. Br J Radiol 26:638–648
Grdina DJ, Murley JS, Kataoka Y, Epperly W (2002)
Relationships between cytoprotection and mutation prevention by WR-1065. Mil Med 167:51–53
Grdina DJ, Murley JS, Kataoka Y, Baker KL, Kunnavakkam R,
Coleman MC, Spitz DR (2009) Amifostine induces antioxidant enzymatic activities in normal tissues and a transplantable tumor that can affect radiation response. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 73:886–896
Greijer AE, van der Wall E (2004) The role of hypoxia
inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) in hypoxia induced apoptosis.
J Clin Pathol 57:1009–1014
Guerrero M, Li XA (2004) Extending the linear-quadratic
model for large fraction doses pertinent to stereotactic
radiotherapy. Phys Med Biol 49:4825–4835
Hackenbeck T, Knaup KX, Schietke R, Schodel J, Willam C,
Wu X, Warnecke C, Eckardt KU, Wiesener MS (2009) HIF1 or HIF-2 induction is sufficient to achieve cell cycle arrest
in NIH3T3 mouse fibroblasts independent from hypoxia.
Cell Cycle 8:1386–1395
Hammond EM, Giaccia AJ (2005) The role of p53 in hypoxiainduced apoptosis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 331:
718–725
Hammond EM, Denko NC, Dorie MJ, Abraham RT,
Giaccia AJ (2002) Hypoxia links ATR and p53 through
replication arrest. Mol Cell Biol 22:1834–1843
Hammond EM, Green SL, Giaccia AJ (2003) Comparison of
hypoxia-induced replication arrest with hydroxyurea and
aphidicolin-induced arrest. Mutat Res 532:205–213
He J, Luster TA, Thorpe PE (2007) Radiation-enhanced
vascular targeting of human lung cancers in mice with a
monoclonal antibody that binds anionic phospholipids. Clin
Cancer Res 13:5211–5218
He J, Yin Y, Luster TA, Watkins L, Thorpe PE (2009)
Antiphosphatidylserine antibody combined with irradiation
damages tumor blood vessels and induces tumor immunity in
a rat model of glioblastoma. Clin Cancer Res 15:6871–6880
Henk JM, Bishop K, Shepherd SF (2003) Treatment of head
and neck cancer with CHART and nimorazole: phase II
study. Radiother Oncol 66:65–70

M. D. Story et al.
Hewitt HB, Wilson CW (1959) A survival curve for mammalian leukaemia cells irradiated in vivo (implications for the
treatment of mouse leukaemia by whole-body irradiation).
Br J Cancer 13:69–75
Hill RP, Marie-Egyptienne DT, Hedley DW (2009) Cancer
stem cells, hypoxia and metastasis. Semin Radiat Oncol 19:
106–111
Hornsey S (1977) Protection by hypoxia and the effect of low oxygen
tensions on radiosensitivity. Experientia Suppl 27:31–43
Johnson N, Li YC, Walton ZE, Cheng KA, Li D, Rodig SJ,
Moreau LA, Unitt C, Bronson RT, Thomas HD, Newell DR,
D’Andrea AD, Curtin NJ, Wong KK, Shapiro GI (2011)
Compromised CDK1 activity sensitizes BRCA-proficient
cancers to PARP inhibition. Nat Med 17:875–882
Kang S (2003) Overexpression of extracellular superoxide
dismutase protects mice against radiation-induced lung
injury. Int J Radiat Biol Oncol Phys 57:1056–1066
Kataoka Y, Basic I, Perrin J, Grdina DJ (1992) Antimutagenic
effects of radioprotector WR-2721 against fission-spectrum
neurons and 60Co gamma-rays in mice. Int J Radiat Biol
61:387–392
Kataoka Y, Perrin J, Hunter N, Milas L, Grdina DJ (1996)
Antimutagenic effects of amifostine: clinical implications.
Semin Oncol 23:53–57
Kavanagh BD, Newman F (2008) Toward a unified survival
curve: in regard to Park et al. (IntJ Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
2008;70:847–852) and Krueger et al. (Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 2007;69:1262–1271) Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
71:958–959
Kawase T, Kunieda E, Deloar HM, Seki S, Sugawara A, Tsunoo T,
Ogawa EN, Ishizaka A, Kameyama K, Takeda A, Kubo A
(2007) Experimental stereotactic irradiation of normal rabbit
lung: computed tomographic analysis of radiation injury and
the histopathological features. Radiat Med 25:453–461
Komaki R, Lee JS, Milas L, Lee HK, Fossella FV, Herbst RS,
Allen PK, Liao Z, Stevens CW, Lu C, Zinner RG,
Papadimitrakopoulou VA, Kies MS, Blumenschein GR Jr,
Pisters KM, Glisson BS, Kurie J, Kaplan B, Garza VP,
Mooring D, Tucker SL, Cox JD (2004) Effects of amifostine
on acute toxicity from concurrent chemotherapy and
radiotherapy for inoperable non-small-cell lung cancer:
report of a randomized comparative trial. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 58:1369–1377
Koukourakis MI (2002) Hypofractionated and accelerated
radiotherapy with amifostine cytoprotection (HypoARC):
a new concept in radiotherapy and encouraging results in
breast cancer. Semin Oncol 29:42–46
Koukourakis MI, Patlakas G, Froudarakis ME, Kyrgias G,
Skarlatos J, Abatzoglou I, Bougioukas G, Bouros D (2007)
Hypofractionated accelerated radiochemotherapy with cytoprotection (Chemo-HypoARC) for inoperable non-small
cell lung carcinoma. Anticancer Res 27:3625–3631
Li C, Jackson RM (2002) Reactive species mechanisms of
cellular hypoxia-reoxygenation injury. Am J Physiol Cell
Physiol 282:C227–C241
Lin A, Lawrence TS (2006) An anaphylactoid reaction from
amifostine. Radiother Oncol 79:352
Maj JG, Paris F, Haimovitz-Friedman A, Venkatraman E,
Kolesnick R, Fuks Z (2003) Microvascular function regulates
intestinal crypt response to radiation. Cancer Res 63:4338–4341

Radiolobiology of Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy/Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy
Marks LB (1995) Extrapolating hypofractionated radiation
schemes from radiosurgery data: regarding Hall et al.,
IJROBP 21:819–824; 1991 and Hall and Brenner, IJROBP
25:381–385; 1993. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 32:274–276
McGarry RC, Papiez L, Williams M, Whitford T,
Timmerman RD (2005) Stereotactic body radiation therapy
of early-stage non-small-cell lung carcinoma: phase I study.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 63:1010–1015
McKenna F, Ahmad S (2009) Toward a unified survival curve: in
regard to Kavanagh and Newman (Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
2008;71:958–959) and Park et al. (Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
2008;70:847–852) Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 73:640
Mell LK, Malik R, Komaki R, Movsas B, Swann RS, Langer C,
Antonadou D, Koukourakis M, Mundt AJ (2007) Effect of
amifostine on response rates in locally advanced non-small-cell
lung cancer patients treated on randomized controlled trials: a
meta-analysis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 68:111–118
Moulder JE, Cohen EP (2007) Future strategies for mitigation
and treatment of chronic radiation-induced normal tissue
injury. Semin Radiat Oncol 17:141–148
Mueller-Klieser W, Schlenger KH, Walenta S, Gross M,
Karbach U, Hoeckel M, Vaupel P (1991) Pathophysiological approaches to identifying tumor hypoxia in patients.
Radiother Oncol 20(Suppl 1):21–28
Muniyappa H, Song S, Mathews CK, Das KC (2009) Reactive
oxygen species-independent oxidation of thioredoxin in
hypoxia: inactivation of ribonucleotide reductase and redoxmediated checkpoint control. J Biol Chem 284:17069–17081
Overgaard J (1994) Clinical evaluation of nitroimidazoles as
modifiers of hypoxia in solid tumors. Oncol Res 6:509–518
Overgaard J, Overgaard M, Nielsen OS, Pedersen AK,
Timothy AR (1982) A comparative investigation of nimorazole and misonidazole as hypoxic radiosensitizers in a
C3H mammary carcinoma in vivo. Br J Cancer 46:904–911
Overgaard J, Sand Hansen H, Lindelov B, Overgaard M,
Jorgensen K, Rasmusson B, Berthelsen A (1991) Nimorazole
as a hypoxic radiosensitizer in the treatment of supraglottic
larynx and pharynx carcinoma. First report from the Danish
Head and Neck Cancer Study (DAHANCA) protocol 5-85.
Radiother Oncol 20(Suppl 1):143–149
Overgaard J, Hansen HS, Overgaard M, Bastholt L,
Berthelsen A, Specht L, Lindelov B, Jorgensen K (1998)
A randomized double-blind phase III study of nimorazole as
a hypoxic radiosensitizer of primary radiotherapy in supraglottic larynx and pharynx carcinoma. Results of the danish
head and neck cancer study (DAHANCA) Protocol 5-85.
Radiother Oncol 46:135–146
Papadopoulos KP, Goel S, Beeram M, Wong A, Desai K,
Haigentz M, Milian ML, Mani S, Tolcher A, Lalani AS,
Sarantopoulos J (2008) A phase 1 open-label, accelerated
dose-escalation study of the hypoxia-activated prodrug
AQ4N in patients with advanced malignancies. Clin Cancer
Res 14:7110–7115
Papadopoulou MV, Bloomer WD (2003) NLCQ-1 (NSC
709257): exploiting hypoxia with a weak DNA-intercalating
bioreductive drug. Clin Cancer Res 9:5714–5720
Papadopoulou MV, Ji M, Rao MK, Bloomer WD (2001)
4-[3-(2-Nitro-1-imidazolyl)propylamino]-7-chloroquinoline
hydrochloride (NLCQ-1), a novel bioreductive agent as
radiosensitizer in vitro and in vivo: comparison with
tirapazamine. Oncol Res 12:325–333

135

Papadopoulou MV, Bloomer WD, Taylor AP, Hernandez M,
Blumenthal RD, Hollingshead MG (2007) Advantage of
combining NLCQ-1 (NSC 709257) with radiation in
treatment of human head and neck xenografts. Radiat Res
168:65–71
Park C, Papiez L, Zhang S, Story M, Timmerman RD (2008)
Universal survival curve and single fraction equivalent
dose: useful tools in understanding potency of ablative
radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 70:847–852
Patel AG, Sarkaria JN, Kaufmann SH (2011) Nonhomologous
end joining drives poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)
inhibitor lethality in homologous recombination-deficient
cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108:3406–3411
Potten CS, O’Shea JA, Farrell CL, Rex K, Booth C (2001) The
effects of repeated doses of keratinocyte growth factor on
cell proliferation in the cellular hierarchy of the crypts of
the murine small intestine. Cell Growth Differ 12:265–275
Puck TT, Marcus PI (1956) Action of X-rays on mammalian
cells. J Exp Med 103:653–666
Rades D, Fehlauer F, Bajrovic A, Mahlmann B, Richter E,
Alberti W (2004) Serious adverse effects of amifostine
during radiotherapy in head and neck cancer patients.
Radiother Oncol 70:261–264
Rischin D, Peters L, Fisher R, Macann A, Denham J,
Poulsen M, Jackson M, Kenny L, Penniment M, Corry J,
Lamb D, McClure B (2005) Tirapazamine, cisplatin, and
radiation versus fluorouracil, cisplatin, and radiation in
patients with locally advanced head and neck cancer: a
randomized phase II trial of the trans-tasman radiation
oncology group (TROG 98.02). J Clin Oncol 23:79–87
Rischin D, Peters LJ, O’Sullivan B, Giralt J, Fisher R, Yuen K,
Trotti A, Bernier J, Bourhis J, Ringash J, Henke M,
Kenny L (2010) Tirapazamine, cisplatin, and radiation
versus cisplatin and radiation for advanced squamous cell
carcinoma of the head and neck (TROG 02.02, HeadSTART): a phase III trial of the trans-tasman radiation
oncology group. J Clin Oncol 28:2989–2995
Robbins ME, Diz DI (2006) Pathogenic role of the reninangiotensin system in modulating radiation-induced late
effects. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 64:6–12
Rubin P, Johnston CJ, Williams JP, McDonald S,
Finkelstein JN (1995) A perpetual cascade of cytokines
postirradiation leads to pulmonary fibrosis. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 33:99–109
Saha D, Watkins L, Yin Y, Thorpe P, Story MD, Song K,
Raghavan P, Timmerman R, Chen B, Minna JD, Solberg TD
(2010) An orthotopic lung tumor model for image-guided
microirradiation in rats. Radiat Res 174:62–71
Sasse AD, Clark LG, Sasse EC, Clark OA (2006) Amifostine
reduces side effects and improves complete response rate
during radiotherapy: results of a meta-analysis. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 64:784–791
Semenza GL (2007) Evaluation of HIF-1 inhibitors as anticancer agents. Drug Discov Today 12:853–859
Semenza GL, Shimoda LA, Prabhakar NR (2006) Regulation of
gene expression by HIF-1. Novartis Found Symp 272:2–8
(discussion 8–14, 33–16)
Sheldon PW, Hill SA, Foster JL, Fowler JF (1976) Radiosensitization of C3H mouse mammary tumours using
fractionated doses of X rays with the drug Ro-07-0582. Br
J Radiol 49:76–80

136
Skov KA, MacPhail S (1994) Low concentrations of nitroimidazoles: effective radiosensitizers at low doses. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 29:87–93
Song SY, Choi W, Shin SS, Lee SW, Ahn SD, Kim JH, Je HU, Park
CI, Lee JS, Choi EK (2009) Fractionated stereotactic body
radiation therapy for medically inoperable stage I lung cancer
adjacent to central large bronchus. Lung Cancer 66:89–93
Sprong D, Janssen HL, Vens C, Begg AC (2006) Resistance of
hypoxic cells to ionizing radiation is influenced by homologous
recombination status. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 64:562–572
Stone HB (1976) Metronidazole and fractionated radiotherapy of
a murine tumor. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1:1133–1137
Strandquist M (1944) Studien die kumulative wirking der
roentgenstrahlen bei fraktionierung. Acta Radiol Suppl 55:1–44
Sugie C, Shibamoto Y, Ito M, Ogino H, Suzuki H, Uto Y,
Nagasawa H, Hori H (2005) Reevaluation of the radiosensitizing effects of sanazole and nimorazole in vitro and in
vivo. J Radiat Res (Tokyo) 46:453–459
Sung P, Klein H (2006) Mechanism of homologous recombination: mediators and helicases take on regulatory functions.
Natl Rev Mol Cell Biol 7:739–750
Thomlinson RH, Gray LH (1955) The histological structure of
some human lung cancers and the possible implications for
radiotherapy. Br J Cancer 9:539–549
Thompson LH, Schild D (2002) Recombinational DNA repair
and human disease. Mutat Res 509:49–78
Till JE, Mc CEA (1961) A direct measurement of the radiation
sensitivity of normal mouse bone marrow cells. Radiat Res
14:213–222
Timmerman RD, Story M (2006) Stereotactic body radiation
therapy: a treatment in need of basic biological research.
Cancer J 12:19–20
Timmerman R, McGarry R, Yiannoutsos C, Papiez L, Tudor K,
DeLuca J, Ewing M, Abdulrahman R, DesRosiers C,

M. D. Story et al.
Williams M, Fletcher J (2006) Excessive toxicity when
treating central tumors in a phase II study of stereotactic
body radiation therapy for medically inoperable early-stage
lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 24:4833–4839
Timmerman R, Bastasch M, Saha D, Abdulrahman R,
Hittson W, Story M (2007a) Optimizing dose and fractionation for stereotactic body radiation therapy. Normal tissue
and tumor control effects with large dose per fraction. Front
Radiat Ther Oncol 40:352–365
Timmerman RD, Kavanagh BD, Cho LC, Papiez L, Xing L
(2007b) Stereotactic body radiation therapy in multiple
organ sites. J Clin Oncol 25:947–952
Timmerman RD, Park C, Kavanagh BD (2007c) The North
American experience with stereotactic body radiation therapy
in non-small cell lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol 2:S101–S112
Timothy AR, Overgaard J, Overgaard M (1984) A phase I
clinical study of Nimorazole as a hypoxic radiosensitizer.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 10:1765–1768
Vujaskovic Z, Anscher MS, Feng QF, Rabbani ZN, Amin K,
Samulski TS, Dewhirst MW, Haroon ZA (2001) Radiationinduced hypoxia may perpetuate late normal tissue injury.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 50:851–855
Vujaskovic Z, Batinic-Haberle I, Rabbani ZN, Feng QF, Kang
SK, Spasojevic I, Samulski TV, Fridovich I, Dewhirst MW,
Anscher MS (2002) A small molecular weight catalytic
metalloporphyrin antioxidant with superoxide dismutase
(SOD) mimetic properties protects lungs from radiationinduced injury. Free Radic Biol Med 33:857–863
Wang JZ, Huang Z, Lo SS, Yuh WT, Mayr NA (2010) A
generalized linear-quadratic model for radiosurgery,
stereotactic body radiation therapy, and high-dose rate
brachytherapy. Sci Transl Med 2:39ra48
Weterings E, Chen DJ (2008) The endless tale of nonhomologous end-joining. Cell Res 18:114–124

Primary Lung Cancer
Joe Y. Chang, Shervin M. Shirvani, Billy W. Loo Jr.,
John P. Lamond, Ben J. Slotman, and Yasushi Nagata

Contents
1

Introduction.............................................................. 138

2

Competing Treatment Options
for Early Stage NSCLC ..........................................
2.1 Surgical Therapy .......................................................
2.2 Conventional Radiation Therapy ..............................
2.3 Radiofrequency Ablation...........................................
Technological Aspects .............................................
Positioning and Immobilizing the Patient ................
Compensating for Tumor Motion .............................
Contouring the Target and Sparing
Normal Tissues ..........................................................
3.4 Issues for Dosimetry and Treatment Planning .........
3.5 Confirming the Accuracy of Dose Delivery
with On-Board Imaging ............................................

3
3.1
3.2
3.3

4

138
139
140
140
141
141
141
141
142
145

Volumetric Image-Guided and/or Real-Time
Tracking SABR Systems......................................... 145

J. Y. Chang (&)  S. M. Shirvani
Department of Radiation Oncology,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA
e-mail: jychang@mdanderson.org
B. W. Loo Jr.
Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305-5847, USA
J. P. Lamond
Department of Radiation Oncology,
Drexel University College of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19102, USA
B. J. Slotman
Department of Radiation Oncology,
VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands
Y. Nagata
Department of Radiation Oncology,
Hiroshima University Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan

5
5.1
5.2
5.3

The CyberKnife Image-Guided SABR System....
Fiducial Marker Placement .......................................
Treatment Planning ...................................................
Treatment Delivery and Image Guidance ................

146
146
146
147

6
6.1
6.2
6.3

Stereotactic Proton Therapy ..................................
Technical Considerations for Proton Therapy..........
Clinical Outcomes with Proton Beam Therapy .......
Patient Selection ........................................................

148
148
149
150

7

Japanese SABR Strategy ........................................ 150

8

Dutch SABR Strategy ............................................. 150

9
Outcomes and Patterns of Failure ........................
9.1 Medically Inoperable Stage I NSCLC......................
9.2 Recurrent NSCLC and Metastatic
Lesions in Lung.........................................................
9.3 Operable or Borderline Operable Stage I NSCLC...

151
151
151
152

10

Toxicities and Challenges ....................................... 153

11

Post-SABR Imaging Changes................................. 156

12

Case Examples ......................................................... 156

13

Conclusions and Future Directions ....................... 157

References.......................................................................... 157

Abstract

Stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR), also
called stereotactic body radiation therapy
(SBRT), has emerged as a promising treatment
for early stage non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), particularly for patients who are
unable to tolerate surgical resection, and possibly
as an alternative to surgery for some appropriately selected patients. Data from numerous
retrospective studies and clinical trials have
demonstrated that SABR/SBRT is a safe and
effective treatment, with results rivaling those
of surgical resection, for early stage NSCLC.

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2012_550, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

137

138

J. Y. Chang et al.

This chapter will discuss technical aspects,
clinical applications and outcomes, and toxicities
of SABR/SBRT for NSCLC.

1

Introduction

Stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR), also called
stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT), has
emerged as a promising treatment for early stage nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC), particularly for
patients unable to tolerate surgical resection, and
possibly as an alternative to surgery for some appropriately selected patients. The use of SABR to treat
intrathoracic tumors marks one of the most successful
and gratifying uses of this technology. SABR delivers
very high doses of radiation to the tumor target in a
small number of fractions (usually five or fewer) by
using multiple radiation fields that converge on the
region that harbors neoplastic cells. Since its introduction, the treatment has grown in popularity among
radiation oncologists and patients because it is fast,
convenient, and it avoids the need for general anesthesia or an invasive procedure. An important feature
of modern stereotactic radiotherapy is that supplementary techniques, such as intensity modulation or
volumetric arcs, have evolved to fine tune the dose
distribution to millimeter accuracy. With these techniques, the ablative doses of radiation steeply fall off
beyond the intended treatment volume, thereby sparing normal structures from toxic adverse effects.
SABR has become a particularly useful tool in
the treatment of early stage (T1-2 N0) NSCLC.
The reason for this is that NSCLC is predominantly a
disease in elderly individuals with a long history of
smoking. This means that patients, on average, are
characterized by less than average performance status
and higher than average burden of comorbidities.
Historically, those deemed to be medically inoperable
have had few effective treatment options for lung
cancer, even when the disease was diagnosed early.
One option was to use conventionally fractionated
radiation, but outcomes were generally grim with
disappointing local control rates of 30–50% and longterm survival rates of only 10–30% (Dosoretz et al.
1993; Kaskowitz et al. 1993). These results were
likely to have been impacted by the fact that toxicities
limited dose escalation and thereby prevented delivery of a truly tumoricidal dose. The highest attainable

biologically equivalent dose (BED) that can be given
with conventionally fractionated regimens before
toxicities become unacceptable is typically around
80 Gy, and this level is insufficient to consistently
eradicate gross disease in NSCLC. With the innovations of stereotactic therapy and hypofractionation, a
BED of 100 Gy or higher is safely achievable without
excessive toxicity. In contrast to the poor results of
conventional fractionation, various studies have
demonstrated that SABR can yield local control rates
of 70–98% in early stage NSCLC. For SABR with
BED [100 Gy to target volume, local control rates
have been [90% (Timmerman et al. 2010; Onishi
et al. 2007; Fakiris et al. 2009; Baumann et al. 2006;
Nagata et al. 2002, 2005, 2010; Hara et al. 2006;
Grills et al. 2011; Ricardi et al. 2009; Lagerwaard
et al. 2008; Uematsu et al. 2001; Xia et al. 2006;
Chang et al. 2011b; Senan et al. 2011b).
The stark contrast in outcomes between SABR and
conventionally fractionated radiation has caused a
substantial shift in thinking toward the approach to
medically inoperable patients with early stage
NSCLC. However, SABR represents one of the most
demanding areas in the field of radiation oncology
when it comes to technical expertise and quality
assurance. The stakes are high in two vital ways.
Firstly, early stage NSCLC is deadly, but in most
cases still represents an opportunity for cure; therefore, the quality of the treatment can directly determine whether a mortal outcome occurs. Secondly, the
toxicities from ablative doses of radiation are severe
and less forgiving than those of gentler fractionation
schemes. In light of these realities, high quality
treatment must be achieved through careful consideration of multiple issues. These include proper
patient selection based on strong published evidence,
meticulous planning of the treatment to both attain
adequate coverage of tumor and avoid organs-at-risk,
and careful delivery of the ablative radiation with
reliable immobilization, accurate tumor targeting, and
precise verification of dose delivery.

2

Competing Treatment Options
for Early Stage NSCLC

If delivered properly, SABR offers definitive treatment for patients with poor performance status
who are newly diagnosed with early stage NSCLC.

Primary Lung Cancer

The enthusiastic and broad adoption of SABR for
NSCLC has been driven by two characteristics of
lung cancer patients. Firstly, the median age of
patients with NSCLC is 71 years, making this a disease that predominantly affects elderly patients, who
are likely to have coincident chronic illnesses (NCI
2011). Secondly, smoking, the most prevalent risk
factor for lung cancer, carries the parallel risks of
multiple systemic medical conditions, including
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (Devereux
2006; Young et al. 2009) and coronary artery disease
(Taylor et al. 1992; Ambrose and Barua 2004; Pell
et al. 2008). This combination of advanced age and
medical comorbidities makes surgical intervention for
lung cancer patients risky. In numerical terms, prospective trials and statistical models have shown that
the perioperative mortality for the standard of care
surgery, lobectomy, rises from 2–3% for a typical
male patient older than 65 years with mild to moderate comorbidities to approximately 20% for the
worst surgical candidates (Falcoz et al. 2007; Chamogeorgakis et al. 2007, 2009; Swanson et al. 2007).
It is in these latter high-risk patients that SABR holds
the most promise. Even among these poor surgical
candidates, peripheral lung tumors can be safely
ablated with SABR with acceptable toxicity provided
that the lesion is located away from critical structures.

2.1

Surgical Therapy

Because there are no randomized trials comparing
SABR with surgery, the standard of care for early
stage NSCLC continues to be lobectomy until phase
III data challenges this assertion. The first question,
then, ought to be whether a patient is a candidate to
undergo this operation. To approximate the global
operative risk of a patient prior to surgery, several
calculators are available including the Goldman
Index, Lee’s Revised Cardiac Risk Index, Detsky’s
Modified Cardiac Risk Index, Eagle’s Cardiac Risk
Assessment, and the Thoracoscore Model. The last
model is especially useful for assessing lobectomy
risk as it was developed and trained with a thoracic
surgery dataset, whereas the others were meant to
apply to any surgery. The Thoracoscore Model uses
multiple factors including age, sex, comorbidities,
performance status, degree of dyspnea, and American
Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) score to generate

139

a risk of in-hospital mortality (Falcoz et al. 2007).
While there is no universal risk threshold to eliminate
surgery as an option, surgeons and patients can
independently use these calculators in combination
with clinical gestalt to determine whether the benefits
of an operation outweigh the potential risk of death.
A simpler and more common approach when
weighing whether to perform lobectomy is to focus on
pulmonary function, the physiologic parameter most
affected by the operation. Again, the threshold for risk
varies from patient to patient and among physicians,
but at our institution, we consider patients candidates
for lobectomy if (a) their forced expiratory volume in
1 s (FEV1) is [75% of predicted volume or [1 liter
(l); and (b) if the diffusion capacity of the lung for
carbon monoxide (DLCO) is [60% of predicted
capacity. For ambiguous cases that are near these
thresholds, a Xenon study is obtained to predict postoperative pulmonary function. If the predicted postoperative FEV1 is \35% (or \0.8 l), there is an
increased risk of death. Likewise a predicted postoperative DLCO \40% is associated with an
increased surgical complication rate.
Given the high correlation of lung cancer and
cardiovascular disease, a growing number of patients
with lung cancer at presentation will be on chronic
aspirin or thienopyridine therapy (e.g., clopidogrel)
either to reduce risk of coronary events or to prevent
thrombosis after placement of a coronary stent
(Ambrose and Barua 2004; Jemal et al. 2008). Discontinuation of aspirin or thienopyridine therapy
before surgery can result in myocardial infarction or
even death, and in instances where a drug-eluting
stent has been placed, elective surgeries may require
deferral for up to a year (Iakovou et al. 2005; Grines
et al. 2007; Kaluza et al. 2000; Sharma et al. 2004).
For individual patients, the decision to discontinue
antiplatelet therapy to undergo lobectomy should be
made with the assistance of a cardiologist.
If a patient is not a candidate for lobectomy, then
the current alternatives to supportive care include
sublobar (wedge) resection and SABR. As discussed
in the section below on clinical outcomes, there is no
consensus on the comparative effectiveness of these
approaches, but retrospective data suggests that while
they are comparable in survival, local control appears
better with SABR (Grills et al. 2011). Candidacy for
SABR includes physiologic, anatomic, and technical
considerations. Physiologic candidacy is not as

140

J. Y. Chang et al.

stringent as it is for surgery, and the use of specific
thresholds for FEV1 and DLCO is controversial.
Some centers use an FEV1 of less than 0.2 liters to
predict for increased toxicity following SABR, and
triage these patients to best supportive care or systemic therapy. Far more important for SABR patient
selection are anatomic considerations which are discussed in a later section of this chapter. In general,
patients who have peripherally located tumors that do
not appose the chest wall can expect less adverse
effects, while more challenging cases involve tumors
that are closer to central mediastinal structures, the
superior sulcus, and the rib cage.

2.2

Conventional Radiation Therapy

As stated in the chapter introduction, conventionally
fractionated radiotherapy was a historic alternative for
NSCLC patients with early stage NSCLC who were
not candidates for (or who refused) surgery. However
in order to respect the dose constraints of normal
tissues, treatment was limited to 60–66 Gy in 1.8 or
2.0 Gy fractions. Some patients achieved a cure but in
general, the outcomes were grim, with 5 year local
control rates of 30–50% and overall survival rates of
10–30% (Dosoretz et al. 1993; Kaskowitz et al. 1993).
In fact, a SEER analysis of patients treated between
1988 and 2001 reported improved survival when
conventional radiation therapy was compared to
observation, although the treatment was not curative
(Wisnivesky et al. 2005). In light of current evidence
of the efficacy and safety using SABR, conventional
radiation therapy can no longer be recommended as a
first-line treatment for early stage NSCLC.

2.3

Radiofrequency Ablation

Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) involves passing
high-frequency electrical currents through an electrode at the site of a tumor (Das et al. 2010). The heat
that is generated via RFA coagulates surrounding
tissue and thereby ablates the tumor. The major
advantage of RFA is that it can be performed in a
single session without the need for hospitalization.
Accuracy is achieved with CT image guidance as the
electrode is passed percutaneously to the site of the
tumor. Candidates for RFA include patients with

tumors \4 cm in size. Tumors that are located \1 cm
away from major airways or vessels are relatively
contraindicated as this poses a higher risk for catastrophic injury. Another reason to avoid treatment of
central tumors with RFA is that blood flow may act to
conduct heat away from the tumor, thus obviating the
procedure’s effectiveness (Goldberg et al. 1998).
Overall, the procedure is safe and well tolerated in
experienced hands. Major adverse effects associated
with RFA include pneumothorax, bleeding, sepsis,
and infection of the lungs and/or the skin (Das et al.
2010; Gomez et al. 2009; Ambrogi et al. 2006).
Self-limited pneumothorax is the most frequent
complication, but its occurrence varies widely in
the literature from approximately 5 to 60% of RFA
procedures (Zhu et al. 2008).
There is limited data for judging the efficacy of
RFA for early stage NSCLC as most studies have
examined small cohorts of patients, and the initial
experience with RFA has focused on patients who
refuse surgery or who are medically inoperable.
Among the largest experiences, Simon et al. treated
75 stage I NSCLC patients and reported 5 year
progression-free survival (PFS) of 47% for tumors
\3 cm and 25% for larger tumors (Simon et al.
2007). A small cohort of 13 stage I NSCLC in the
RAPTURE RFA trial experienced promising 2 year
overall survival of 75% (Lencioni et al. 2008). Hiraki
et al. reported an overall survival of 74% at 3 years
among 19 stage I NSCLC patients, and Pennathur
et al. reported an overall survival of 68% at 2 years
among 20 patients (Hiraki et al. 2007; Pennathur et al.
2007). Another prospective study in medical inoperable stage I NSCLC (tumor \5 cm) revealed a complete response rate of 59.5%, mean local recurrence
interval of 25.9 months, and median overall survival
of 33.4 months (Ambrogi et al. 2006). An ongoing
trial, The American College of Surgeons Oncology
Group (ACOSOG) Z4033, will provide much needed
clarity regarding the safety and efficacy of RFA in a
larger cohort of early stage NSCLC patients (Radiofrequency ablation in treating patients with stage I
non-small cell lung cancer ACOSOG Z4033, http://
clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/study/NCT00109876).
One intriguing possibility is combining RFA with
external beam radiation. Thermal ablation is most
effective in the center of the tumor (due to heat
dissipation at the periphery) while external beam
radiotherapy or SABR is more effective in the

Primary Lung Cancer

periphery (due to hypoxia and necrosis at the center).
Currently, this approach is experimental.
Although RFA holds promise for selected patient
populations, SABR has resulted in higher rates of
overall survival in larger, prospective studies and is the
favored technology at many institutions. A perceived
advantage of SABR is that radiotherapy can be delivered more reliably and uniformly than heat, resulting in
a lower risk of local failures as a consequence of
insufficient treatment. Although there is no direct
comparison between RFA and SABR, local control rate
appears better with SABR if BED[100 Gy. The role of
RFA for salvage treatment after SABR could be interesting to explore.

3

Technological Aspects

This section will focus on technical considerations.
Prior to proceeding with SABR, the radiation oncologist must address four questions. (1) Can the patient
be positioned and immobilized? (2) Can treatment
planning compensate for tumor motion? (3) Will the
treatment cover the intended target and spare adjacent
critical structures? (4) Can the accuracy of radiation
delivery be verified at the time of treatment?

3.1

Positioning and Immobilizing
the Patient

Positioning and immobilization are critical in the use
of SABR for lung tumors. A geographical miss of the
tumor target is a lost opportunity for cure because the
biological characteristics of radiation preclude a
‘‘second chance’’ in most cases. Therefore, the position of the patient’s body must be highly reproducible
through the use of several reference points (Chang
and Roth 2007). To move the arms away from
potential radiation fields, patient are typically
required to raise their arms and grasp an indexed
T-shaped bar. To minimize interfractional body shifts,
the trunk and abdomen could be placed supine on a
vacuum immobilization bag that extends from the
head to the pelvis. However, different institutions may
use different immobilization devices based on their
experiences. Customized masks are not needed in
most cases but may be fabricated to immobilize the
head and neck for treatment of apical tumors.

141

3.2

Compensating for Tumor Motion

Next, simulation and subsequent treatment planning
must account for tumor motion given that the lungs
are dynamic during respiration. During the respiratory
cycle, lung tumors can move along any directional
axis and can also be stretched and/or deformed (Liu
et al. 2005). Capturing the entire tumor in the radiation field despite these multiple axes of motion is
challenging but surmountable with modern techniques. We recommend that the entire path of a tumor
during a respiratory cycle be delineated with a
contemporary four-dimensional (4D) CT planning
system. These 4D data are typically obtained by
acquiring spatially oversampled CT data while monitoring the patient’s respiration. At each CT couch
position, images are obtained for greater than one
respiratory cycle and divided into approximately 10
phases based on timing in relation to the overall
cycle; the relative position of these phases is typically
expressed as a percentage (0% is full inspiration, 50%
is end-expiration, and 90% is the phase immediately
before returning to full inspiration). A complete
reconstructed three-dimensional (3D) CT dataset for
each phase is then created by collating matched phase
data from each couch position. These 3D phase
reconstructions can then be played in sequence to
generate a 4D map of the tumor’s position in relation
to surrounding structures throughout the entire respiratory cycle. The radiation oncologist is then able to
consider these 4D image characteristics along with
the patient’s capacity to control or hold their breath to
determine whether treatment should be delivered
during free-breathing, respiratory gating, or breathholding (Nehmeh et al. 2004; Ramsey et al. 1999;
Rosenzweig et al. 2000; Chang and Roth 2007).

3.3

Contouring the Target and Sparing
Normal Tissues

Once the images from simulation are transferred to
the treatment planning station, there is some flexibility in defining the tumor volume that is targeted by
treatment. For tumors that exhibit significant movement, the most conservative strategy is to contour the
envelope created by the tumor across the entire
respiratory cycle. This volume is called the internal
gross tumor volume (iGTV) and can be generated

142

from the different CT phases in multiple ways (Chang
et al. 2008b). These include (a) combining the entire
gross tumor volumes (GTV) from all respiratory
phases, (b) combining the GTV contours from two
extreme respiratory phases such as the 0% and 50%
phases in the respiratory cycle, (c) defining the GTV
contour as the maximum intensity projection (MIP) at
each voxel during an entire respiratory cycle, and (d)
using the MIP technique and modifying the contours
as needed with visual verification in each individual
respiratory phase. Published data have found that
methods (b) and (c) tend to underestimate tumor
coverage (Ezhil et al. 2009). To balance efficiency
and accuracy, we prefer using the MIP with visual
modification. GTV should be contoured in lung
window. Intravenous contrast-based simulation could
be considered if the lesion is close bronchial tree and
major vessels. For covering microscopic disease and
adjusting for set-up error, a clinical target volume
(CTV) expansion of 5–8 mm and a planning treatment volume (PTV) expansion of 3–5 mm are added
to the iGTV. However, these expansions should take
into account neighboring organs-at-risk and may need
to be reduced in the dimensions that deliver excess
dose to normal tissues. Radiation Therapy Oncology
Group (RTOG) and some centers omit a CTV
expansion and instead generate a PTV directly from
the iGTV.
Three other scenarios require special consideration. For more apically located tumors with less than
5 mm of motion, it is possible to use a traditional
static planning treatment volume expansion at any
phase in the respiratory cycle provided that the PTV
expansion is larger than the observed range of motion
(i.e. 5–8 mm beyond the CTV expansion). Secondly,
for tumors near central structures, breath-holding
can be used to move the tumor away from the
mediastinum. Specialized goggles are typically used
at simulation to provide visual feedback to the patient
regarding the extent of diaphragmatic excursion at
full inspiration. The patient wears the same goggles
during treatment to reproduce his breath-hold at the
same level as that used during simulation. Finally, for
patients with severe lung disease such as emphysema
or interstitial fibrosis, the use of ITV techniques may
result in unacceptable decline in pulmonary function
while breath-holding may be limited by the patient’s
capacity to attain adequate inspiration secondary to
his underlying illness. In these cases, respiratory

J. Y. Chang et al.

gating may be used. With this technique, the radiation
oncologist contours the tumor at a particular point
during the respiratory cycle (e.g., at end inspiration),
and the radiation is subsequently delivered in pulses
that are synchronized to the patient’s breathing such
that the treatment is given only at the designated
respiratory phase.

3.4

Issues for Dosimetry and Treatment
Planning

Dosimetry of SABR involves choosing between many
dichotomies to customize treatment, so that the final
dose distribution adequately covers tumor, avoids
normal tissues, and is technically feasible. In this
section, several of these dichotomies will be discussed
in the context of SABR. These include the use of
homogeneous versus heterogeneous modeling,
coplanar versus non-coplanar beams, blocking with
and without margin, and lastly forward-planned 3D
conformal versus inverse-planned intensity-modulated radiotherapy.
Typically, SABR combines multiple beam angles
(6–12 beams) to achieve sharp dose gradients, highprecision localization, and a high dose per fraction in
extracranial locations. Accurate dose calculation
algorithms, such as Monte Carlo or analytical anisotropic algorithm (AAA), should be used. The next
consideration is the dose prescription. Retrospective
reviews suggest that variations in the planning
approach to dose prescription likely account for some
of the differences in local control rates observed in
clinical trials. Senan et al. 2011a from the Netherlands
pointed out in a recent review that dose prescribed to
a point within the tumor can result in an inadequate
dose to the lesion’s periphery and worse local control
(Chang et al. 2011a).Therefore, dose should be
prescribed to an isodose line outside the target.
In general the goal should be to deliver a biologically
effective dose (BED) greater than 100 Gy to the
entirety of the tumor. The importance of this dose
level was confirmed in a retrospective review of a
multi-institutional study in Japan which found that
5 year local recurrence rates improved from 8.4 to
26.4% when comparing those treated to \100 Gy
BED to those treated to at least 100 Gy BED (Onishi
et al. 2007). If the lesion is peripherally located and at
least 2 cm from critical normal structures, this BED

Primary Lung Cancer

can generally be achieved with 54–60 Gy delivered in
three fractions or 48–50 Gy in four fractions prescribed to the 60–90% isodose line. If the lesion is
more centrally located, the dose and fractionation
may require modification to prevent major complications. This will be discussed in more detail in a later
section of this chapter.
Conventional methods to calculate dose distributions in tissues make the assumption that the patient’s
body is a homogeneous medium with the density of
water. In the thorax, this is problematic as the density
of the air within the lungs is significantly less than
that of water. This discrepancy can be mathematically
accounted for by introducing tissue heterogeneity
correction algorithms that use CT Hounsfield units as
a surrogate for tissue electron density. However, the
practical necessity of these corrections for conventionally fractionated thoracic radiation plans has been
a point of considerable controversy, as high levels of
correlation have been observed between corrected and
uncorrected plans (Frank et al. 2003; Chang et al.
2006a). Nevertheless, the impact of heterogeneity
correction in SABR is pronounced as a consequence
of using fewer fractions and very high doses. There
are few studies that have compared homogenously
and heterogeneously calculated plans for SABR targets. A retrospective analysis of treatment plans
submitted to the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group
(RTOG) 0236 stereotactic body radiotherapy protocol
showed that when heterogeneity corrections were
applied, the planning target volume receiving
[/=60 Gy decreased, on average, by 10.1%, i.e.
54 Gy was actually delivered instead of 60 Gy in 3
fractions (Xiao et al. 2009). In light of these findings,
we generally recommend that heterogeneity corrections be applied for SABR planning.
Optimal beam arrangement in the design of a
SABR plan should meet the dual requirements of
tumor coverage and normal tissue sparing. There are
currently three major beam arrangements in use:
multiple static coplanar beams, multiple static noncoplanar beams, and arc therapy. Comparing the two
static options, the advantage of non-coplanar beams is
that higher conformality can be achieved around the
PTV, dose gradients are generally sharper, skin dose
is diminished, and, in some cases, effective sparing of
the entire contralateral lung can be achieved (Lim do
et al. 2009). However, a disadvantage is that the
volume of lung receiving low doses is higher in non-

143

coplanar plans, which may be unacceptable in
patients with a high burden of concurrent lung disease. Non-coplanar beam arrangements also tend to
require a longer treatment time to accommodate
couch and gantry shifts. Figure 1 illustrates an
example of coplanar and non-coplanar plans for the
same patient and highlights the difference in lung
exposure at the low dose level.
The method of blocking can also have an impact
on the dosimetric profile of the SABR plan. Conventionally forward-planned 3D conformal plans
require blocks to be placed at a margin beyond the
PTV, which generally results in greater homogeneity
in the treatment volumes. In SABR, dose homogeneity also has the potential to be improved in this
way, but the cost of increased normal tissue exposure
using traditional block margins often violates organ
dose constraints. Therefore, forward-planned SBRT
blocks are typically placed at the edge of the PTV in
the penumbra region. Increased monitor units are
needed to ensure tumor coverage at the periphery
when this form of blocking is used, and in turn, there
is greater heterogeneity within the tumor mass. This is
not necessarily harmful, as the higher doses within the
tumor may result in better therapeutic effect. Figure 2
demonstrates this principle.
Volumetric-modulated arc therapy (VMAT), where
the gantry speed, MLC leaf position, and dose rate vary
continuously during delivery, is a newer option and
holds promise as a method to maximize conformality
and tissue sparing without requiring non-coplanar
treatment delivery. It can deliver radiation dose accurately with better conformality and more efficiently by
reducing treatment delivery time by 50%. Early single
institution studies suggest that VMAT reduces lung
and skin dose when compared to static coplanar beam
arrangements (Holt et al. 2011; Brock et al. 2011; Li
et al. 2011). VMAT delivery in flattening-filter-free
mode reduces treatment delivery time from 20 min for
the highest dose when 8–12 non-coplanar beams were
used to \3 min.
Finally, several centers have shifted from forwardplanned 3D conformal radiation therapy to intensitymodulated radiation therapy (IMRT) for the design
and delivery of SABR in lung tumors. The theoretical
benefit of IMRT hinges on improved conformality
through beam weighting in conjunction with the
assignment of avoidance structures. Using IMRT, the
treatment planner can sculpt dose around mediastinal

144

J. Y. Chang et al.

Fig. 1 a An example of non-coplanar beam arrangements for
SABR of an early stage lung tumor. b The non-coplanar plan
(solid line) results in higher lung exposure (blue) at the low
dose levels than an optimized coplanar plan (dashed line). The
total soft tissue exposure (purple) is not significantly different

when these two plans are compared. The axial dose distribution
of the (c) non-coplanar and (d) coplanar beam arrangements are
shown, demonstrating sparing of the contralateral lung in the
non-coplanar plan

and chest wall structures to avoid acute and long-term
complications. A frequently cited use of this technique is to constrain peripheral dose within the chest
wall to reduce the risk of rib fracture and chronic
neuropathy. Despite the advantages of conformality,
a few caveats should be kept in mind if IMRT is used.
Firstly, the treatment times are significantly longer,
which may compromise therapy in patients who
require breath-holding or in those who cannot tolerate
the supine position due to comfort and/or comorbid
conditions. Secondly, with IMRT, there is interplay
between tumor motion and collimator leaf movement
that may cause the delivered radiation to differ from

the calculated dose distribution. In conventionally
fractionated plans, these variances are smoothed out
over 30–40 fractions and become individually less
significant. On the other hand, SABR plans involve
only three to five fractions, so sources of error within
each fraction can have significant clinical consequence. For this reason, adequate motion management and quality assurance at every step of SABR
planning and delivery becomes even more critical if
IMRT is to be used. Finally, the amplified central
tumor dose that results from 3D conformal dose
heterogeneity may not be delivered when plans are
created with IMRT (unless specifically specified).

Primary Lung Cancer

145

Fig. 2 Example of forward-planned 3D conformal SABR plan.
Panels (a) and (b) show block edges at a margin away from the
PTV and adjacent to the PTV, respectively. Corresponding
panels (c) and (d) demonstrate increased dose heterogeneity

and decreased normal tissue exposure when the block is moved
closer to the PTV. e These differences are also apparent when
comparing dose volume histograms of blocks at margin (solid
line) versus blocks adjacent to the PTV (dashed line)

This is not intrinsic to IMRT, but happens because
IMRT optimization algorithms are often tuned to favor
more homogeneous doses. In VMAT (RapidArc)
this can be partially overcome by MU optimization
(decreased modulation). However, whether there is
any clinical significance to this loss of heterogeneity
within the tumor is unknown.

as CT-on-rails and cone-beam computed tomography.
Once treatment has begun, certain linear accelerator
systems are able to utilize orthogonal radiographs
in real-time as an adjunct to confirm continued positional accuracy. With these devices, the position of
the patient and the lesion can be determined prior to
and during SABR treatment. As accuracy and precision improve with these technologies, we may be able
to further diminish the size of the PTV to assist in
sparing of critical normal tissues. Two currently used
on-board imaging systems are described next.

3.5

Confirming the Accuracy of Dose
Delivery with On-Board Imaging

Geometric verification at the time of treatment is
essential and cannot be overemphasized because the
consequences for inaccurate delivery of SABR may
lead to castrotrophic consequences. A geographic
miss may allow for metastatic seeding of a once
curable local disease while an inadvertently treated
organ-at-risk can lead to life-threatening injuries. The
use of portal films before each treatment and comparison to digitally reconstructed radiographs based
on skeletal anatomy as a sole means of geometric
verification cannot be recommended as it lacks
adequate sensitivity to ensure patient safety and
oncologic efficacy. Instead, we strongly advise direct
visualization of the lesion at the time of treatment.
Systems available include real-time 3D imaging such

4

Volumetric Image-Guided and/
or Real-Time Tracking SABR
Systems

As discussed above, it is crucial to have 4D CT
image-guided SABR treatment planning to take
intrafraction tumor motion into consideration (Chang
et al. 2008b). In addition, uncertainty of interfraction tumor motion, anatomy change and set up
also should be addressed. Cone-beam CT or CT
on-rail-based volumetric image-guided delivery
remains the most precise approach to verify daily
tumor location. Megavoltage cone-beam CT
(MVCBCT) uses EPID mounted on a linac gantry

146

and the therapy megavoltage X-ray as a basic configuration for a CT imaging system. A kilovoltage
cone-beam CT (kVCBCT) imaging produces
multiple kV radiographs as the gantry rotates. Due to
the use of low kV X-ray energy, the kVCBCT
images provide better soft tissue contrast compared
with MVCBCT, which can be used for soft tissue
target delineation. Integrated treatment units, such as
Varian Trilogy and Elekta Synergy Unit, provide an
excellent platform for high- precision, image-guided
radiation therapy.
BrainLab AG with Exac Trac (Novalis Body
SystemTM, BrainLAB AG, Heimstetten, Germany) is
an integrated IGRT system for target localization,
setup correction, and the delivery of high-precision
stereotactic radiosurgery and stereotactic radiotherapy. Image guidance utilizes two distinct imaging
subsystems: a real-time infrared (IR) tracking subsystem and a kV stereoscopic X-ray imaging subsystem. Two ceiling-mounted infrared cameras are
used to monitor the movement of infrared-reflecting
markers placed on patient’s skin or on the reference
frame mounted on the treatment couch. The marker
images are automatically compared to stored reference information and generate the initial couch shift
instruction to set up the patient. A video camera
system provides additional visual feedback to the
patient’s position. Then, the X-ray imaging guidance
system takes over and performs further internal
target alignment based on either bony landmarks
or implanted fiducial markers. During treatment
delivery, the optical tracking system (IR) and the
fluoroscopic X-ray imaging system can work together
to monitor target position and to perform treatment
interventions. Two types of treatment interventions
can be performed: adaptive gating of the treatment
beam or real-time correction of target offset by using
a 6D robotic couch. True Beam accelerator (Varian
medical systems) integrates imaging, beam delivery,
and motion management into a synchronized system
and provides a cutting-edge technology with precise/
efficient delivery and targeting using VMAT and
volumetric image guidance. Technology is also being
developed to treat the moving tumor by tracking it
with moving leaves of the multi-leaf collimator
(MLC). Preliminary indications are that the response
of such MLC-based systems is rapid enough that the
desired dose can be delivered quite accurately (Ong
et al. 2011).

J. Y. Chang et al.

5

The CyberKnife Image-Guided
SABR System

The CyberKnife stereotactic radiotherapy system uses
a seamless integration of image-guided stereotactic
localization to achieve precise and accurate radiation
delivery with a unique ability to dynamically track
targets that move with breathing. Details of the
CyberKnife system have been discussed in an earlier
chapter of this book on ‘‘CyberKnife System’’.

5.1

Fiducial Marker Placement

Dynamic target tracking is an integral part of treating
tumors that move with breathing using the CyberKnife. This process requires the implantation of
metallic fiducial markers in or around the tumor for
image-guided tracking. Markers may be delivered by a
number of routes, including CT-guided percutaneous
needle placement, a bronchoscopic procedure, or even
endovascular delivery, prior to the initial simulation.
The fiducial markers are ideally placed such that their
projections from the perspective of both of the in-room
X-ray images are distinct, i.e., nonoverlapping and
well separated (by approximately 1 cm) while still
being in close proximity to the lesion to be treated.
Three markers are sufficient for unique spatial localization, but in practice 4–5 are often placed in case of
loss or suboptimal placement of markers. Implantation
and tracking of a single marker in the center of the
tumor has also been described.
The main challenge in the use of fiducial markers
is the invasiveness of the implantation approaches.
In fact, the main acute toxicity encountered in
CyberKnife-based SABR of lung tumors is implantation-related pneumothorax. The CT-guided percutaneous approach, in particular, carries the highest
risk of pneumothorax. The risk of pneumothorax can
be reduced using bronchoscopic approaches.

5.2

Treatment Planning

One distinguishing feature of the CyberKnife treatment planning system is that it uses inverse optimization. This allows simultaneous conformal targeting
and normal tissue avoidance, and permits ‘‘dose

Primary Lung Cancer

painting,’’ or simultaneously prescribing different
doses to high or low risk regions, for example,
corresponding to gross and microscopic tumor extension. User selected parameters include the number
and size of collimators, and exclusion of beams through
specified structures.
The CyberKnife is designed to compensate for
breathing-induced target motion by dynamic tracking.
Of note, a tumor tracking plan can be created from a
static (breath-hold) CT scan. During treatment
delivery, the robotic manipulator follows the trajectory of the implanted fiducial markers, ensuring that
there is no geometric miss of the target. However, the
dose to the surrounding normal structures can in
principle be different from that indicated by the static
plan. If 4D CT simulation is available, the treatment
planning system can calculate the dose on all the
phases of the 4D CT data set based on dynamic
fiducial tracking, and deformably propagate the doses
to the reference phase, providing an estimate of the
dynamic dose distribution.
A shortcoming of conventional dose calculation
algorithms is their poor modeling of dose buildup
and penumbra from lateral electron scatter when
radiation beams traverse interfaces between materials
of substantially different density. The standard dose
calculation algorithm in the CyberKnife treatment
planning system uses a pencil-beam (electronic path
length, EPL) model that produces accurate dose
distributions for targets in regions of homogeneous
density such as the brain. However, it has significant
inaccuracies when used in regions of sharp density
gradients such as in or around the lungs or air
sinuses in the head. Monte Carlo dose calculation,
which models the interactions generated by individual
photons to produce accurate dose distributions when
simulating many events, is available as an optional
addition to the treatment planning system. When
treating tumors in the lung, the discrepancy in calculated dose (covering a specified volume of the target)
between the EPL and Monte Carlo algorithms is typically 10–20%, but can exceed 80% depending on the
size and location of the specific target, with the largest
discrepancies for small tumors surrounded by air-filled
lung parenchyma. The EPL calculation consistently
overestimates the tumor coverage, but the degree of
error is not generalizable or predictable without
doing an actual comparative calculation. Thus, the

147

Monte Carlo module should be considered a requirement for definitive treatment of thoracic tumors.

5.3

Treatment Delivery and Image
Guidance

Breathing-induced target motion is compensated
for by adjustments to the linac position using the
robotic manipulator. The dynamic marker-based
tumor tracking is then initiated using the Synchrony
Respiratory Tracking System. Prior to the initiation
of treatment, a series of 10–15 X-ray images is
acquired, timed such that the internal marker coordinates from the various portions of the breathing
cycle are all sampled as determined by the signal
from the optical camera. A correlation model is then
built, which generates a continuously calculated
position of the center of mass of the internal fiducials from the external marker coordinates. It is this
calculated/predicted position that the beam follows
dynamically.
Intermittent X-ray images continue to be acquired
throughout the delivery, as often as at the beginning
of every beam. Each new measurement of internal
marker position is compared to the corresponding
predicted position, and the correlation error is calculated. Treatment continues as long as the correlation
error is below a user-defined threshold, generally
3 mm. This threshold is thus an approximate upper
bound to the tracking error of the system. If it is found
to be exceeded, treatment stops, additional images are
acquired, and if necessary, the correlation model is
rebuilt from the new images.
An optional marker-less tracking capability is also
available for treatment of selected lung tumors (the
XSight Lung Respiratory Tracking System). Tumor
localization is accomplished using automated realtime image segmentation of the in-room X-ray images
based on the contrast of the tumor itself. Thus the
system is best used for lesions with sufficient contrast
in density from the surrounding anatomy to be clearly
visualized on both of the in-room X-ray images, i.e.,
those located in the lung periphery at least 1.5 cm in
size, and that do not overlap other dense anatomical
structures, such as the spine, diaphragm, and heart in
the projection views. As such, marker-less tracking
may be applicable to a minority of lung tumors

148

J. Y. Chang et al.

currently. Furthermore, its accuracy remains to be
rigorously validated clinically, and presently all of the
publications on this subject pertain to measurement of
its performance in artificial settings, although early
clinical reports of favorable tumor control when using
this method provide indirect evidence of its accuracy
(Brown et al. 2009) and recent updated Xsight version
may allow more patients to be treated with this
option.
A typical lung tumor SABR plan is delivered in
60–90 min owing to the sequential delivery of
approximately 100–200 non-coplanar beams. While
the most unique strength of the CyberKnife system is
its automated image-guided motion compensation,
this in no way diminishes the importance a highly
skilled and attentive treatment team. A potential
pitfall is the temptation to allow the entire treatment
session to proceed automatically with almost no user
interaction. Because errors in automated image analysis such as fiducial marker extraction can and do
occur, manual inspection of the images displayed
during the treatment and interruption for reimaging
when necessary are crucial to ensure that treatment
is delivered appropriately. Ultimately, the treating
physicians and therapy staff, rather than the technology itself, are the most important determinants of
quality treatment and technical accuracy.

6

Stereotactic Proton Therapy

An important challenge in treating NSCLC patients is
the risk of severe toxicities to normal tissues including the lungs, heart, esophagus, and spinal cord.
Proton therapy offers the potential to limit radiationinduced toxic effects: Unlike photons, which cause
ionizing damage throughout the beam path, particularly in the exit dose path, protons penetrate tissue and
deposit the bulk of their energy at a particular depth,
the Bragg peak, which is a function of the protons’
initial energy and density of the tissue in the beam
path. Because this depth-dose distribution is characterized by dose deposition in a specifically delineated
target and minimal exit dose, proton radiation holds
promise for reducing the exposure of at-risk organs.
This feature of proton therapy may be particularly
beneficial in patients who have limited pulmonary
reserve (Chang et al. 2006b).

6.1

Technical Considerations for Proton
Therapy

A single energy proton beam generates a narrow
Bragg peak and is of limited clinical utility. To cover
an entire tumor volume, a spread-out Bragg peak
must be used. In this technique, multiple proton
beams of different energies are delivered to create a
series of Bragg peaks. Summing each of these peaks
creates a uniform dose distribution that covers the
length of the target volume but avoids dose delivery
to distal structures. The dose delivered with proton
beam therapy is expressed as cobalt-Gray equivalents
(CGE) which reflects the fact that a conversion factor
is needed to determine the dose of protons needed to
exert the same effect as dose prescriptions based
on photon radiation. This factor, called the relative
biological effectiveness (RBE), is defined as the ratio
of the photon radiation dose necessary to achieve a
specific biological effect in an experimental system to
the proton radiation dose required to achieve the same
biological effect. For proton therapy, the RBE is
generally accepted to be 1.1 (Paganetti et al. 2002).
Two modes of proton therapy are currently in use.
In passive-scattering proton therapy (PSPT), 3D
treatment planning methods are used to deliver a
conformal dose distribution. During treatment, a
compensator is used to shape the distal edge of the
beam, while an aperture is used to limit the perimeter
of the radiation field (Chang et al. 2006b; Auberger
et al. 2007). Scanning beam proton therapy, on the
other hand, utilizes pencil-beam scanning with different energies to deliver treatment to each of the
individual ‘‘spots’’ (voxels) that constitute the tumor.
Pencil-beam scanning plans are typically designed
using an inverse planning procedure called intensitymodulated proton therapy (IMPT). IMPT uses an
objective function to simultaneously optimize the
intensity and energy of the pencil beam required to
deliver the appropriate radiation dose to each of the
hundreds of voxels in the tumor volume (Zhang et al.
2009). Although both passive-scattering and pencilscanning technologies limit dose to normal structures
via the physical characteristics of the Bragg, the
conformality achieved with pencil-scanning methods
like IMPT is generally better than that achieved with
PSPT. Nonetheless the greater precision achieved
with IMPT equates to less margin for error and this

Primary Lung Cancer

149

Table 1 Selected prospective studies of SABR for early stage non-small cell lung cancer
Trial

Stage

Dose and fractionation

Local control

Overall survival

Timmerman et al. (2010)

T1-T2 N0

60 Gy in 3 fractions

98.0% (3 years)

72.0% (2 years)

Fakiris et al. (2009)

T1-T2 N0

60–66 Gy in 3 fractions

88.1% (3 years)

42.7% (3 years)

Chang et al. (2011b)

T1-2 N0

50 Gy in 4 fractions

98.5% (2 years)

78.2% (2 years)

North America

Europe
Senan et al. (2011b)

T1-T2 N0 (operable)

60 Gy in 3, 5, or 8 fractions

93.0% (3 years)

84.7% (3 years)

Ricardi et al. (2009)

T1-T2 N0

45 Gy in 3 fractions

87.8% (3 years)

57.1% (3 years)

Nagata et al. (2002)

T1-T2 N0

48 Gy in 4 fractions

94.0% (3 years)

T1: 83.0%;
T2: 72.0% (3 years)

Xia et al. (2006)

T1-T2 N0

70 Gy in 10 fractions

95.0% (3 years)

78.0% (3 years)

Nagata et al. (2010)

T1 N0 (operable)

48 Gy in 4 fractions

68.5% (3 years)

76.0% (3 years)

Asia

can be a significant disadvantage for mobile targets
such as early stage NSCLC.

6.2

Clinical Outcomes with Proton Beam
Therapy

For most peripheral tumors, photon-based SBRT is
usually adequate to treat the lesion with high accuracy
and low toxicity. However, hypofractionated proton
therapy may have utility in improving the toxictherapeutic ratio in patients with tumors located near
sensitive central structures or superiorly near the
brachial plexus. In such patients, using photons to
deliver the ablative dose-fractionation schemes
described above can result in significant morbidity
and life-threatening complications such as severe
pneumonitis, tracheal or great vessel rupture, esophageal ulceration, and spinal cord myelopathy (see
section on Toxicity and Challenges).
As of the time of this chapter, relatively few
clinical studies have investigated the use of proton
therapy in patients with early stage NSCLC (Table 1).
Bush et al. (2004), who used real-time fluoroscopy
to verify patient position and no specific action to
correct for respiratory movements, treated 68 patients
with 51–60 CGEs delivered in 10 fractions. Despite
the older technique and a BED of less than 100 CGE,
the 3 year local control and cause-specific survival
rates in this study were 74 and 72%, respectively.
Moreover, no patients experienced acute radiation
pneumonitis or early or late esophageal or cardiac

toxicity. Nihei et al. 2006, using techniques that
included 3DCT simulation, respiratory gating, and
real-time digital radiography for position verification,
treated 37 patients with 60 CGE delivered in 6 fractions and reported a local control rate of 95% at
24 months. Hata et al. 2007 treated 21 patients who
had stage I NSCLC with 50 or 60 CGE delivered in
10 fractions and reported 2 year overall and causespecific survival rates of 74 and 86%, respectively.
The authors noted that all but one of the irradiated
tumors was controlled during follow-up and that the
toxicity profile was promising, with no grade 3 or
higher reactions.
More recently, Chang et al. 2011b conducted a
phase I/II prospective study of proton therapy for
inoperable centrally or superiorly located stage IA
(T1N0M0) NSCLC, any stage IB (T2N0M0) NSCLC,
and selected stage II (T3N0M0) NSCLC. Unlike the
aforementioned studies, in which very large fraction
sizes were used, Chang et al. 2011b employed more
modest hypofractionation to treat 18 patients with a
total dose of 87.5 CGE delivered in 2.5 CGE fractions. At a median follow-up time of 16.3 months,
no patient had experienced grade 4 or 5 toxicity.
The most common adverse effects were grade
2 dermatitis (67% of patients), grade 2 fatigue (44%),
grade 2 pneumonitis (11%), grade 2 esophagitis (6%),
and grade 2 chest wall pain (6%). Local control was
achieved in 88.9% of patients; however, 38.9% of
patients developed metastatic disease in regional
lymph nodes or distant organs. For high-risk large,
centrally located, or superiorly located tumors,

150

J. Y. Chang et al.

modestly hypofractionated proton therapy is an
appealing strategy for achieving a high BED while
allowing normal tissues to recover between fractions
(Register et al. 2011).

6.3

Patient Selection

Despite their heterogeneity of doses, fractionation
schemes, and techniques for positioning, immobilization, respiratory compensation, and geometric verification, all the proton studies quoted achieved
favorable toxicity profiles and excellent local control
of the primary tumor. However, whether proton
therapy should be used instead of photon-based
techniques depends on specific patient circumstances
and clinical judgment. Three types of patients with
early stage NSCLC may be especially well suited to
receive proton therapy instead of photon-based
radiotherapy. Namely, those whose photon plan has
an unacceptably high risk of radiation pneumonitis,
those who cannot receive ablative photon radiotherapy because of the tumor’s proximity to critical
structures, and those with recurrent lesions in a previously irradiated field (Kelly et al. 2010). To clarify
the relative clinical benefits of proton therapy,
researchers at MD Anderson Cancer Center are
developing a prospective randomized study to directly
compare ablative proton therapy with ablative
photon-based radiotherapy using a dose of 50 Gy in 4
fractions in patients with early stage or recurrent
NSCLC.

with BED \ 150 Gy was feasible and beneficial for
curative treatment of patients with Stage I NSCLC
and BED [ 100 Gy was recommended to achieve
optimal local control and survival. One of the common dose regimens, 48 Gy in 4 fractions, has been
widely used with excellent local control in
tumors \ 3 cm (Nagata et al. 2005). In the Japanese
study, however, the dose (48 Gy) was prescribed to
isocenter and PTV dose could be as low as 40 Gy.
Recent studies have shown suboptimal local control,
particularly for the T2 ([3 cm) tumor subgroup
(Onishi et al. 2011). The Japanese Clinical Oncology
Group (JCOG) has thus started a multi-institutional
dose-escalation study for Stage IB NSCLC patients
(JCOG 0702).
For operable stage I NSCLC, promising 5 year
overall survival rates (Stage IA: 72%; IB: 62%),
comparable to surgery, after SABR (BED [ 100 Gy)
in stage I NSCLC has been seen in a retrospective
study (Onishi et al. 2011). The local control rate was
92% for stage Ia and 73% for stage Ib patients.
A Phase II multi-institutional study of JCOG
researching the efficacy and toxicity of SABR for
both medically operable and inoperable Stage IA
NSCLC patients (JCOG 0403) was started in 2004,
and patient entry was completed in October 2008. A
total of 90 medically inoperable and 65 operable
patients have been enrolled. Preliminary data JCOG
0403 was reported in ASTRO 2010 (Nagata et al.
2010).

8
7

Japanese SABR Strategy

Japanese radiation oncologists pioneered SABR in
lung cancer using a CT–linear accelerator unit
sharing a common couch, enabling image-guided
fractionated SABR without rigid immobilization
(Uematsu et al. 2001). A Japanese multi-institutional
study (n = 245) using different dose regimens
reported the local recurrence rate of 8.1% for
BED C 100 Gy as compared with 26.4% for
\100 Gy (P \ 0.05) (Onishi et al. 2004). The 3 year
overall survival rate of medically operable patients
was 88.4% for BED C 100 Gy compared with
69.4% for \100 Gy (P \ 0.05). They concluded that
hypofractionated high-dose stereotactic radiotherapy

Dutch SABR Strategy

In the Netherlands, SABR was started in 2003 and
now is the standard of care for medically inoperable
patients with stage I NSCLC. Interestingly, earlier
Dutch studies in similar populations have demonstrated that the risk of finding benign lesions in these
patients with new or growing lesions, which were
FDG-PET positive with CT-characteristics of malignancy, is less than 5%. Therefore, in most of the
Dutch SABR studies, [60% patients were diagnosed
to have stage I NSCLC clinically based on images
without pathological confirmation. Comparison of the
outcomes after SABR of patients with and without
pathologically proven disease showed no significant
differences in overall survival or local control
(Verstegen et al. 2011).

Primary Lung Cancer

In the Dutch experience, a SABR dose of 60 Gy
was delivered in 3, 5, or 8 fractions, depending on
tumor size and location (Lagerwaard et al. 2008).
Three fractions were delivered in case of T1 tumors,
5 fractions for T1 tumors with broad contact with the
thoracic wall or mediastinum and for T2 tumors, and
8 fractions for tumors close to critical structures. All
doses were prescribed to the 80% isodose encompassing the PTV. All prescribed doses have a BED10
Gy of 105 Gy10 or higher. In a study of 676 patients
with long follow-up, the overall survival rates of
52.2% at 3 years and 27.3% at 5 years were
achieved. Actuarial local control was 91.4% at
3 years. For T1 tumors, local control was 93.7% at
3 years versus 88.5% for T2 tumors (p = 0.031).
There was no significant difference in toxicity
compared to patients with peripherally located versus
centrally located lesions. There were no significant
differences in local control between the three fractionation schemes. The regional failure rate was
9.3% at 3 years and the actuarial distant failure rate
was 17.0% at 3 years.
For operable patients with stage I NSCLC, a
randomized phase III trial of radiosurgery or surgery
for operable early stage NSCLC patients (ROSEL)
was initiated, but unfortunately, closed in 2010 due to
poor accrual. However the study was very helpful in
the implementation of SABR in the Netherlands.
Quality assurance guidelines have been developed,
which has helped the implementation of SABR in
other academic and non-academic centers.
This breakthrough of SABR has already had a
public health impact in certain geographies. After the
introduction of SABR in the Netherlands, population-based cancer registries showed a decline in the
proportion of untreated elderly patients with early
stage lung cancer along with improvement in the
median survival of these individuals (Palma et al.
2010).

9

Outcomes and Patterns of Failure

9.1

Medically Inoperable Stage I NSCLC

If the above technical and dosimetric considerations
are optimized in a formalized setting with rigorous
quality assurance, patients treated with SABR for
early stage NSCLC can expect excellent treatment,

151

recovery, local control of their tumors, and, in many
cases, oncologic cure. Prospective studies of SABR
have been published demonstrating high control of
primary lesions and promising overall survival
(Table 2). Local control rates were typically [90%
if tumor volume (not just isocenter) received a BED
of [100 Gy. Distant metastasis remained the most
common site of failure (10–25%) and regional
lymph node recurrence ranged from 3 to 10%.
Particularly notable is RTOG Trial 0236, which
utilized mature SABR techniques with formal
quality assurance steps to treat 59 patients between
2004 and 2006. These early stage tumors were
treated to 60 Gy in 3 fractions (calculated to be
54 Gy with heterogeneity correction). At the time of
publication, only one local failure had occurred
within 2 cm of the original lesion, resulting in an
actuarial local control rate of 98.0% at 3 years
(Timmerman et al. 2010). In light of these results,
standard of care for inoperable patients has moved
from conventional radiation therapy and/or supportive care to SABR.

9.2

Recurrent NSCLC and Metastatic
Lesions in Lung

In addition to early stage NSCLC patients who are
medically inoperable, other niche patient populations
are benefitting from the advent of SABR. One group
consists of those previously treated with conventionally fractionated radiation therapy to the chest,
who subsequently experienced local recurrence
or a new primary. In this setting, both surgery and
conventional radiation therapy are limited by the
attendant risks of operating or treating within an
already irradiated field. They are typically treated
with palliative chemotherapy. Fortunately, re-irradiation with SABR has been shown to provide greater
than 90% in-field local control in these cases with
manageable toxicity (Kelly et al. 2010). Pulmonary
metastases are another target for which SABR holds
promise. A multi-institutional phase I/II study of 38
patients with 1–3 pulmonary metastases from various
primary sites, including NSCLC, treated with SABR
resulted in a 96% local control rate at 2 years. Grade
3 toxicities occurred in only 3 patients (8%) and
only one (3%) experienced symptomatic pneumonitis
(Rusthoven et al. 2009).

152

J. Y. Chang et al.

Table 2 Dose constraints used in major North American, European, and international trials
Organ at risk

RTOGa 0618
(3 fractions)

Dutch ROSELb trial
(3 fractions)

Dutch ROSEL trial
(5 fractions)

International STARSc trial
(4 fractions)

Spinal cord

B18 Gy

B18 Gy

B25 Gy

20 Gy B 1 cc
15 Gy B 10 cc

Lung

V20 B 10%

V20 B 5–10%

V20 B 5–10%

V20 B 20%
V10 B 30%
V5 B 50%

Esophagus

B27 Gy

B24 Gy

B27 Gy

Brachial plexus

B24 Gy

B24 Gy

B27 Gy

35 Gy B 1 cc
30 Gy B 10 cc
Point B 40 Gy
35 Gy B 1 cc
30 Gy B 10 cc

Heart

B30 Gy

B24 Gy

B27 Gy

40 Gy B 1 cc
35 Gy B 10 cc

Trachea

B30 Gy

B30 Gy

B32 Gy

35 Gy B 1 cc
30 Gy B 10 cc

Bronchi

B30 Gy

B30 Gy

B32 Gy

40 Gy B 1 cc
35 Gy B 10 cc

Skin

B24 Gy

Not limited

Not limited

40 Gy B 1 cc
35 Gy B 10 cc

Limits represent point doses unless otherwise specified
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 0618
b
Randomized clinical trial of surgery versus radiosurgery in patient with stage IA NSCLC who are fit to undergo primary
resection
c
Randomized study of lobectomy versus cyberknife for operable lung cancer
a

9.3

Operable or Borderline Operable
Stage I NSCLC

The more controversial question is whether patients
with early stage lung cancer who are candidates for
lobectomy or wedge resection should undergo SABR
in lieu of surgery. Unfortunately, there is no published
randomized data directly comparing SABR with surgery for operable patients. A phase III randomized
study to compare SABR with sublobar resection
(ACOSOG Z4099/RTOG 1021) is ongoing. The
ROSEL trial in the Netherlands randomized stage IA
NSCLC patients to either surgery or SABR, but the
trial closed early due to poor accrual. A similarly
designed trial sponsored by Accuray Inc. (the international STARS trial) has begun to accrue patients’
results and will hopefully be completed and published
in 2014. In the meantime, preliminary evidence
suggests that SABR may be a comparable alternative
for patients able to undergo surgery. For example,

retrospective review of medically operable patients in
a Japanese multi-institutional study found 5 year local
recurrence and overall survival rates of 8.4 and
70.8%, respectively, provided that they were treated
to a BED greater than 100 Gy (Onishi et al. 2007).
These results were confirmed by a recent publication
from the same group (Onishi et al. 2011). Such outcomes are similar to the 5 year outcomes observed in
the lobectomy arm of the North American Lung
Cancer Study Group (LCSG) 821 trial that compared
wedge resection and lobectomy (local recurrence and
overall survival of 6 and 70%, respectively) (Ginsberg
and Rubinstein 1995).
A more direct comparison, albeit also retrospective, was published by the William Beaumont Hospital group (Grills et al. 2011). Between 2003 and
2008, patients at that institution categorized as borderline operable were treated with either SABR or
sublobar (wedge) resections. Retrospective analysis
of this center’s experience demonstrated that SABR

Primary Lung Cancer

and sublobar resection had the same rate of distant
metastases and cause-specific survival, but a nonsignificant trend was observed for a decreased risk of
local and regional recurrence in the SABR group.
A different single-center analysis from Washington
University in St. Louis used propensity matched score
analysis and likewise demonstrated equal rates of
local recurrence and disease-specific survival between
SBRT and surgery (Crabtree et al. 2010). Notably,
70% of the patients in this study underwent
lobectomy.
With regard to prospective data, outcomes of two
single-arm studies of operable patients treated with
SABR have been reported by investigators from Japan
and the Netherlands. Nagata et al. (2010) recently
reported outcomes from the Japanese Clinical
Oncology Group (JCOG) 0403 trial. In this phase II
study, operable stage IA patients received 48 Gy in
four fractions. The 65 patients in this study were
elderly (median age, 79 years) but were generally in
good health with performance status 0–2,
PaO2 C 60 torr, and FEV1.0 C 700 mL. Moreover,
they were deemed operable by thoracic surgeons.
With a median follow-up of 45.4 months, the 3 year
overall survival rate was 76.0%, and the 3 year local
progression-free survival rate was 68.5%. Grade 3
toxicities included chest pain (1.5%), dyspnea (3.1%),
hypoxia (1.5%), and pneumonitis (3.1%). The Dutch
study followed ‘‘potentially operable’’ patients who
underwent SABR instead of surgery (Senan et al.
2011b). This slightly younger patient group (median
age, 76 years), experienced actuarial 3 year local
control and overall survival rates of 93.0% and
84.7%, respectively. Although randomized data
would be more convincing, it is hard to imagine that
the potentially operable patients in these two trials
would have had better outcomes with surgery. Currently, an American single-arm study of operable
patients is being conducted in the United States by the
RTOG, and its results are eagerly awaited.
In summary, the evidence that is available suggests
that there may be similar efficacy in outcomes when
comparing SBRT and surgical options. However, we
emphasize that level I evidence is lacking and that
currently lobectomy remains the standard of care.
We hope that intriguing preliminary evidence
prompts radiation oncologists and patients to be more
willing to enroll in the necessary trials to address this

153

important question. Finally, it is worth noting that
the introduction of new systemic chemotherapies,
molecularly targeted agents, and biological markers
identifying subtypes of lung cancer will further
complicate the issue of local therapy (Chen et al.
2007; Seike et al. 2007; Tsao et al. 2007; Brock et al.
2008). It is as of yet unclear whether new agents will
be more effective at sterilizing the region (lobe)
around the tumor, tipping the scales toward SBRT, or
whether these agents will better prevent distant
metastases, making definitive surgery to local and
regional structures more critical. Within the realm of
radiotherapy, questions regarding the timing of systemic therapy (sequential versus concurrent) and
whether to target only the tumor versus the tumor and
regional structures will need to be addressed as systemic agents disseminate into practice. Ultimately,
empirical trials will be necessary to guide treatment
during this exciting time for multimodality lung
cancer therapy.

10

Toxicities and Challenges

Although SABR provides many benefits to patients
and avoids the perioperative and long-term complications of surgery, the ablative doses of radiation used
in a course of SABR can result in considerable
damage to normal tissues if treatment is improperly
planned. Therefore, appropriate anatomical selection
of candidates is crucial if the advantages of SABR are
to be meaningful for the individual patient. For
lesions located in the periphery of the lung but away
from the chest wall, the use of SABR is more permissible because the lung is a parallel organ and can
generally tolerate the loss of functional alveolar units
immediately around the neoplasm. With modern
improvements in the technical execution of SABR
and quality assurance, grade 3–4 toxicity rates now
occur in the range of 0–15% in patients with peripheral tumors (Timmerman et al. 2010; Nagata et al.
2005; Uematsu et al. 2001; Xia et al. 2006; Stauder
et al. 2011). Radiation pneumonitis is the most common toxicity in this group, and studies have shown
that limiting the volume of the lungs receiving 20 Gy
(V20) to 5–20% of the total volume is a useful
threshold for preventing this adverse effect (Nagata
et al. 2011).

154

Fig. 3 a Optimized SABR plan with 50 Gy in 4 fractions to
PTV in centrally located left lower lobe stage I non-small cell
lung cancer. b SABR plan 50 Gy in 4 fractions without

J. Y. Chang et al.

beam optimization. Optimized SABR reduces the dose to
esophagus (E), bronchial tree (BT), pulmonary vessels (PV),
and the lungs.

Fig. 4 Patient with early
stage NSCLC in the left apex
treated with SABR 50 Gy
in 4 fractions who
subsequently developed
brachial plexus neuropathy.
a Isodose distribution showed
that brachial plexus may have
received 40 Gy. b CT with
contrast demonstrating the
location of vessels and
brachial plexus

If the lesion is centrally located, SABR can result
in severe injury to mediastinal structures. A phase II
study of 70 patients with both peripherally and centrally located tumors treated to 60–66 Gy (without
heterogeneity correction) in three fractions found
2 year freedom from severe toxicity rates of 83% in
patients with peripherally located tumors versus 54%
for patients with centrally located tumors (Timmerman
et al. 2006b). These toxicities included pleural effusion, pneumonitis, and a decline in pulmonary function. Four of six deaths were likely related to treatment
and all of these deaths occurred in patients with central
tumors. The authors of the study recommended that the
60 Gy in 3 fraction regimen not be used in patients
with tumors within 2 cm of the central airways. Other

devastating but rare toxicities of central structures
include tracheal or great vessel rupture, esophageal
ulceration, and spinal cord myelopathy (Nagata et al.
2009; Joyner et al. 2006).
The incidence of these toxicities can be prevented
with careful treatment planning that avoids excess
dose to these tissues using blocking in forward-planned 3D therapy or conformal avoidance using IMRT.
A complementary strategy is to alter the total dose
and fraction size of the SABR regimen, particularly if
blocking compromises dose to the tumor. Along these
lines, investigators at MD Anderson Cancer Center
reported on a series of 27 patients with centrally
and superiorly located tumors that were treated
with gentler regimen of 50 Gy in four fractions

Primary Lung Cancer

155

Table 3 Studies of proton therapy for early stage NSCLC
Trial

Dose/fraction size (CGE)

Local control

Overall survival

Chang et al. (2011b)

87.5/2.5

89% (2 years)

54.5% (2 years)

Hata et al. (2007)

50–60/5–6

95% (2 years)

74% (2 years)

Bush et al. (2004)

60/6

74% (3 years)

44% (3 years)

70–94/3.5–4.7

84% (2 years)

80% (2 years)

Prospective

Retrospective
Nihei et al. (2006)

Fig. 5 a Peripherally located
early stage non-small cell
lung cancer treated with
SABR to a dose of 50 Gy
in 4 fractions (white isodose
line). b Surveillance
computed tomography scan
3 years following treatment.
The tumor has been replaced
by focal consolidation

(Chang et al. 2008a). Complication rates were modest
given the tumors’ central location: Four patients
(14.8%) developed grade 2 pneumonitis and three
patients (11.1%) developed grade 2–3 skin toxicity
and/or chest wall pain. Optimizing the SABR plan with
the dosimetric techniques described in Sect. 3.4 can
improve dose distribution to critical normal structures
and reduce the chance of toxicities (Fig. 3). Another
reported regimen for centrally located lesions used
70 Gy in 10 fractions for centrally located lesions and
likewise resulted in reassuring rates of toxicities while
preserving tumor control (Xia et al. 2006). Identifying
the ideal SABR regimen is a topic of active clinical
investigation, and the RTOG is currently conducting
two trials (RTOG 0813 and RTOG 0915) to identify
optimal dose and fractionation in different SABR
populations (Timmerman et al. 2006a).
Tumors near the chest wall and brachial plexus
also present the possibility of severe injury, manifesting as neuropathic complications (Fig. 4) and rib

fractures. In a series of 36 patients with tumors at the
apex treated with a three-fraction regimen to a median
dose of 57 Gy, the rate of brachial plexopathy was
19.4% (Forquer et al. 2009). Additionally, instances
of neuropathic pain, arm weakness, and one case of
extremity paralysis were reported. Those receiving
more than 26 Gy to the brachial plexus had the
highest risk of neuropathy (46%), and this value is
now used as the maximum tolerable dose for this
structure. With regard to neuropathic chest wall pain,
a large institutional series of 265 patients with tumors
located within 2.5 cm of the chest wall reported a
17% rate of chronic chest wall pain (Welsh et al.
2010). In this study, obesity and diabetic state were
associated with development of chronic pain. Rib
fractures are another potential complication, and two
studies have examined the incidence of rib fractures.
Nine fracture events occurred among 42 patients in
the first study, and five events occurred in 60 patients
in the second study (Voroney et al. 2009; Dunlap

156

J. Y. Chang et al.

Fig. 6 Complete clinical response after SABR 50 Gy in 4 fractions

et al. 2009). A dose of 30 Gy was found to be the
inflection point at which the incidence of both chest
wall pain and rib fracture increase (Dunlap et al.
2009; Welsh et al. 2010). Examples of organ dose
limitations used in major trials in North America and
Europe are presented in Table 3. At MDAnderson
Cancer Center, we limit V35 of the chest wall to \50
cc to reduce the rate of chest wall toxicities.
For patients who received prior chest radiation and
developed recurrent disease treated with SABR,
18.9% developed grade 3 radiation pneumonitis (RP)
and 1.4% had grade 5 RP. In this clinical context,
pneumonitis occurrence was predicted by ECOG
performance status (2–3), FEV1 (B65%), previous
PTV (bilateral mediastinum), and composite V20
(C30%) (Liu et al. 2011).

11

means to distinguish post-irradiation effects from viable tumors, but this technology also lacks sensitivity in
the short term as SABR-treated regions can have persistent [18F] fluorodeoxyglucose avidity for up to a year
following treatment (Matsuo et al. 2010; Henderson
et al. 2009). To overcome this ambiguity, some centers
use specific findings on PET such as a high post-SABR
standardized uptake volume ([5) more than 6 months
after SABR to better select patients for confirmatory
biopsy (Zhang et al. 2010). Despite these diagnostic
challenges, a lack of clear tumor progression following
treatment is generally encouraging, and an experienced
radiologist familiar with post-SABR effects should be
able to identify particularly suspicious radiographic
changes that merit pathologic investigation. Such
identification is important as some preliminary studies
suggest that salvage surgery following SABR is
feasible (Neri et al. 2010).

Post-SABR Imaging Changes

A different challenge unique to SABR involves imaging follow-up after treatment. Parenchymal changes
such as fibrosis and persistent pneumonitis can occur,
and the radiographic appearance of these changes on
surveillance CT imaging is diverse. Diffuse consolidation, ground-glass opacities, and focal consolidation
and scarring have all been observed (Fig. 5). The
resulting diagnostic dilemma is that this wide spectrum
of radiographic changes can be confused with tumor
recurrence and render tools like the RECIST criteria
insufficient for evaluation of local response. Positron
emission tomography (PET) has been touted as a

12

Case Examples

Case 1
A patient with peripherally located early stage nonsmall cell lung cancer was treated with SABR to a
dose of 50 Gy in 4 fractions (Fig. 5a). Repeated CT
of chest showed replacement of tumor by focal consolidation 3 years after treatment (Fig. 5b).
Case 2
A patient with early stage NSCLC in the left lung
apex was treated with SABR to a dose of 50 Gy

Primary Lung Cancer

157

Fig. 7 Local recurrence after SABR 50 Gy in 4 fractions. LR Local recurrence

in 4 fractions and developed left brachial plexus
neuropathy. Based on the treatment plan, the brachial
plexus may have received 40 Gy (Fig. 4a). CT with
contrast showed the location of vessels and brachial
plexus (Fig. 4b).
Case 3
A patient with early stage NSCLC was treated with
SABR to a dose of 50 Gy in 4 fractions (Fig. 6, left
and middle boxes). Complete response was achieved
4 years after treatment (Fig. 6, right box).
Case 4
A patient with early stage NSCLC was treated with
SABR to a dose of 50 Gy in 4 fractions (Fig. 7, left two
boxes). Repeat CT showed no recurrence after one year
(Fig. 7, third box). Local recurrence occurred 2 years
after treatment (Fig. 7, right box).

13

Conclusions and Future Directions

Patients with early stage lung cancer can be challenging to treat due to advanced age, poor performance status, and comorbidities. Proper technique
that includes reliable immobilization, accurate tumor
targeting, and precise verification of dose delivery is
critical for safe, effective, and ethical use of this
technology. Several dosimetric choices are available
at treatment planning to optimize dose and minimize
the risk of toxicity. For patients who are medically
inoperable, SABR has become the standard of care
for achieving a high rate of local control and overall
survival. Toxicity is minimal with peripherally
located tumors, but centrally or superiorly located
lesions can also be treated with a modified dose and
fractionation. Proton-based SABR may potentially

further reduce the toxicity in clinically challenging
cases. While several preliminary studies suggest that
SABR could be as efficacious as surgery in the
treatment of operable patients, change in practice
patterns for these patients will likely depend on the
publication of ongoing randomized trials.
Conflicts of Interest The authors have no conflicts
of interest to disclose.
Acknowledgments The authors would like to acknowledge
the contributions of Eugene Koay, Joshua Y. Chang, and Peter
Balter in the preparation of the manuscript.

References
Ambrogi MC, Lucchi M, Dini P, Melfi F, Fontanini G, Faviana P,
Fanucchi O, Mussi A (2006) Percutaneous radiofrequency
ablation of lung tumours: results in the mid-term. Eur J
Cardiothorac Surg 30(1):177–183. doi:10.1016/j.ejcts.2006.
03.067
Ambrose JA, Barua RS (2004) The pathophysiology of cigarette
smoking and cardiovascular disease: an update. J Am Coll
Cardiol 43(10):1731–1737. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2003.12.047
Auberger T, Seydl K, Futschek T, Sztankay A, Sweeney RA,
Lukas P (2007) Photons or protons: precision radiotherapy
of lung cancer. Strahlenther Onkol 183 Spec No 2:3–6. doi:
10.1007/s00066-007-2002-9
Baumann P, Nyman J, Lax I, Friesland S, Hoyer M, Rehn
Ericsson S, Johansson KA, Ekberg L, Morhed E, Paludan
M, Wittgren L, Blomgren H, Lewensohn R (2006) Factors
important for efficacy of stereotactic body radiotherapy of
medically inoperable stage I lung cancer. A retrospective
analysis of patients treated in the Nordic countries. Acta
Oncol 45(7):787–795. doi:10.1080/02841860600904862
Brock MV, Hooker CM, Ota-Machida E, Han Y, Guo M, Ames
S, Glockner S, Piantadosi S, Gabrielson E, Pridham G,
Pelosky K, Belinsky SA, Yang SC, Baylin SB, Herman JG
(2008) DNA methylation markers and early recurrence in
stage I lung cancer. N Engl J Med 358(11):1118–1128. doi:
10.1056/NEJMoa0706550

158
Brock J, Bedford J, Partridge M, McDonald F, Ashley S,
McNair HA, Brada M (2011) Optimising Stereotactic Body
Radiotherapy for Non-small Cell Lung Cancer with Volumetric Intensity-modulated Arc Therapy-A Planning Study.
Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). doi:10.1016/j.clon.2011.02.003
Brown WT, Wu X, Fayad F, Fowler JF, Garcia S, Monterroso MI,
de la Zerda A, Schwade JG (2009) Application of robotic
stereotactic radiotherapy to peripheral stage I non-small cell
lung cancer with curative intent. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol)
21(8):623–631. doi:10.1016/j.clon.2009.06.006
Bush DA, Slater JD, Shin BB, Cheek G, Miller DW, Slater JM
(2004) Hypofractionated proton beam radiotherapy for stage
I lung cancer. Chest 126(4):1198–1203. doi:10.1378/chest.
126.4.1198
Chamogeorgakis TP, Connery CP, Bhora F, Nabong A,
Toumpoulis IK (2007) Thoracoscore predicts midterm
mortality in patients undergoing thoracic surgery. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 134(4):883–887. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2007.
06.020
Chamogeorgakis T, Toumpoulis I, Tomos P, Ieromonachos C,
Angouras D, Georgiannakis E, Michail P, Rokkas C (2009)
External validation of the modified Thoracoscore in a new
thoracic surgery program: prediction of in-hospital mortality. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 9(3):463–466. doi:
10.1510/icvts.2008.201178
Chang JY, Roth JA (2007) Stereotactic body radiation therapy
for stage I non-small cell lung cancer. Thorac Surg Clin
17(2):251–259. doi:10.1016/j.thorsurg.2007.03.011
Chang DT, Olivier KR, Morris CG, Liu C, Dempsey JF, Benda
RK, Palta JR (2006a) The impact of heterogeneity correction on dosimetric parameters that predict for radiation
pneumonitis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 65(1):125–131.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2005.09.047
Chang JY, Zhang X, Wang X, Kang Y, Riley B, Bilton S,
Mohan R, Komaki R, Cox JD (2006b) Significant reduction
of normal tissue dose by proton radiotherapy compared with
three-dimensional conformal or intensity-modulated radiation therapy in Stage I or Stage III non-small-cell lung
cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 65(4):1087–1096. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2006.01.052
Chang JY, Balter PA, Dong L, Yang Q, Liao Z, Jeter M, Bucci
MK, McAleer MF, Mehran RJ, Roth JA, Komaki R (2008a)
Stereotactic body radiation therapy in centrally and superiorly located stage I or isolated recurrent non-small-cell
lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 72(4):967–971.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.08.001
Chang JY, Dong L, Liu H, Starkschall G, Balter P, Mohan R,
Liao Z, Cox JD, Komaki R (2008b) Image-guided radiation
therapy for non-small cell lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol
3(2):177–186. doi:10.1097/JTO.0b013e3181622bdd
Chang JY, Liu H, Zhang X, al. E (2011a) Four-dimensional CT
and on-board volumetric image-guided stereotactic ablative
radiotherapy for stage I NSCLC. Int J Rad Onc Bio Phy
(in press)
Chang JY, Komaki R, Wen HY, De Gracia B, Bluett JB,
McAleer MF, Swisher SG, Gillin M, Mohan R, Cox JD
(2011b) Toxicity and patterns of failure of adaptive/ablative
proton therapy for early-stage, medically inoperable nonsmall cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.04.049

J. Y. Chang et al.
Chen HY, Yu SL, Chen CH, Chang GC, Chen CY, Yuan A,
Cheng CL, Wang CH, Terng HJ, Kao SF, Chan WK, Li HN,
Liu CC, Singh S, Chen WJ, Chen JJ, Yang PC (2007) A
five-gene signature and clinical outcome in non-small-cell
lung cancer. N Engl J Med 356(1):11–20. doi:10.1056/
NEJMoa060096
Crabtree TD, Denlinger CE, Meyers BF, El Naqa I, Zoole J,
Krupnick AS, Kreisel D, Patterson GA, Bradley JD (2010)
Stereotactic body radiation therapy versus surgical resection
for stage I non-small cell lung cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg 140(2):377–386. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2009.12.054
Das M, Abdelmaksoud MH, Loo BW Jr, Kothary N (2010)
Alternatives to surgery for early stage non-small cell lung
cancer-ready for prime time? Curr Treat Options Oncol
11(1–2):24–35. doi:10.1007/s11864-010-0119-z
Devereux G (2006) ABC of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Definition, epidemiology, and risk factors. BMJ
332(7550):1142–1144. doi:10.1136/bmj.332.7550.1142
Dosoretz DE, Galmarini D, Rubenstein JH, Katin MJ, Blitzer
PH, Salenius SA, Dosani RA, Rashid M, Mestas G, Hannan
SE et al (1993) Local control in medically inoperable lung
cancer: an analysis of its importance in outcome and factors
determining the probability of tumor eradication. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 27(3):507–516. doi:10.1016/
0360-3016(93)90373-4
Dunlap NE, Cai J, Biedermann GB, Yang W, Benedict SH,
Sheng K, Schefter TE, Kavanagh BD, Larner JM (2009)
Chest wall volume receiving [30 Gy predicts risk of severe
pain and/or rib fracture after lung stereotactic body
radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 76(3):796–801.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.02.027
Ezhil M, Vedam S, Balter P, Choi B, Mirkovic D, Starkschall G,
Chang JY (2009) Determination of patient-specific internal
gross tumor volumes for lung cancer using four-dimensional
computed tomography. Radiat Oncol 4:4. doi:10.1186/1748717X-4-4
Fakiris AJ, McGarry RC, Yiannoutsos CT, Papiez L, Williams
M, Henderson MA, Timmerman R (2009) Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for early-stage non-small-cell lung carcinoma: four-year results of a prospective phase II study. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 75(3):677–682. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2008.11.042
Falcoz PE, Conti M, Brouchet L, Chocron S, Puyraveau M,
Mercier M, Etievent JP, Dahan M (2007) The Thoracic
Surgery Scoring System (Thoracoscore): risk model for
in-hospital death in 15,183 patients requiring thoracic
surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 133(2):325–332. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2006.09.020
Forquer JA, Fakiris AJ, Timmerman RD, Lo SS, Perkins SM,
McGarry RC, Johnstone PA (2009) Brachial plexopathy
from stereotactic body radiotherapy in early-stage NSCLC:
dose-limiting toxicity in apical tumor sites. Radiother Oncol
93(3):408–413. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2009.04.018
Frank SJ, Forster KM, Stevens CW, Cox JD, Komaki R,
Liao Z, Tucker S, Wang X, Steadham RE, Brooks C,
Starkschall G (2003) Treatment planning for lung cancer:
traditional homogeneous point-dose prescription compared
with heterogeneity-corrected dose-volume prescription. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 56(5):1308–1318. doi:10.1016/
S0360-3016(03)00337-7

Primary Lung Cancer
Ginsberg R, Rubinstein L (1995) Randomized trial of lobectomy versus limited resection for T1 N0 non-small cell lung
cancer. Lung Cancer Study Group. Ann Thorac Surg
60:615–622. doi:10.1016/0003-4975(95)00537-U
Goldberg SN, Hahn PF, Tanabe KK, Mueller PR, Schima W,
Athanasoulis CA, Compton CC, Solbiati L, Gazelle GS
(1998) Percutaneous radiofrequency tissue ablation: does
perfusion-mediated tissue cooling limit coagulation necrosis?
J Vasc Interv Radiol 9(1 Pt 1):101–111. doi:10.1016/S10510443(98)70491-9
Gomez FM, Palussiere J, Santos E, Tourdias T, Cornelis F,
Saiz V, Montes H, Eker O (2009) Radiofrequency thermocoagulation of lung tumours. Where we are, where we are
headed. Clin Transl Oncol 11(1):28–34. doi:10.1007/s12094009-0307-0
Grills IS, Mangona VS, Welsh R, Chmielewski G, McInerney E,
Martin S, Wloch J, Ye H, Kestin LL (2011) Outcomes after
stereotactic lung radiotherapy or wedge resection for stage I
non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 28(6):928–935.
doi:10.1200/JCO.2009.25.0928
Grines CL, Bonow RO, Casey DE Jr, Gardner TJ, Lockhart PB,
Moliterno DJ, O’Gara P, Whitlow P (2007) Prevention of
premature discontinuation of dual antiplatelet therapy in
patients with coronary artery stents: a science advisory from
the American Heart Association, American College of
Cardiology, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions, American College of Surgeons, and American Dental Association, with representation from the
American College of Physicians. J Am Coll Cardiol
49(6):734–739. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2007.01.003
Hara R, Itami J, Kondo T, Aruga T, Uno T, Sasano N,
Ohnishi K, Kiyozuka M, Fuse M, Ito M, Naoi K, Kohno Y
(2006) Clinical outcomes of single-fraction stereotactic
radiation therapy of lung tumors. Cancer 106(6):1347–1352.
doi:10.1002/cncr.21747
Hata M, Tokuuye K, Kagei K, Sugahara S, Nakayama H,
Fukumitsu N, Hashimoto T, Mizumoto M, Ohara K,
Akine Y (2007) Hypofractionated high-dose proton beam
therapy for stage I non-small-cell lung cancer: preliminary
results of a phase I/II clinical study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 68(3):786–793. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2006.12.063
Henderson MA, Hoopes DJ, Fletcher JW, Lin PF, Tann M,
Yiannoutsos CT, Williams MD, Fakiris AJ, McGarry RC,
Timmerman RD (2009) A pilot trial of serial 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography in patients
with medically inoperable stage I non-small-cell lung
cancer treated with hypofractionated stereotactic body
radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 76(3):789–795.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.02.051
Hiraki T, Gobara H, Iishi T, Sano Y, Iguchi T, Fujiwara H,
Tajiri N, Sakurai J, Date H, Mimura H, Kanazawa S (2007)
Percutaneous radiofrequency ablation for clinical stage I
non-small cell lung cancer: results in 20 nonsurgical
candidates. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 134(5):1306–1312.
doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2007.07.013
Holt A, van Vliet-Vroegindeweij C, Mans A, Belderbos JS,
Damen EM (2011) Volumetric-modulated arc therapy for
stereotactic body radiotherapy of lung tumors: a comparison
with intensity-modulated radiotherapy techniques. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.09.014

159
Iakovou I, Schmidt T, Bonizzoni E, Ge L, Sangiorgi GM,
Stankovic G, Airoldi F, Chieffo A, Montorfano M, Carlino
M, Michev I, Corvaja N, Briguori C, Gerckens U, Grube E,
Colombo A (2005) Incidence, predictors, and outcome of
thrombosis after successful implantation of drug-eluting
stents. JAMA 293(17):2126–2130. doi:10.1001/jama.293.
17.2126
Jemal A, Thun MJ, Ries LA, Howe HL, Weir HK, Center MM,
Ward E, Wu XC, Eheman C, Anderson R, Ajani UA,
Kohler B, Edwards BK (2008) Annual report to the nation
on the status of cancer, 1975–2005, featuring trends in lung
cancer, tobacco use, and tobacco control. J Natl Cancer Inst
100(23):1672–1694. doi:10.1093/jnci/djn389
Joyner M, Salter BJ, Papanikolaou N, Fuss M (2006) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for centrally located lung
lesions. Acta Oncol 45(7):802–807. doi:10.1080/028418
60600915322
Kaluza GL, Joseph J, Lee JR, Raizner ME, Raizner AE (2000)
Catastrophic outcomes of noncardiac surgery soon after
coronary stenting. J Am Coll Cardiol 35(5):1288–1294. doi:
10.1016/S0735-1097(00)00521-0
Kaskowitz L, Graham MV, Emami B, Halverson KJ, Rush C
(1993) Radiation therapy alone for stage I non-small cell
lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 27(3):517–523.
doi:10.1016/0360-3016(93)90374-5
Kelly P, Balter PA, Rebueno N, Sharp HJ, Liao Z, Komaki R,
Chang JY (2010) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for
patients with lung cancer previously treated with thoracic
radiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 78(5):1387–1393.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.09.070
Lagerwaard FJ, Haasbeek CJ, Smit EF, Slotman BJ, Senan S
(2008) Outcomes of risk-adapted fractionated stereotactic
radiotherapy for stage I non-small-cell lung cancer. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 70(3):685–692. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2007.10.053
Lencioni R, Crocetti L, Cioni R, Suh R, Glenn D, Regge D,
Helmberger T, Gillams AR, Frilling A, Ambrogi M,
Bartolozzi C, Mussi A (2008) Response to radiofrequency
ablation of pulmonary tumours: a prospective, intentionto-treat, multicentre clinical trial (the RAPTURE study). Lancet
Oncol 9(7):621–628. doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(08)70155-4
Li X, Chang J, Liu W, Quan E, Balter P, Zhang X (2011)
Significant improvement of plan quality, delivery efficiency
and plan consistency by VMAT combined with automated
inverse planning algorithm for stereotactic body radiation
therapy in centrally/superiorly located stage I non-small-cell
lung cancer. Med Phys 38:3866
Lim do H, Yi BY, Mirmiran A, Dhople A, Suntharalingam M,
D’Souza WD (2009) Optimal beam arrangement for stereotactic body radiation therapy delivery in lung tumors. Acta
Oncol 49(2):219–224. doi:10.3109/02841860903302897
Liu H, Choi B, Zhang J, Tutt T, Chi M, Wang C, Luo D, Prado K,
Mohan R, Dong L, Balter P (2005) Assessing respirationinduced tumor motion and margin of internal target volume
for image-guided radiotherapy of lung cancers. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 63 (suppl 1):S30–S30. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2005.07.058
Liu H, Vinogradskiy YY, Komaki R, Martel M, Tucker S,
Chang JY (2011) Predicting radiation pneumonitis after
stereotactic ablative radiotherapy in patients with previous

160
conventional thoracic radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 81(suppl 2):S82
Matsuo Y, Nakamoto Y, Nagata Y, Shibuya K, Takayama K,
Norihisa Y, Narabayashi M, Mizowaki T, Saga T,
Higashi T, Togashi K, Hiraoka M (2010) Characterization
of FDG-PET images after stereotactic body radiation
therapy for lung cancer. Radiother Oncol 97(2):200–204.
doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2010.04.011
Nagata Y, Negoro Y, Aoki T, Mizowaki T, Takayama K,
Kokubo M, Araki N, Mitsumori M, Sasai K, Shibamoto Y,
Koga S, Yano S, Hiraoka M (2002) Clinical outcomes of 3D
conformal hypofractionated single high-dose radiotherapy
for one or two lung tumors using a stereotactic body frame.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 52(4):1041–1046
Nagata Y, Takayama K, Matsuo Y, Norihisa Y, Mizowaki T,
Sakamoto T, Sakamoto M, Mitsumori M, Shibuya K,
Araki N, Yano S, Hiraoka M (2005) Clinical outcomes of a
phase I/II study of 48 Gy of stereotactic body radiotherapy
in 4 fractions for primary lung cancer using a stereotactic
body frame. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 63(5):1427–1431.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2005.05.034
Nagata Y, Hiraoka M, Mizowaki T, Narita Y, Matsuo Y,
Norihisa Y, Onishi H, Shirato H (2009) Survey of stereotactic body radiation therapy in Japan by the Japan 3-D
Conformal External Beam Radiotherapy Group. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 75(2):343–347. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2009.02.087
Nagata Y, Hiraoka M, Shibata T, Onishi H (2010) A phase II
trial of Stereotactic body radiation therapy for operable
TIN0M0 non-small cell lung cancer: Japan Clinical Oncology Group (JCOG0403). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
78:S27. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.07.104
Nagata Y, Wulf J, Lax I, Timmerman R, Zimmermann F,
Stojkovski I, Jeremic B (2011) Stereotactic radiotherapy of
primary lung cancer and other targets: results of consultant
meeting of the International Atomic Energy Agency. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 79(3):660–669. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2010.10.004
NCI (2011) National Cancer Institutes. Cancer of the lung and
bronchus—SEER stat fact sheet; http://seer.cancer.gov/
statfacts/html/lungb.html Accessed 1 June 2011
Nehmeh S, Erdi Y, Pan T, Pevsner A, Rosenzweig K, Yorke E,
Mageras G, Schoder H, Vernon P, Squire O, Mostafavi H,
Larson S, Humm J (2004) Four-dimensional (4D) PET/CT
imaging of the thorax. Med Phys 31:3179–3186. doi:
10.1118/1.1809778
Neri S, Takahashi Y, Terashi T, Hamakawa H, Tomii K,
Katakami N, Kokubo M (2010) Surgical treatment of local
recurrence after stereotactic body radiotherapy for primary
and metastatic lung cancers. J Thorac Oncol 5:2003–2007
Nihei K, Ogino T, Ishikura S, Nishimura H (2006) High-dose
proton beam therapy for Stage I non-small-cell lung cancer.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 65(1):107–111. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2005.10.031
Ong C, Verbakel WF, Cuijpers JP, Slotman BJ, Senan S (2011)
Dosimetric impact of interplay effect on RapidArc lung
stereotactic treatment delivery. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
79(1):305–311. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.02.059

J. Y. Chang et al.
Onishi H, Araki T, Shirato H, Nagata Y, Hiraoka M, Gomi K,
Yamashita T, Niibe Y, Karasawa K, Hayakawa K, Takai Y,
Kimura T, Hirokawa Y, Takeda A, Ouchi A, Hareyama M,
Kokubo M, Hara R, Itami J, Yamada K (2004) Stereotactic
hypofractionated high-dose irradiation for stage I nonsmall
cell lung carcinoma: clinical outcomes in 245 subjects in a
Japanese multiinstitutional study. Cancer 101(7):1623–1631
Onishi H, Shirato H, Nagata Y, Hiraoka M, Fujino M, Gomi K,
Niibe Y, Karasawa K, Hayakawa K, Takai Y, Kimura T,
Takeda A, Ouchi A, Hareyama M, Kokubo M, Hara R,
Itami J, Yamada K, Araki T (2007) Hypofractionated
stereotactic radiotherapy (HypoFXSRT) for stage I nonsmall cell lung cancer: updated results of 257 patients
in a Japanese multi-institutional study. J Thorac Oncol
2(7 Suppl 3):S94–S100. doi:10.1097/JTO.0b013e318074de34
Onishi H, Shirato H, Nagata Y, Hiraoka M, Fujino M, Gomi K,
Karasawa K, Hayakawa K, Niibe Y, Takai Y, Kimura T,
Takeda A, Ouchi A, Hareyama M, Kokubo M, Kozuka T,
Arimoto T, Hara R, Itami J, Araki T (2011) Stereotactic
body radiotherapy (SBRT) for operable stage I non-smallcell lung cancer: can SBRT be comparable to surgery? Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 81(5):1352–1358. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.07.1751
Paganetti H, Niemierko A, Ancukiewicz M, Gerweck LE,
Goitein M, Loeffler JS, Suit HD (2002) Relative biological
effectiveness (RBE) values for proton beam therapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 53(2):407–421. doi:10.1016/
S0360-3016(02)02754-2
Palma D, Visser O, Lagerwaard FJ, Belderbos J, Slotman BJ,
Senan S (2010) Impact of introducing stereotactic lung
radiotherapy for elderly patients with stage I non-small-cell
lung cancer: a population-based time-trend analysis. J Clin
Oncol 28(35):5153–5159. doi:10.1200/JCO.2010.30.0731
Pell JP, Haw S, Cobbe S, Newby DE, Pell AC, Fischbacher C,
McConnachie A, Pringle S, Murdoch D, Dunn F, Oldroyd
K, Macintyre P, O’Rourke B, Borland W (2008) Smokefree legislation and hospitalizations for acute coronary
syndrome. N Engl J Med 359(5):482–491. doi:10.1056/
NEJMsa0706740
Pennathur A, Luketich JD, Abbas G, Chen M, Fernando HC,
Gooding WE, Schuchert MJ, Gilbert S, Christie NA,
Landreneau RJ (2007) Radiofrequency ablation for the
treatment of stage I non-small cell lung cancer in high-risk
patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 134(4):857–864. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2007.04.060
Radiofrequency ablation in treating patients with stage I nonsmall cell lung cancer (ACOSOG Z4033): \http://clinical
trials.gov/ct2/show/study/NCT00109876[. Accessed 1 June
2011
Ramsey C, Scaperoth D, Arwood D, Oliver A (1999) Clinical
efficacy of respiratory gated conformal radiation therapy.
Med Dosim 24(2):115–119. doi:10.1016/S0958-3947(99)
00006-0
Register SP, Zhang X, Mohan R, Chang JY (2011) Proton
stereotactic body radiation therapy for clinically challenging
cases of centrally and superiorly located stage I non-small-cell
lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 80(4):1015–1022.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.03.012

Primary Lung Cancer
Ricardi U, Filippi AR, Guarneri A, Giglioli FR, Ciammella P,
Franco P, Mantovani C, Borasio P, Scagliotti GV, Ragona R
(2009) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for early stage
non-small cell lung cancer: results of a prospective trial.
Lung Cancer 68(1):72–77. doi:10.1016/j.lungcan.2009.05.
007
Rosenzweig K, Hanley J, Mah D, Mageras G, Hunt M, Toner S,
Burman C, Ling C, Mychalczak B, Fuks Z, Leibel S (2000)
The deep inspiration breath-hold technique in the treatment
of inoperable non-small-cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 48(1):81–87. doi:10.1016/S0360-3016(00)
00583-6
Rusthoven KE, Kavanagh BD, Burri SH, Chen C, Cardenes H,
Chidel MA, Pugh TJ, Kane M, Gaspar LE, Schefter TE
(2009) Multi-institutional phase I/II trial of stereotactic
body radiation therapy for lung metastases. J Clin Oncol
27(10):1579–1584. doi:10.1200/JCO.2008.19.6386
Seike M, Yanaihara N, Bowman ED, Zanetti KA, Budhu A,
Kumamoto K, Mechanic LE, Matsumoto S, Yokota J,
Shibata T, Sugimura H, Gemma A, Kudoh S, Wang XW,
Harris CC (2007) Use of a cytokine gene expression
signature in lung adenocarcinoma and the surrounding
tissue as a prognostic classifier. J Natl Cancer Inst
99(16):1257–1269. doi:10.1093/jnci/djm083
Senan S, Palm D, Lagerwaard F (2011a) Stereotactic ablative
radiotherapy for stage I NSCLC: recent advances and
controversies. J Thorac Dis 3(3):189–196
Senan S, Verstegen N, Haasbeek C, Slotman B, Lagerwaard FJ
(2011b) Outcomes of stereotactic body radiotherapy in
patients with clinical stage I non-small cell lung cancer who
are fit to undergo surgery. J Clin Oncol 29:suppl abst 7051
Sharma AK, Ajani AE, Hamwi SM, Maniar P, Lakhani SV,
Waksman R, Lindsay J (2004) Major noncardiac surgery
following coronary stenting: when is it safe to operate?
Catheter Cardiovasc Interv 63(2):141–145. doi:10.1002/ccd.
20124
Simon CJ, Dupuy DE, DiPetrillo TA, Safran HP, Grieco CA,
Ng T, Mayo-Smith WW (2007) Pulmonary radiofrequency
ablation: long-term safety and efficacy in 153 patients.
Radiology 243(1):268–275. doi:10.1148/radiol.2431060088
Stauder MC, Macdonald OK, Olivier KR, Call JA, Lafata K,
Mayo CS, Miller RC, Brown PD, Bauer HJ, Garces YI
(2011) Early pulmonary toxicity following lung stereotactic
body radiation therapy delivered in consecutive daily
fractions. Radiother Oncol. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2011.
04.002
Swanson SJ, Herndon JE 2nd, D’Amico TA, Demmy TL,
McKenna RJ Jr, Green MR, Sugarbaker DJ (2007) Videoassisted thoracic surgery lobectomy: report of CALGB
39802–a prospective, multi-institution feasibility study.
J Clin Oncol 25(31):4993–4997. doi:10.1200/JCO.2007.
12.6649
Taylor AE, Johnson DC, Kazemi H (1992) Environmental
tobacco smoke and cardiovascular disease. A position paper
from the Council on Cardiopulmonary and Critical Care,
American Heart Association. Circulation 86(2):699–702
Timmerman R, Galvin J, Michalski J, Straube W, Ibbott G,
Martin E, Abdulrahman R, Swann S, Fowler J, Choy H
(2006a) Accreditation and quality assurance for Radiation

161
Therapy Oncology Group: Multicenter clinical trials using
Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy in lung cancer. Acta
Oncol 45(7):779–786. doi:10.1080/02841860600902213
Timmerman R, McGarry R, Yiannoutsos C, Papiez L, Tudor K,
DeLuca J, Ewing M, Abdulrahman R, DesRosiers C,
Williams M, Fletcher J (2006b) Excessive toxicity when
treating central tumors in a phase II study of stereotactic
body radiation therapy for medically inoperable early-stage
lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 24(30):4833–4839. doi:10.1200/
jco.2006.07.5937
Timmerman R, Paulus R, Galvin J, Michalski J, Straube W,
Bradley J, Fakiris A, Bezjak A, Videtic G, Johnstone D,
Fowler J, Gore E, Choy H (2010) Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for inoperable early stage lung cancer.
JAMA 303(11):1070–1076. doi:10.1001/jama.2010.261
Tsao MS, Aviel-Ronen S, Ding K, Lau D, Liu N, Sakurada A,
Whitehead M, Zhu CQ, Livingston R, Johnson DH, Rigas J,
Seymour L, Winton T, Shepherd FA (2007) Prognostic and
predictive importance of p53 and RAS for adjuvant
chemotherapy in non small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol
25(33):5240–5247. doi:10.1200/JCO.2007.12.6953
Uematsu M, Shioda A, Suda A, Fukui T, Ozeki Y, Hama Y,
Wong J, Kusano S (2001) Computed tomography-guided
frameless stereotactic radiotherapy for stage I non-small
cell lung cancer: a 5-year experience. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 51(3):666–670. doi:10.1016/S0360-3016(01)
01703-5
Verstegen NE, Lagerwaard FJ, Haasbeek CJ, Slotman BJ,
Senan S (2011) Outcomes of stereotactic ablative radiotherapy following a clinical diagnosis of stage I NSCLC:
comparison with a contemporaneous cohort with pathologically proven disease. Radiother Oncol 101(2):250–254.
doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2011.09.017
Voroney JP, Hope A, Dahele MR, Purdie TG, Franks KN,
Pearson S, Cho JB, Sun A, Payne DG, Bissonnette JP,
Bezjak A, Brade AM (2009) Chest wall pain and rib fracture
after stereotactic radiotherapy for peripheral non-small cell
lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol 4(8):1035–1037. doi:
10.1097/JTO.0b013e3181ae2962
Welsh J, Thomas J, Shah D, Allen PK, Wei X, Mitchell K, Gao
S, Balter P, Komaki R, Chang JY (2010) Obesity increases
the risk of chest wall pain from thoracic stereotactic body
radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.04.022
Wisnivesky JP, Bonomi M, Henschke C, Iannuzzi M, McGinn
T (2005) Radiation therapy for the treatment of unresected
stage I-II non-small cell lung cancer. Chest 128(3):1461–
1467. doi:10.1378/chest.128.3.1461
Xia T, Li H, Sun Q, Wang Y, Fan N, Yu Y, Li P, Chang J
(2006) Promising clinical outcome of stereotactic body
radiation therapy for patients with inoperable Stage I/II nonsmall-cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
66:117–125. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2006.04.013
Xiao Y, Papiez L, Paulus R, Timmerman R, Straube WL,
Bosch WR, Michalski J, Galvin JM (2009) Dosimetric
evaluation of heterogeneity corrections for RTOG 0236:
stereotactic body radiotherapy of inoperable stage I-II nonsmall-cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
73(4):1235–1242. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.11.019

162
Young RP, Hopkins RJ, Christmas T, Black PN, Metcalf P,
Gamble GD (2009) COPD prevalence is increased in
lung cancer, independent of age, sex and smoking history.
Eur Respir J 34(2):380–386. doi:10.1183/09031936.001
44208
Zhang X, Li Y, Pan X, Xiaoqiang L, Mohan R, Komaki R, Cox
JD, Chang JY (2009) Intensity-modulated proton therapy
reduces the dose to normal tissue compared with intensitymodulated radiation therapy or passive scattering proton
therapy and enables individualized radical radiotherapy for

J. Y. Chang et al.
extensive stage IIIB non-small-cell lung cancer: a virtual
clinical study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 77(2):357–366.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.04.028
Zhang X, Balter P, Pan T, Allen P, Chuang H, Chang JY (2010)
PET/CT and outcome in lung cancer treated with stereotactic body radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
78(3):S16. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.07.080
Zhu JC, Yan TD, Morris DL (2008) A systematic review of
radiofrequency ablation for lung tumors. Ann Surg Oncol
15(6):1765–1774. doi:10.1245/s10434-008-9848-7

Primary Liver Cancer
Higinia R. Cárdenes and Foster Lasley

Contents

Abstract

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most
frequently occurring primary tumor of the liver in
adults and the fourth most common cause of cancerrelated deaths in the world. Its rising incidence in
the United States and Europe is attributed to the
increased incidence of hepatitis C infection.
Currently, the optimal treatment for HCC is orthotopic
liver transplant or surgical resection for selected
patients. However many patients are not able to
undergo these radical interventions. Historically, radiotherapy for hepatocellular carcinoma has been shown
to be poorly tolerated in the cirrhotic liver and has
had suboptimal results with standard fractionation.
With the introduction of stereotactic body radiotherapy
(SBRT) techniques, there are emerging data indicating
that the use of targeted, highly conformal, hypofractionated ablative radiotherapy can provide results that
compare favorably with other ablative procedures for
HCC in terms of local control, safety and survival.
Therefore, SBRT is gaining interest as an alternative,
safe, non-invasive and effective technique for the
treatment of appropriately selected patients who are not
able to undergo orthotopic liver transplantation.

1
Introduction.............................................................. 163
1.1 Overview of the Current Management of HCC....... 163
2
Clinical Presentation ............................................... 165
2.1 Screening and Diagnosis of HCC............................. 165
2.2 Staging of HCC ......................................................... 167
3
Clinical Applications .............................................. 169
3.1 Patient Selection ........................................................ 171
3.2 Simulation .................................................................. 173
173
173
174
174

4
4.1
4.2
4.3

Treatment Planning ...............................................
Target Volumes Delineation .....................................
Treatment Planning ...................................................
Organ Dose Tolerances .............................................

5

Follow-Up.................................................................. 175

6

Case Example ........................................................... 177

7

Future Directions..................................................... 177

References.......................................................................... 179

Authors’ Contributions This book chapter has been seen,
read, and agreed upon in its content by all the designated
authors.

1

Introduction

An erratum to this chapter is available at
10.1007/978-3-642-25605-9_9645.

1.1

Overview of the Current
Management of HCC

H. R. Cárdenes (&)  F. Lasley
Department of Clinical Radiation Oncology,
Indiana University School of Medicine, 535 Barnhill Dr,
RT 041, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA
e-mail: hcardene@iupui.edu

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most frequently occurring primary tumor of the liver in adults
and the fourth most common cause of cancer-related

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2012_548, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

163

164

deaths in the world (Ferlay et al. 2010). The incidence
of HCC is increasing both in Europe and in the United
States due to the increasing prevalence of hepatitis C
(El-Serag et al. 2003). In the United States it has been
estimated that in 2011 there will be 26,190 new cases
and 19,590 deaths from HCC and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas (CCC) (Siegel et al. 2011). Early
diagnosis of HCC can be achieved by surveillance of
at risk populations (Bruix et al. 2001; Sangiovanni
et al. 2004).
HCC is a very complex malignancy for which
there is limited consensus regarding prognosis and
therapeutic approach. Cirrhosis underlies the majority
of HCC cases, most of which are due to chronic
hepatitis B (HBV) and C virus (HCV) infections. Of
recognized importance when making decisions
regarding the most appropriate management of a
patient with HCC, is the involvement of a multidisciplinary team of hepatologists, hepatobiliary
surgeons, liver transplant team, interventional radiologists, medical and radiation oncologists. In fact,
the appropriate treatment for any given patient with
HCC must take into account unique patient and tumor
characteristics as well as the degree of underlying
liver disease (Bruix et al. 2005).
Despite recent advances in early detection and
diagnosis, only 30–40% of patients with HCC may
benefit from radical therapies, i.e., liver transplantation, surgical resection and percutaneous ablative
therapies. Orthotopic liver transplantation(OLT) offers
the best chance for cure, particularly in patients with
decompensated liver disease. Excellent results can be
achieved in patients who meet the Milan criteria: solitary HCC \ 5 cm, or up to three nodules which are
all smaller than 3 cm; the absence of extrahepatic or
vascular spread (Mazzaferro et al. 1996). The 5-year
survival rate of these early-stage patients exceeds 70%
with recurrence rates of 10–15%. However, a shortage
of sufficient liver donations is the major limitation for
OLT. Surgical resection, the only other potentially
curative option, primarily in non-cirrhotic patients,
results in 5-year survival rates of approximately
50–60%. However, the recurrence rate is very high,
generally noted to be around 50% (Llovet et al. 1999;
Mazzaferro et al. 1996). Thus, minimally invasive
therapies are gaining increasing attention in the
treatment of patients with HCC who are not
surgical candidates, including percutaneous ethanol
injection-ablation (PEI), radiofrequency ablation (RFA),

H. R. Cárdenes and F. Lasley

transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) and selective
intra-arterial hepatic radioembolization using ytrium-90
microspheres (Arii et al. 2000; Liu et al. 2002; Llovet
and Bruix 2003; Salem and Hunter 2006; Vilana
et al. 1992).
Image-guided tumor ablation is recommended in
patients with early-stage HCC when surgical options
are precluded. RFA has shown in meta-analyses of
randomized controlled trials (RCT), superior anticancer effects and greater survival benefit compared
to PEI, particularly in tumors \2 cm, and is currently
established as the standard method for local tumor
treatment (Cho et al. 2009; Germani et al. 2010;
Orlando et al. 2009).
A randomized controlled trial comparing resection versus ablation in patients with Child-TurcottePugh (CTP) class A cirrhosis who have single HCC,
5 cm or less in diameter, has failed to show statistically significant differences in overall survival and
disease-free survival between the two treatment
arms (Chen et al. 2006). Other nonrandomized
investigations have suggested that RFA can achieve
survival rates similar to those of surgical resection,
particularly in patients with CTP class A with small,
solitary tumors at the very-early stage of the Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) classification.
The 5-year survival rates for this patient population
are as high as 51–64%, and may reach 76% in
patients who meet the BCLC criteria for surgical
resection (Arii et al. 2000; Cho et al. 2009; Lencioni
et al. 2005).
Transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE)
had been established as the standard of care for
patients in the intermediate stage of the BCLC staging
system with asymptomatic, noninvasive multinodular
tumors with relatively preserved liver functions,
absence of cancer-related symptoms, and no evidence
of vascular invasion or extrahepatic spread (Bruix
et al. 2005). A meta-analysis has shown that 2-year
survival of patients with HCC not suitable for radical
therapies who are treated with arterial embolization or
chemoembolization is improved compared to
conservative management (Llovet and Bruix 2003;
Llovet et al. 2002).
The recent introduction of embolic microspheres that
have the ability to release drug in a controlled and sustained fashion has been shown to significantly increase
safety and efficacy of TACE with respect to conventional, lipiodol-based regimens (Nicolini et al. 2010).

Primary Liver Cancer

The available data for radioembolization with yttrium90 suggests that this is a potential new option for
patients with HCC, with potential clinical benefit,
although no RCTs have been published so far that
proves the clinical benefit of radioembolization compared to the established treatment options for this
patient population (Carr et al. 2010; Salem et al. 2010).
Despite advances and refinements in loco-regional
approaches, the long-term survival outcomes of
patients managed with interventional techniques are
not fully satisfactory, mainly because of the high rates
of tumor recurrence.
Increased understanding of the molecular signaling
pathways involved in HCC has led to the development of molecular targeted therapies aimed at inhibiting tumor cell proliferation and angiogenesis.
Sorafenib (NexavarÒ), a multikinase inhibitor with
antiangiogenic and antiproliferative properties, has
been shown in a phase III randomized trial, the
SHARP Trial, to prolong median overall survival and
median time to radiological progression compared to
placebo for patients with advanced HCC, CTP class
A, and has become the current standard of care to
patients with advanced-stage tumors not suitable for
surgical or loco-regional therapies (Cheng et al. 2009;
Llovet et al. 2008; Llovet et al. 2007). To date, studies
of sorafenib have demonstrated its efficacy in
advanced HCC; however, there may also be a role for
this agent, or other molecular targeted drugs, in earlier-stage disease, either as adjuvant treatment after
curative therapy or in combination with liver directed
therapies. This has prompted the design of clinical
trials aimed at investigating the synergies between
loco-regional and systemic treatments.
External Beam Radiotherapy (EBRT) for the treatment of unresectable HCC has been attempted for more
than four decades. Early trials involved the use of lowdose whole liver irradiation, generally in combination
with intra-arterial and/or intravenous chemotherapy,
with reported 2-year survival rates of less than 10%
(Abrams et al. 1998; Stillwagon et al. 1989). The use of
three-dimensional radiotherapy (3DCRT) treatment
planning has allowed the safe delivery of higher
radiation doses to limited liver volumes with some
encouraging results (Dawson et al. 2000; Kim et al.
2005; Liu et al. 2004; Mornex et al. 2006; Park et al.
2002; Robertson et al. 1993; Seong et al. 2003).
Unfortunately, only some of these series reported data
on survival ranging from 40 to 60% at one year and

165

20–40% at two years, with grade 3 or higher toxicity up
to 40% in some series (Liu et al. 2004; Mornex et al.
2006; Park et al. 2002). The use of conventional EBRT
in HCC treatment has been limited by the low radiation
tolerance of the cirrhotic liver, that often resulted in
radiation-induced liver disease (Cheng et al. 2002).
Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) is a method
to precisely deliver a high dose of radiation to
an extracranial target within the body, with tumorablative intent, using a single dose or a small number
of fractions. SBRT requires specialized treatment
planning resulting in high target dose and steep dose
gradients beyond the target. Therefore, SBRT
requires highly precise, accurate and reproducible
target localization, possible by the use of ImageGuided Radiotherapy (IGRT) (Cao et al. 2008;
Dawson et al. 2005; Lo et al. 2010; Potters et al.
2004). By precise delivery of high doses of radiation,
SBRT may provide an effective, noninvasive, alternative option for the treatment of selected patients
with HCC that could be potentially associated with
improved outcomes in patients who are not surgical
candidates. This chapter will review the current status
of SBRT in the management of HCC.

2

Clinical Presentation

2.1

Screening and Diagnosis of HCC

Hepatocellular carcinoma commonly occurs in the
setting of liver cirrhosis. Common causes of cirrhosis
that should be screened include Hepatitis B and C,
alcoholic cirrhosis, genetic hemochromatosis, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), alpha-1-antitrypsin
deficiency and stage 4 primary biliary cirrhosis (Bruix
et al. 2011). Hepatitis B carriers are at a risk of
developing HCC even without cirrhosis. Surveillance
for HCC should include serum alpha-feto protein
(AFP) and a screening ultrasound at 6-month
intervals. Although AFP has long been used for the
diagnosis of HCC and it has also been part of
surveillance algorithms, it is insufficiently sensitive or
specific for use as a surveillance assay. Therefore, the
diagnosis of HCC must rely on imaging and histology
(Bruix et al. 2011).
In the past, the diagnosis of HCC was established
histologically, but currently a set of non-invasive
criteria for HCC diagnosis in cirrhotic patients is

166

H. R. Cárdenes and F. Lasley

Fig. 1 Diagnostic algorithm
for suspected HCC.
Computed tomography (CT);
multidetector computed
tomography (MDCT);
magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), ultrasound (US).
Permission has been obtained
from John Wiley and Sons
to reuse this figure

widely accepted (Bruix et al. 2005). Although the
initial guidelines for the diagnosis of HCC were based
on the AFP level and radiological appearance of the
lesion on dynamic CT or MRI scan, currently HCC
can be diagnosed radiologically, without the need for
biopsy if the typical imaging features are present,
independent of the AFP level (Bruix et al. 2005). This
requires a contrast enhanced study (dynamic CT scan
or MR). In the arterial phase, HCC is more intensely
enhancing than the surrounding liver. This is because
the arterial blood in the liver is diluted by venous
blood that does not contain contrast, whereas the HCC
contains only arterial blood. In the venous phase, the
HCC is less enhanced than the surrounding liver. This
is because HCC does not have a portal blood supply
and the arterial blood flowing through the lesion no
longer contains contrast, while the portal blood in the
liver now contains contrast. This is known as
‘‘washout,’’ although the term does not really describe
the sequence of events. In the delayed phase,
the presence of ‘‘washout’’ persists. Sometimes
‘‘washout’’ is only present in the delayed phase. The
presence of arterial uptake followed by washout is
highly specific for HCC. This has been validated even

for lesions up to 1 cm (Forner et al. 2008). Thus, to
properly document the existence of HCC, a 4-phase
study is required: unenhanced, arterial, venous and
delayed phases. The presence of arterial hypervascularity alone is insufficient, while the presence of
venous washout is essential.
Thus, the current recommendations for the
diagnosis of HCC are (Bruix et al. 2005) (Fig. 1):
1. For lesions smaller than 1 cm, the recommendations remain unchanged. No detailed investigation
is required, because most of these will be cirrhotic
nodules rather than HCC. However, close followup at 3-month intervals is recommended using the
technique that first documented the presence of the
nodules. If these were detected by screening on
ultrasound, then it is recommended that ultrasound
be the technique of follow-up. If there has been no
growth over a period of up to two years, one can
revert to routine surveillance.
2. Lesions above 1 cm in diameter should be investigated further with either a 4-phase multidetector
CT scan or dynamic contrast enhanced MRI. If the
appearances are typical for HCC on either MRI
or CT scan, as described above, then no further

Primary Liver Cancer

investigation is required and the diagnosis of HCC
is confirmed. If the appearances are not typical for
HCC (and do not suggest hemangioma), then one
of two strategies is possible. A second contrast
enhanced study with the other imaging modality
should be performed. If the appearances are
typical, the diagnosis is confirmed. Alternatively,
an atypical study could trigger a biopsy.
3. The presence of a hypovascular lesion (a lesion
that enhances less than the surrounding liver both
on arterial and venous phase imaging), only a
diagnostic problem for small lesions (defined as
\2 cm in diameter). Pathological study has shown
that the reason for their apparent hypovascularity
is that these lesions have a dual blood supply.
However, dysplastic nodules also may show
unpaired arteries and a reduced portal supply.
Therefore, a biopsy is required to distinguish
dysplastic nodules from HCC. Unfortunately, even
with a needle biopsy, the hallmark features that
distinguish a high-grade dysplastic nodule from
HCC, namely stromal invasion, may not be
detected. Larger HCCs may also be hypovascular.
These may also need biopsy, although the diagnosis will usually be evident without biopsy.
When it is necessary to obtain a histopathological
diagnosis, biopsies of small lesions should be evaluated by an expert pathologist. Tissue that is not clearly
HCC should be stained with all the available markers,
including CD34, CK7, glypican 3, HSP-70, and glutamine synthetase to improve diagnostic accuracy. If
the biopsy is negative for patients with HCC, the
lesion should be followed by imaging at 3–6 month
intervals until the nodule either disappears, enlarges or
displays diagnostic characteristics of HCC. If the
lesion enlarges but remains atypical for HCC a repeat
biopsy is recommended (Bruix et al. 2005).
Once the diagnosis of HCC has been confirmed,
additional laboratory studies should include a hepatitis
B and C panel, baseline liver and renal function tests,
coagulation tests (PT/INR), albumin, complete blood
count with differential and platelets levels, chest
imaging (preferably a chest CT scan) and bone scan if
clinically indicated. Positron emission tomography
(PET) scan has been shown to be useful in detecting
extra-hepatic disease as well as a predictor for
response to therapy and detecting recurrence in HCC
(Cascales Campos et al. 2011; Kim et al. 2011;
Kornberg et al. 2011; Lin et al. 2011).

167

As previously indicated, it is important to involve
a multidisciplinary team when making decisions
regarding the most appropriate management of a
patient with HCC. This team should be comprised of
hepatologists, hepatobiliary surgeons, liver transplant
team, interventional radiologists and medical and
radiation oncologists. In fact, the appropriate treatment
for any given patient with HCC must take into account
unique patient and tumor characteristics as well as the
degree of underlying liver disease. The hepatologist is
actively involved in the initial diagnosis, assessment of
the patient’s liver function, decisions about what form
of therapy is most appropriate based on the patient’s
liver function, and management of the liver disease
before and during treatment.

2.2

Staging of HCC

There is no worldwide consensus on the use of any
given HCC staging system. Although in solid tumors
the prognosis is generally related to tumor stage, in
HCC it is greatly influenced as well by the underlying
liver dysfunction. To best assess the prognosis of
patients with HCC it is recommended that the staging
system takes into account tumor stage, liver function
and performance status, as well as the impact of
treatment.
Historically, HCC has been staged by the TNM (Edge
et al. 2009) (Table 1) or Okuda staging systems (Okuda
et al. 1985). Neither of these is useful in determining a
prognosis with the most adequate forms of therapy,
particularly in patients with early or intermediate stage
disease. The Child-Turcotte-Pugh’s Class (CTP), which
is also frequently referred to as Child-Pugh class, (Pugh
et al. 1973) (Table 2) and the Model for End-Stage Liver
Disease (MELD) system (Christensen 2004; Kamath
et al. 2001) only consider liver function. Among all the
proposed schemas, the BCLC system (Bruix et al. 2004)
and the Cancer of the Liver Italian Program (CLIP)
(CLIP 1998) are the most commonly used.
The BCLC system (Bruix et al. 2004; Llovet et al.
1999) (Fig. 2) includes variables related to tumor
stage, liver function status, physical status and cancerrelated status. The main advantage is that it links
staging with treatment modalities and estimation of life
expectancy. Very-early-stage HCC includes single
nodule \2cm, CTP-A patients. Early-stage HCC
includes single nodule B5 cm or up to three nodules

168

H. R. Cárdenes and F. Lasley

Table 1 American Joint Committee on cancer: cancer staging (Edge et al. 2009)
Primary tumor
(T)

Description

T1

Solitary tumor without vascular invasion

T2

Solitary tumor with vascular invasion or multiple tumors none more than 5 cm

T3a

Multiple tumors more than 5 cm

T3b

Single tumor or multiple tumors of any size involving a major branch of the portal vein or hepatic vein

T4

Tumors with direct invasion of adjacent organs other than the gallbladder or with perforation of visceral
peritoneum

N1

Regional lymph nodes

M1

Distant metastasis

Stage grouping

T-stage

N-stage

M-stage

Stage I

T1

N0

M0

Stage II

T2

N0

M0

Stage IIIA

T3a

N0

M0

Stage IIIB

T3b

N0

M0

Stage IIIC

T4

N0

M0

Stage IVA

Any T

N1

M0

Stage IVB

Any T

Any N

M0

Note When compared to the 6th edition of the AJCC staging manual, the major difference is that T3 (2002) was split into T3a and
T3b to account for differences between size and vascular invasion. T3b was moved to stage group IIIB which is pushed T4 into
group IIIC. Stage group IV was split to include N1 disease (moved up from IIIC to IVa) and IVb is for M1 disease

Table 2 Child-Turcotte-Pugh’s Class (CTP)
Measure

1 point

2 points

3 points

Total bilirubin (mg/dl)

\2

2–3

[3

Serum albumin (g/dl)

[3.5

2.8–3.5

\2.8

INR

\1.7

1.71–2.20

[2.20

Ascites

None

Mild

Severe

Hepatic encephalopathy

None

Grade I–II (or suppressed with medication

Grade III–IV (or refractory)

B3 cm, CTP-A or -B patients. In both of these stages,
patients are considered for radical therapies such as
resection, liver transplantation or percutaneous tumor
ablation, with 5-year survival rates of 50–75% for early
HCC and almost 100% for very-early HCC. Intermediate stage HCC consists of CTP-A or -B patients
with large/multifocal HCC, asymptomatic without
vascular invasion or extrahepatic spread. These
patients have an estimated 3-year survival of 30%
without therapy and they are generally considered for
chemoembolization. Patients with symptomatic HCC,
vascular invasion or extrahepatic spread are included
in the advanced disease category, and have a shorter

life expectancy (1 year, 50%) and may be candidates
for clinical trials. Finally, patients with end-stage disease (CTP-C) or extensive disease leading to severe
deterioration of performance status are considered for
supportive care only, since their estimated median
survival is less than 3 months. To best assess the
prognosis of HCC patients it is recommended that the
staging system take into account tumor stage, liver
function and physical status. The impact of treatment
should also be considered when estimating life
expectancy. Currently, the BCLC system is the only
staging system that accomplishes these aims (Bruix
et al. 2011).

Primary Liver Cancer

Fig. 2 The Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) staging
system for HCC. Metastasis (M) classification; node classification (N); performance status (PS); radiofrequency ablation

3

Clinical Applications

According to the American Association for the Study
of Liver Diseases, there are three potentially curative
options for the treatment of primary HCC: orthotopic
liver transplant, surgical resection and percutaneous
radiofrequency ablation (Bruix et al. 2011). Unfortunately, only a small percentage of all patients with
HCC are candidates for liver transplant. In addition,
due to advanced cirrhosis or unfavorable tumor
location, many patients will not be eligible for
resection or ablation.
The role of external beam radiation therapy in the
management of HCC has remained limited for
two reasons. First, there are concerns regarding
radiation-induced liver disease (RILD), as well as
dose-limiting complications of liver irradiation, particularly in patients with HCC-complicating liver
cirrhosis. Second, there exists more efficient, or less

169

(RFA); transarterial chemoembolization (TACE). Permission
has been obtained from John Wiley and Sons to reuse this
figure

time-consuming, treatment options (Cheng et al.
2002; Dawson et al. 2002; Lawrence et al. 1992; Liu
et al. 2004; Mornex et al. 2006; Park et al. 2002).
SBRT , with an increasingly impressive record of
safely delivering ablative doses of hypofractionated
radiation to tumors within otherwise radiosensitive
organs, appears a more appealing treatment option
that overcomes some of these limitations. Several
series have been published in the literature regarding
the role of SBRT in liver malignancies; however,
most of them include a majority of patients who have
liver metastasis and are non-cirrhotic. Rusthoven
et al. reported on a phase II study investigating the
role of SBRT for liver metastases (60 Gy in three
fractions), with a 2-year local control (LC) of 93%
without grade 3 or higher toxicity (Rusthoven
et al. 2009). Similarly, Herfarth et al. using a single
fraction of 14–26 Gy, which included one HCC
and three cholangiocarcinomas, reported 1-year LC
of 82% for 56 liver tumors, without severe toxicity

170

(Herfarth et al. 2001). Although these studies, among
others reviewed in detail in ‘‘Liver Metastasis’’ by
Stinauer et al. this volume, have confirmed the safety
and efficacy of SBRT for metastatic lesions in an
otherwise healthy liver, similar data for HCC is only
recently maturing.
One of the earliest studies examining hypofractionated radioablative doses for HCC is documented
in a paper by Blomgren et al. (Blomgren et al. 1998).
SBRT was administered in nine patients with HCC
carcinomas, one with an intrahepatic bile duct cancer
and one with an embryonic cancer. A total of 20
tumors were treated in the 11 patients. The total
minimum doses within the target volume varied from
15 to 45 Gy. Treatment was delivered during one to
three sessions with 5–15 Gy per fraction (minimum
dose to the target). Stable disease was observed in five
tumors, reduction in size in 12 tumors, and disappearance in 2 at 12 months’ mean follow-up, for an
overall 70% response rate (10% CR). All patients
developed fever (up to 38.5°C) and nausea for a few
hours after treatment. One patient died two days after
a single dose of 30 Gy to a large HCC in the left liver
lobe; an autopsy was not performed. Two patients
developed ascites within three to six weeks of SBRT
and died (presumably from liver failure).
Méndez Romero et al. published the results of a
phase I–II trial that included a total of 45 lesions
(34 metastatic and 11 HCC). Patients with metastases,
HCC without cirrhosis and HCC \ 4 cm with cirrhosis received 3 fractions of 12.5 Gy, whereas
patients with cirrhosis and/or HCC C 4 cm received
5 9 5 Gy or 3 9 10 Gy (prescription isodose 65%).
Local control at one and two years for the entire
group was 94 and 82%, respectively. Grade C3 was
higher in patients with HCC and CPC-B related liver
cirrhosis (Mendez Romero et al. 2006).
In a prospective Phase I trial conducted at the
University of Toronto, Tse et al. (2008) treated 31
patients with HCC with CTP-A, and 10 patients with
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas with SBRT using
an individualized dose prescription with a median
dose of 36.0 Gy (24.0–54.0 Gy) over 6 fractions; dose
prescription was based on the volume of liver irradiated and the estimated risk of liver toxicity, using the
NTCP model (Dawson et al. 2002; Lawrence et al.
1992). No RILD or treatment-related grade 4/5 toxicity was seen within three months after SBRT. Grade
3 liver enzymes were seen in five patients (12%).

H. R. Cárdenes and F. Lasley

Seven patients (five HCC, two IHC) had a decline in
liver function from CTP-A to -B within 3 months
after SBRT. Median survival of HCC and IHC
patients was 11.7 months (95% CI, 9.2–21.6 months)
and 15.0 months (95% CI, 6.5–29.0 months),
respectively. The 1-year LC and OS survival were 65
and 48%, respectively.
Choi et al. treated 20 patients with HCC, the
majority CTP Class A with an average size 3.8 cm,
delivering 50 Gy in five to ten fractions (16). They
reported no episodes of severe toxicity, with 1-year
rates of LC and OS of 80 and 70%, respectively. The
treatment was well tolerated with no grade C3 toxicities (Choi et al. 2006). Later, from the same institution, Kwon et al. reported on 42 patients with both
CTP class A and B with a median volume 15.4 cc and
a median dose of 36 Gy in three fractions that showed
72% of patients having either partial or complete
response with only one grade 1 liver toxicity. On
multivariate analysis, tumor volume \32 cc was
associated with improved survival. Initial in-field
response, in field progression and Child-Pugh score
were significant on univariate analysis but not on
multivariate analysis (Kwon et al. 2010).
Seo et al. (2010) published a dose escalation trial
of patients with inoperable HCC with diameters
[10 cm who received SBRT as a salvage treatment
after failure from TACE. SBRT dosages were
administered based on tumor volume and ranged
33–57 Gy in three fractions for tumors \300 cc and
40–44 Gy in four fractions for tumors 301–500 cc.
There were 34 patients with CPC-A and four patients
with CPC-B. Median follow-up was 15 months.
Response measured at three months showed 63.1%
local response and 7.9% progressive disease. Eventually, 22 out of 38 patients progressed, with regional
failures being most common. One-, two- and threeyear overall survival rates were 68.4, 61.4 and 42.1%
respectively. On multivariate analysis, it was found
that a dose C42 Gy in three fractions was an independent prognostic factor for overall survival.
At Indiana University Simon Cancer Center
(IUSCC), we developed a phase I-II trial investigating
the role of SBRT in patients with HCC (Cárdenes et al.
2010). In the phase I dose escalation study, 17 patients
with 25 lesions were enrolled. Dose was escalated from
36 to 48 Gy in three fractions in CTP-A patients
without dose-limiting toxicity (DLT). Two patients
with CTP-B disease developed grade 3 hepatic toxicity

Primary Liver Cancer

at the 42 Gy (14 Gy/fraction) level. The protocol was
amended for subsequent CTP-B patients to receive a
regimen of five fractions starting at 40 Gy (8 Gy/fraction) with one patient experiencing progressive liver
failure. Four additional patients were enrolled (one
died of unrelated causes after an incomplete SBRT
course) without DLT. The only factor related to more
than one grade 3 or greater liver toxicity or death within
six months was the CTP score (p = 0.03). Six patients
underwent a liver transplant. Ten patients are alive
without progression with a median FU of 24 months
(10–42 months), with LC/stabilization of the disease of
100%. One- and two-year Kaplan–Meier estimates for
overall survivals were 75 and 60%, respectively. Our
phase I study demonstrated that SBRT is a well tolerated therapy in adequately selected patients with HCC,
with encouraging preliminary local control and survival. (Cárdenes et al. 2010). A confirmatory phase II
trial is currently open to accrual. The current phase II
trial delivers 16 Gy 9 3 fractions (48 Gy total dose) for
CTP-A patients and 8 Gy 9 5 fractions to eligible
patients with CTP-B.
Andolino et al. from Indiana University recently
published the largest series to date of HCC treated
with SBRT, including 60 patients with both CTP class
A and B liver cirrhosis (Andolino et al. 2011). In line
with the previously described studies, our data further
support the safety of SBRT for HCC, with only 13%
of all patients with a CTP score B7 experiencing
an increase of \1 grade in hematologic/hepatic
dysfunction. There was a relationship between pretreatment CTP score and development of toxicity in
any form (p = 0.035) and the occurrence of an
increase in \1 grade in hematologic/hepatic dysfunction (p = 0.008). Our findings suggest that SBRT
may not be safe for patients with a CTP score C8.
Whereas four of eight patients with a score C8
developed progressive liver failure during or shortly
after treatment, two of those four patients had
received a dose of 42 Gy at 14 Gy per fraction as part
of a prior phase I dose escalation study. This fractionation scheme was subsequently deemed unsafe for
patients with CTP class B cirrhosis and is no longer
used for this population. Nonetheless, we suggest
limiting SBRT for patients with a CTP score C8 to
those who are already listed for transplant.
For those patients not listed for transplant, our
current eligibility criteria include one to three lesions,
maximum tumor diameter B6 cm, and CTP class A or

171

B with score B7. Censoring patients at the time of
transplant, we have shown a 2-year LC rate of 90%,
with median LC not yet achieved. This number
compares favorably to the reported rates of 2-year LC
obtained with percutaneous ethanol injection, radiofrequency ablation and transarterial chemoembolization: 70–85, 85–98 and 60–70%, respectively, for
lesions B3 cm (Chok et al. 2006; Lencioni et al.
2005; Shiina et al. 2005; Takayasu 2010). Considering that 50% of the lesions in this series were [3 cm,
for which the rates of LC achieved with radiofrequency ablation fell to approximately 80% or less, our
results for SBRT seem even more encouraging (Poon
et al. 2004; Yin et al. 2009). Equally notable, and
perhaps more clinically relevant, is the median time to
progression (TTP) of four years for the entire cohort
and three years for the non-transplanted population.
These rates are comparable to those obtained with
percutaneous ablation and surgical resection, and they
exceed the quoted rate of 10–27 months after transarterial chemoembolization or radioembolization for
similarly sized lesions (Bronowicki et al. 1996; Chok
et al. 2006; Salem et al. 2010).
The impact on overall survival relative to other liver
directed therapies remains to be determined. The heterogeneity of the population, especially with regard to
the severity of liver cirrhosis and the presence or
absence of extensive comorbidities, precludes an
accurate comparison of overall survival, and formal
phase II/III investigations are required before comparisons can be made.
In conclusion, SBRT is a noninvasive, safe
and effective modality for the treatment of HCC
B 6 cm, and as such warrants greater recognition as a
viable option in the management of this malignancy
(Table 3). At IUSCC, SBRT is now considered to
be the primary option for bridging to transplant, provided the patient meets eligibility criteria. It is also
strongly considered for first-line definitive therapy
when transplant is not an option with one to three
lesions up to 6 cm (Andolino et al. 2011; Cárdenes
et al. 2010).

3.1

Patient Selection

Once staging, hepatic function and performance status
have been properly evaluated, patients should be
discussed in a multidisciplinary conference that

Histology

HCC
CCC

HCC
CCC

HCC
CPC A
and B

HCC

HCC
CPC A

HCC
CPC A
and B

HCC
CPC A
and B

HCC
CPC A
and B

Author

(Blomgren et al.
1998)

(Herfarth et al. 2001)

(Choi et al. 2006)

(Mendez Romero
et al. 2006)

(Tse et al. 2008)

(Kwon et al. 2010)

(Seo et al. 2010)
(SBRT salvage)

(Andolino et al.
2011)
(IU series)

3 9 11–19 Gy or
4 9 10–11 Gy for
C300cc
(80% isodose line)

38
(34A, 4B)

Median Dose 44 Gy
(30–48) in 3 fxns for
CPC A and 40 Gy in
5 fxns for CPC B
(80% isodose line)

Median dose 36 Gy
(30–39 Gy) in 3 fxns
Median 80% isodose
line

42
(38A, 4B)

60
(36A, 24B)

Median dose 30.6 Gy
(24–54 Gy) in 6 fxns

31 (CPC A)

5 9 5 Gy, 3 9 10 Gy
or 3 9 12.5 Gy

50 Gy in 5–10
fractions (fxns)

20
(15A, 5B)
8 (6A, 2B)

1 9 14–26 Gy (80%
iso)

3 9 10 Gy or
2 9 15 Gy

Dose

1
3

11

Number of
patients

Table 3 Literature review. Role of SBRT in HCC

2–112 (29)

ITV
11–464
(40.5)

3–81.8
(15.4)

9–1913
(173)

1.1–322
(22.2)

2–6.5 cm
(3.8 cm)

1–132 (10)

3–622 (22)

GTV vol
(Median cc)

27

15

28.7

17.6

12.9

23

6

12

Median
FU (m)

90%

63% at 3 months
(only 7. 2% local
failure)

72%

1y LC 65%

75%

80%

100%
95%

Local Control

13% grade 2+ hepatic or
hematologic
toxicity and 20%
experienced
progression of CTP class
within 3 months

22 grade 1–2 hepatic or
GI (58%). 1 grade 3 soft
tissue.
0% RILD

1 Grade 4 liver failure.
30–34% grade 1–2 acute
toxicity

16% progressed to CPC B

18% RILD

0%

0%

10%; 2pts died; 1 peritonitis
(rapid tumor necrosis) 1 liver
failure (advanced cirrhosis)

Severe toxicity

2yr 67%
MST 44m

1yr 68.4%
2yr 61.4%
3yr 42.1%
MST 32m

1yr 92.9%
3yr 58.6%

1y 48%
MST
11.7m

1y 75%
2y 40%

1y 70%
2y 43%

MST
13.4m
HCC
17.8m

Crude
65%

Overall
survival

172
H. R. Cárdenes and F. Lasley

Primary Liver Cancer

includes surgery, interventional radiology, radiation
oncology and a member of the transplant services and
should include a discussion of which patients may be
safely resected or move to a transplant list. Generally
patients are considered for SBRT who have well
compensated liver function status with at least a CTP
score of 7 or lower. Scores of 8 or higher are at much
higher risk of significant decline in liver function after
SBRT (Cárdenes et al. 2010).
Most institutional studies have only treated
patients with one to three lesions up to 5 or 6 cm
(Andolino et al. 2011; Choi et al. 2008). However,
Seo et al. (2010) published their experience using
SBRT in 38 patients with tumors up to 10 cm as
salvage therapy after TACE. SBRT dosages
(33–57 Gy in three or four fractions) were administered according to tumor volumes, which ranged from
11 to 464 ml (median, 40.5 ml). The two-year overall
survival and local progression-free survival rates were
61.4 and 66.4%, respectively. The local response rate
was 63% at three months after SBRT. A decline in
liver function was observed in 16% of patients.
In addition to the previous factors, it is important
to keep technical considerations in mind when
selecting patients for SBRT. These include proximity
to stomach, small intestine or large intestine, which
would increase the likelihood of toxicity. In addition,
the presence of uncontrolled ascites is considered,
in our experience, a contraindication for SBRT
since it severely limits daily setup reproducibility and
accuracy in treatment delivery.

3.2

Simulation

Patients should be simulated in a stereotactic immobilization frame that utilizes a coordinate system
based on fixed fiducials allowing isocenter set-up at
time of treatment via predefined coordinates. The
LeibingerÒ frame, ElektaÒ frame and Novalis brainlab ExacTracÒ system are acceptable examples of
such immobilization that are FDA approved.
An alternative to the use of a stereotactic frame
would be implanted fiducials. However, this is an
invasive procedure and may subject the patient to
additional risk. In patients with HCC it has been
recognized that there is a potential risk of bleeding
and needle track seeding in patients undergoing
thin needle liver biopsy, since these are for the most

173

part, highly vascularized tumors (Silva et al. 2008;
Stigliano et al. 2007). Whether this risk is the same or
not when placing fiducials in the tumor or in its
proximity is unknown. At our institution, we do not
favor that fiducial placement, since it may even
compromise safety of potential OLT.
At the time of simulation, the excursion of the right
dome of the diaphragm (superior portion of the liver)
should be observed under fluoroscopy or 4D CT to
estimate liver motion and determine the required
expansion when delineating the Planning Target
Volume (PTV) from the Gross Tumor Volume (GTV).
Ideally, patients should be assessed for suitability for
Active Breathing Control (ABC) or diaphragmatic
control device. Patients with severe lung disease and
patients who cannot tolerate diaphragmatic or
breathing control devices can be treated without them.
However, they will require a larger margin to account
for breathing related intra-fractional organ movement,
resulting in a larger internal target volume (ITV). IV
contrast enhanced volumetric CT scans with 2–3 mm
slice intervals should be done either during the simulation or within close time proximity in a dedicated
diagnostic CT scanner. The patient should be in the
treatment position in the stereotactic frame, with the
ABC or diaphragmatic control device in place. It is
very important to obtain a triphasic CT scan with the
patient in the treatment position since HCC is better
visualized in the arterial phase of the study. The CT
scan should extend through the whole liver and down
below the kidneys. Therefore, we recommend scanning from the carina down to the iliac crests. Oral GI
contrast to opacify the stomach and duodenum should
be used for patients with peripheral-medial liver
lesions or lesions of the caudate lobe.

4

Treatment Planning

4.1

Target Volumes Delineation

Treatment planning volumes should be delineated using
the definitions from ICRU Report 50 (International
Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements
(ICRU) 1993) and ICRU Report 62 (International
Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements
(ICRU) 1999) for GTV, CTV, PTV and organs at risk
(OAR). GTV is defined as all known gross disease
identified by the planning CT, diagnostic triphasic CT

174

H. R. Cárdenes and F. Lasley

and/or MRI and clinical information and the GTV (s)
may be discontinuous. When treating HCC with SBRT,
the CTV should essentially be equivalent to the GTV.
Internal target volume (ITV) takes into account the
internal movement of the target lesion, primarily related
to patient’s breathing. This can be minimized with
respiratory gating, breath hold or compression devices.
At Indiana University, we use a compression device
affixed to the stereotactic frame, to attempt limiting the
diaphragmatic excursion to[1 cm in the cranio-caudal
extent while visualizing under fluoroscopic guidance or
4D CT. The PTV takes into account treatment setup
uncertainty and as well as patient’s breathing motion
(ITV). Achievable accuracies for the liver range from
1.8 to 5 mm (Benedict et al. 2010; Fuss et al. 2004;
Herfarth et al. 2001; Wulf et al. 2000). Therefore, most
common PTV values often range from 2 to 5 mm
around the ITV (Benedict et al. 2010; Choi et al.
2008; Seo et al. 2010). At Indiana University, we
use a PTV surrounding the GTV that consists of 5 mm
axially and 10 mm craniocaudal expansion. If breathing
control is not feasible for whatever reason, the margins
will need to be expanded to take this into account.

4.2

Treatment Planning

In contrast to traditional radiotherapy, hotspots are
desired within the PTV, potentially providing additional
benefit by overcoming the higher radioresistance of the
hypoxic tumor cells more prominent at the center of the
tumor. Doses are often prescribed to a lower isodose line
(usually 80%) encompassing the surface of the PTV, with
very little margin for beam penumbra at the target edge
and a rapid dose falloff, thereby sparing nearby organs at
risk (Benedict et al. 2010).
When planning liver SBRT, it is often best to use
multiple (5–10) highly conformal beams, with noncoplanar arrangements that avoid opposition of fields,
and intensity modulation to create a parabolic beam
entrance profile; this approach will aid in achieving a
sharp dose falloff outside the PTV. The parabolic
entrance profile can be accomplished with field-in-field
technique or electronic compensation (Papiez et al.
2003).
In addition, some form of image-guided radiation
therapy (IGRT) must be used in order to improve
set-up accuracy and treatment delivery (Cao et al.
2008; Dawson et al. 2005).

4.3

Organ Dose Tolerances

Due to the ablative dose levels, the normal tissue
constraints that have been developed for conventionally fractionated radiation cannot be used. The
knowledge of normal tissue tolerances for ablative
doses of radiation is still limited but growing. Organs
at risk may be separated into parallel and serial tissues.
Parallel tissues are characterized by compartmentalization and the ability to carry on physiologic function
even when portions of the organ have been completely
ablated. Examples include lung, liver and kidneys.
Dose constraints are very volume dependent in these
cases. On the other hand, serial organs function in a
chain, and if any portion is ablated, the entire organ is
at risk of losing physiologic capability; these include
spinal cord, ribs and gastro-intestinal tract.
Unlike liver metastasis, HCCs often have underlying liver disease and thus, these patients are thought
to have a lower threshold for eliciting symptomatic
liver toxicity. Therefore, dose constraints for normal
liver in HCC should be more conservative than in the
treatment of metastatic liver lesions. At Indiana
University, based on our published experience for
patients with CTP-A liver cirrhosis, the dose to
one-third of the uninvolved liver is restricted to B10
Gy, (3.3 Gy/fxn) and C500 cc of uninvolved liver
should receive \7 Gy (2.3 Gy/fxn). For patients with
CTP-B cirrhosis, dose to one-third of the uninvolved
liver is restricted to B18 Gy (3.6 Gy/fxn), and
C500 cc of uninvolved liver should receive \12 Gy
(2.4 Gy/fxn) (Andolino et al. 2011; Cárdenes et al.
2010). There is a strong correlation between radiation-induced liver toxicity and CTP score. In the
analysis of the 60 patients treated up to 2009, we have
shown that among patients with CTP score B7, only
12% experienced an increase of \1 grade of hematologic or hepatic toxicity. Our experience has also
suggested that SBRT may not be safe for patients with
CTP score of 8 or greater unless they are already
listed for transplant. In our analysis, of eight patients
with CTP score of 8 or greater, 4 progressed to liver
failure and 2 of those 4 died (Andolino et al. 2011).
Son et al. (2010) found that the only significant
dosimetric parameter on multivariate analysis related
to grade C2 liver toxicity was total liver volume
receiving [18 Gy. The risk of progression of liver
dysfunction rose sharply if the amount of liver
receiving [18 Gy fell below 800 cc.

Primary Liver Cancer

Andolino et al. (2011) suggested that in order to
minimize rib/chest wall toxicity including pain or fracture, the maximal dose should remain \50 Gy and the
dose received by 5 cc of chest wall should be \40 Gy.
Other constraints include: a maximal cord dose to be kept
lower than 600 cGy per fraction, for a total of 18 Gy in
three fractions;[2/3 of the right kidney to receive no\15
Gy total dose, and [1/3 of the left kidney to receive no
\15 Gy total dose (Cárdenes et al. 2010).
Data on organ toxicity with SBRT are lacking.
Therefore recommendations regarding OAR tolerance
doses are primarily based on institutional experience,
toxicity observations and radiobiological models. The
following is a table of suggested organ tolerances
based on our experience here at IU as well as Dr
Timmerman’s personal communication (Table 4).

5

Follow-Up

Patients should be followed regularly during and after
completion of SBRT for HCC in order to assess
toxicity as well as response to therapy. Expected
toxicity includes fatigue, nausea and vomiting which
should gradually subside over several months to days.
The most significant toxicity derived from this therapy is RILD. Therefore, we strongly recommend
clinical and laboratory evaluation prior to each fraction of SBRT, at one month after completion of
therapy and every three months interval once therapy
has been completed.
Similar to surveillance, multiphase MRI or triphasic CT scans are the imaging modality of choice for
follow-up of treated liver tumors. There is very little
data on the use of FDG-PET or post-SBRT follow-up
at this time and due to inadequacy of PET for HCC
surveillance, it cannot be recommended as a solitary
modality in the absence of multiphase CT or MRI.
Because of continued risk of new tumors, patients
should have follow-up scans with at least the same
frequency as surveillance for high-risk individuals,
preferably every three months. Ideally, one should use
the same modality as initial surveillance in order to
make direct comparisons to pre-treatment scans and
also to more adequately search for changes in normal
liver that may indicate new tumors. Three different
reactions have been nicely described after SBRT to
liver lesions which likely represent the same type of
reaction that changes over time (Herfarth et al. 2003).

175

There are few data on the radiologic correlates of
response for HCC. Historically, many trials have used
the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
(RECIST) to grade response (Therasse et al. 2000).
Since 2001, the European Association for the Study of
the Liver (EASL) has suggested that assessment of
tumor necrosis, as recognized by non-enhanced areas
by spiral CT, should be considered the optimal
method to assess local response (Bruix et al. 2001).
A recent report assessed the concordance between
RECIST and EASL guidelines for evaluating response
to local therapies. It concluded that RECIST missed all
complete responses and underestimated the extent of
partial tumor response (Forner et al. 2009). Table 5
displays the current criteria of response to SBRT.
Price et al. recently published the Indiana University
experience on 26 patients with HCC evaluating the
response after SBRT (Price et al. 2011). Those patients,
all of whom were not surgical candidates, were enrolled
in a phase I-II trial conducted at Indiana University. All
patients had imaging before, at one to three months, and
every three to six months after SBRT. Median followup was 13 months. Per RECIST, four patients had a
complete response (CR), 15 had a partial response (PR),
and 7 achieved stable disease (SD) at 12 months. One
patient with SD experienced progression marginal to
the treated area. The overall best response rate (CR +
PR) was 73%. In comparison, by EASL criteria, 18 of
26 patients had C50% nonenhancement at 12 months.
Thirteen of those18 patients demonstrated 100% nonenhancement, and five patients had [50% nonenhancement. Kaplan–Meier 1- and 2-year survival
estimates were 77 and 60%, respectively. The authors
concluded that SBRT is effective therapy for patients
with HCC with an overall best response rate (CR + PR)
of 73%. Reduced vascularity or nonenhancement on
imaging, a surrogate for ablation, may be a more useful
indicator than size reduction in evaluating HCC
response to SBRT in the first 6 to 12 months, supporting
EASL criteria (Price et al. 2011).
Zook et al. subsequently analyzed the radiological
and pathological correlation in 24 patients with
33 lesions consistent with HCC, treated at Indiana
University with liver SBRT followed by OLT. Based
on their results, EASL criteria has a better specificity
and positive predictive value for predicting progressive or stable disease than either RECIST criteria or
WHO criteria; RECIST criteria had greater specificity
and positive predictive value for predicting a CR

8.4 Gy

10.6 Gy

1,000cc

200cc

\2/3 vol

Lung

Renal
Cortex

Renal
Hilum

7.4 Gy

23 Gy

\10cc

Skin

10 Gy
7 Gy

\0.35cc
\1.2cc

Spinal
Cord

16 Gy

14.3 Gy

\20cc

Colon

31 Gy

11.9 Gy

\5cc

Jejunum/
ileum

\15cc

11.2 Gy
9 Gy

\5cc
\10cc

Duodenum

\10cc

11.2 Gy

\10cc

Stomach

Heart

11.9 Gy

\5cc

Esophagus

Great
vessels

Vol max

Volume

Tissue

1 Fraction

N/A

N/A

N/A

26 Gy

37 Gy

22 Gy

14 Gy

18.4 Gy

15.4 Gy

12.4 Gy

12.4 Gy

15.4 Gy

Max point dose

18.6 Gy

14.4 Gy

11.4 Gy

30 Gy

39 Gy

24 Gy

18 Gy
12.3 Gy

24 Gy

17.7 Gy

16.5 Gy
11.4 Gy

16.5 Gy

17.7 Gy

Vol max

3 Fractions

Table 4 Dose constraints for SBRT based on number of fractions

N/A

N/A

N/A

33 Gy

45 Gy

30 Gy

21.9 Gy

28.2 Gy

25.2 Gy

22.2 Gy

22.2 Gy

25.2 Gy

Max point dose

21 Gy

16 Gy

12.4 Gy

33.2 Gy

43 Gy

28 Gy

20.8 Gy
13.6 Gy

24 Gy

18.8 Gy

17.6 Gy
12 Gy

17.6 Gy

18.8 Gy

Vol max

4 Fractions

N/A

N/A

N/A

36 Gy

49 Gy

34 Gy

26 Gy

33.2 Gy

30 Gy

27.2 Gy

27.2 Gy

30 Gy

Max point dose

23 Gy

17.5 Gy

13.5 Gy

36.5 Gy

47 Gy

32 Gy

23 Gy
14.5 Gy

25 Gy

19.5 Gy

18 Gy
12.5 Gy

18 Gy

19.5 Gy

Vol max

5 Fractions

N/A

N/A

N/A

39.5 Gy

53 Gy

38 Gy

30 Gy

38 Gy

35 Gy

32 Gy

32 Gy

35 Gy

Max point dose

Malignant
hypertension

Basic renal function

Pneumonitis

Ulceration

Aneurysm

Pericarditis

Myelitis

Colitis/fistula

Enteritis/obstruction

Ulceration

Ulceration/fistula

Stenosis/fistula

Endpoint (CGrade 3)

176
H. R. Cárdenes and F. Lasley

Primary Liver Cancer

177

Table 5 Definition of response using WHO, RECIST, and EASL criteria (Bruix et al. 2001; Eisenhauer et al. 2009; Miller et al.
1981)
Best
response

WHO
(change in sum of products)

RECIST
(change in sums longest
diameter)

EASL
(change in enhancement)

CR

Disappearance (confirmed
at 4 weeks)

Disappearance
(confirmed at 4 weeks)

Absence of enhancing tumor areas, reflecting
complete tissue necrosis

PR

50% decrease
(confirmed at 4 weeks)

30% decrease (confirmed at
4 weeks)

Decrease[50% of enhanced areas, reflecting partial
tissue necrosis

SD

Neither PR nor PD criteria
met

Neither PR nor PD criteria
met

Tumor response between PR and PD

PD

25% increase

20% increase

Increase [25% in size of C1 measurable lesion(s)

[Publication Pending]. Figure 3 illustrates treatment
planning and observed radiological changes in a
patient with CTP-B after SBRT for HCC.

6

Case Example

A 69-year-old man with a history of nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH)-related liver cirrhosis had an
episode of abdominal pain nausea, and vomiting and
had an ultrasound that found a mass in his left lobe of
the liver in segment 2 measuring 4.1 9 4.3 9 4 cm.
The lesion had on dual phase CT scan arterial
enhancement (Fig. 3a). His AFP was mildly elevated.
A biopsy had been performed in an outside institution,
which demonstrated hepatocellular carcinoma. His
case was presented at a Multidisciplinary Liver Tumor
Conference and it was decided that he was a poor
surgical candidate due to cardiac comorbidity and he
was referred to radiation oncology for consideration of
Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy (SBRT). His ChildPugh score was 7. The plan was generated such that he
would receive a total dose of 4000 cGy in five fractions
of 800 cGy each prescribed to the 80% isodose line
covering the PTV, with consideration given to heart
dose. (Figure 3b and 3c). An attempt was made to keep
500 cc of liver \12 Gy and 1/3 of the liver \18 Gy
(Fig. 3d). Additionally,\2/3 of the right kidney should
receive [15 Gy and \1/3 of the left kidney should
receive[15 Gy. Cord dose was kept below 18 Gy and
Heart dose was limited to [400 cGy per fraction.
He was treated one to week times per week.
Complete clinical as well as biochemical and hematological assessment was performed prior to each
fraction to determine potential liver toxicity. The
patient tolerated the treatment very well with only

mild right upper quadrant pain and no evidence of
acute liver toxicity during treatment.
At one month, his CT scan shows the lesion with
approximately the same size but with some central
hypo-attenuation (Fig. 3e) that is characteristic of
response to treatment. At three months, the actual size
of the hypodense area had increased, but the borders
had become less delineated and the entire lesion was
significantly less enhancing during the arterial phase
(Fig. 3f). These changes were expected and indicative
of good response to therapy. At six months, there was
continued evidence of hyperemia in the treated area
with a central hypodense (Fig. 3g). Over the course of
three years, the area of hyperemia in the treatment
area gradually disappeared while a region of hypodensity persisted as seen at one year (Fig. 3h), two
years (Fig. 3i) and three years (Fig. 3j). This hypodense region, without arterial-contrast enhancement is
often (but not always) seen in cases of hepatocellular
carcinoma after SBRT. The area of hyperemia in the
treatment area with diminishing enhancement over
time is commonly seen as post-treatment changes in
the liver.

7

Future Directions

Potential areas of investigation in the role of SBRT in
the management of HCC include
1. Role of Sorafenib in combination with SBRT
2. Role of adjuvant Sorafenib after SBRT
3. Better ways to understand early response to SBRT
in the normal liver parenchyma and tumor tissues
4. Predictors of liver toxicity and tumor response
5. Long-term outcome of SBRT in the management
of HCC.

178

Fig. 3 Child-Pugh B patient with a single HCC tumor not
eligible for hepatic resection who was treated with
800 cGy 9 5 fxns prescribed to 80% isodose line for CPC B
patient. Pretreatment (a), contours (b), treatment plan (c).

H. R. Cárdenes and F. Lasley

Figure 3d shows a dose volume histogram (DVH) for the
patient. Post-treatment shown at one month (e), three months
(f), six months (g), one year (h), two years (i), and three years
(j) post-treatment

Primary Liver Cancer

References
Abrams RA, Pajak TF, Haulk TL, Flam M, Asbell SO (1998)
Survival results among patients with alpha-fetoproteinpositive, unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma: analysis of
three sequential treatments of the RTOG and Johns Hopkins
Oncology Center. Cancer J Sci Am 4(3):178–184
Andolino DL, Johnson CS, Maluccio M, Kwo P, Tector AJ,
Zook J, Johnstone PA, Cardenes HR (2011) Stereotactic
body radiotherapy for primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Int
J Rad Oncol Biol Phys 81(4):e447–e453
Arii S, Yamaoka Y, Futagawa S, Inoue K, Kobayashi K,
Kojiro M, Makuuchi M, Nakamura Y, Okita K, Yamada R
(2000) Results of surgical and nonsurgical treatment for
small-sized hepatocellular carcinomas: a retrospective and
nationwide survey in Japan. The Liver Cancer Study Group
of Japan. Hepatology 32(6):1224–1229
Benedict SH, Yenice KM, Followill D, Galvin JM, Hinson W,
Kavanagh B, Keall P, Lovelock M, Meeks S, Papiez L,
Purdie T, Sadagopan R, Schell MC, Salter B, Schlesinger
DJ, Shiu AS, Solberg T, Song DY, Stieber V, Timmerman
R, Tome WA, Verellen D, Wang L, Yin FF (2010)
Stereotactic body radiation therapy: the report of AAPM
Task Group 101. Med Phys 37(8):4078–4101
Blomgren H, Lax I, Göranson H, Kræpelien T, Nilsson B,
Näslund I, Svanström R, Tilikidis A (1998) Radiosurgery
for tumors in the body: clinical experience using a new
method. J Radiosurg 1(1):63–74
Bronowicki JP, Boudjema K, Chone L, Nisand G, Bazin C,
Pflumio F, Uhl G, Wenger JJ, Jaeck D, Boissel P,
Bigard MA, Gaucher P, Vetter D, Doffoel M (1996)
Comparison of resection, liver transplantation and transcatheter oily chemoembolization in the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol 24(3):293–300
Bruix J, Boix L, Sala M, Llovet JM (2004) Focus on
hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Cell 5(3):215–219
Bruix J, Sherman M (2011) American Association for the Study of
Liver Diseases Management of hepatocellular carcinoma: an
update. Hepatology 53(3):1020–1022. doi:10.1002/hep.24199
Bruix J, Sherman M, Llovet JM, Beaugrand M, Lencioni R,
Burroughs AK, Christensen E, Pagliaro L, Colombo M,
Rodes J, EASL Panel of Experts on HCC (2001) Clinical
management of hepatocellular carcinoma. Conclusions of the
Barcelona-2000 EASL Conference. European Association for
the Study of the Liver. J Hepatol 35(3):421–430
Bruix J, Sherman M, Practice Guidelines Committee, American
Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (2005) Management of hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 42(5):
1208–1236
Cao M, Cardenes H, Langer M, Slessinger E, Zhao Q,
DesRosiers C (2008) Evaluation of automatic volume
match function for kilovoltage cone-beam CT (CBCT)
guided patient setup. Med Phys 35(6):2990
Cárdenes H, Price T, Perkins S, Maluccio M, Kwo P, Breen T,
Henderson M, Schefter T, Tudor K, Deluca J, Johnstone P
(2010) Phase I feasibility trial of stereotactic body radiation
therapy for primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Transl
Oncol 12(3):218–225. doi:10.1007/s12094-010-0492-x
Carr BI, Kondragunta V, Buch SC, Branch RA (2010)
Therapeutic equivalence in survival for hepatic arterial

179
chemoembolization and yttrium 90 microsphere treatments
in unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma: a two-cohort
study. Cancer 116(5):1305–1314
Cascales Campos P, Ramirez P, Gonzalez R, Febrero B,
Pons JA, Miras M, Sanchez Bueno F, Robles R, Parrilla P
(2011) Value of 18-FDG-positron emission tomography/
computed tomography before and after transarterial chemoembolization in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma
undergoing liver transplantation: initial results. Transpl
Proc 43(6):2213–2215
Chen M-S, Li J-Q, Zheng Y, Guo R-P, Liang HH, Zhang YQ,
Lin XJ, Lau WY (2006) A prospective randomized trial
comparing percutaneous local ablative therapy and partial
hepatectomy for small hepatocellular carcinoma. Ann Surg
243(3):321–328
Cheng A-L, Kang Y-K, Chen Z, Tsao C-J, Qin S, Kim JS, Luo R,
Feng J, Ye S, Yang T-S, Xu J, Sun Y, Liang H, Liu J, Wang J,
Tak WY, Pan H, Burock K, Zou J, Voliotis D, Guan Z (2009)
Efficacy and safety of sorafenib in patients in the Asia-Pacific
region with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: a phase III
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet
Oncol 10(1):25–34
Cheng JC-H, Wu JK, Huang CM, Huang DY, Cheng SH,
Lin YM, Jian JJ, Yang PS, Chuang VP, Huang AT (2002)
Radiation-induced liver disease after radiotherapy for
hepatocellular carcinoma: clinical manifestation and dosimetric description. Radiother Oncol 63(1):41–45
Cho YK, Kim JK, Kim MY, Rhim H, Han JK (2009)
Systematic review of randomized trials for hepatocellular
carcinoma treated with percutaneous ablation therapies.
Hepatology 49(2):453–459
Choi BO, Choi IB, Jang HS, Kang YN, Jang JS, Bae SH,
Yoon SK, Chai GY, Kang KM (2008) Stereotactic body
radiation therapy with or without transarterial chemoembolization for patients with primary hepatocellular carcinoma:
preliminary analysis. BMC Cancer 8:351
Choi BO, Jang HS, Kang KM, Lee SW, Kang YN, Chai GY,
Choi IB (2006) Fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy in
patients with primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Jpn J Clin
Oncol 36(3):154–158
Chok KS, Ng KK, Poon RTP, Lam CM, Yuen J, Tso WK,
Fan ST (2006) Comparable survival in patients with
unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma treated by radiofrequency ablation or transarterial chemoembolization. Arch
Surg 141(12):1231–1236
Christensen E (2004) Prognostic models including the ChildPugh, MELD and Mayo risk scores–where are we and
where should we go? J Hepatol 41(2):344–350
CLIP (1998) A new prognostic system for hepatocellular
carcinoma: a retrospective study of 435 patients: the
Cancer of the Liver Italian Program (CLIP) investigators.
Hepatology 28(3):751–755
Dawson LA, Eccles C, Bissonnette J-P, Brock KK (2005)
Accuracy of daily image guidance for hypofractionated
liver radiotherapy with active breathing control. Int J Rad
Oncol Biol Phys 62(4):1247–1252
Dawson LA, McGinn CJ, Normolle D, Ten Haken RK, Walker
S, Ensminger W, Lawrence TS (2000) Escalated focal liver
radiation and concurrent hepatic artery fluorodeoxyuridine
for unresectable intrahepatic malignancies. J Clin Oncol
18(11):2210–2218

180
Dawson LA, Normolle D, Balter JM, McGinn CJ, Lawrence TS,
Ten Haken RK (2002) Analysis of radiation-induced liver
disease using the Lyman NTCP model.[Erratum appears in
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2002 Aug 1;53(5):1422]. Int J
Rad Oncol Biol Phys 53 (4):810-821
Edge SB, Byrd DR, Compton CC, Fritz AG, Greene FL,
Trotti A (eds) (2009) AJCC cancer staging manual, 7th edn.
Springer, New York
Eisenhauer EA, Therasse P, Bogaerts J, Schwartz LH, Sargent D,
Ford R, Dancey J, Arbuck S, Gwyther S, Mooney M,
Rubinstein L, Shankar L, Dodd L, Kaplan R, Lacombe D,
Verweij J (2009) New response evaluation criteria in solid
tumours: revised RECIST guideline (version 1.1). Eur J
Cancer 45(2):228–247
El-Serag HB, Davila JA, Petersen NJ, McGlynn KA (2003) The
continuing increase in the incidence of hepatocellular
carcinoma in the United States: an update.[Erratum appears
in Ann Intern Med. 2004 Jan 20;140(2):151].[Summary for
patients in Ann Intern Med. 2003 Nov 18;139(10):I28;
PMID: 14623640]. Ann Intern Med 139(10):817–823
Ferlay J, Shin H-R, Bray F, Forman D, Mathers C, Parkin DM
(2010) Estimates of worldwide burden of cancer in 2008:
GLOBOCAN 2008. Int J Cancer 127(12):2893–2917.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ijc.25516
Forner A, Ayuso C, Varela M, Rimola J, Hessheimer AJ, de
Lope CR, Reig M, Bianchi L, Llovet JM, Bruix J (2009)
Evaluation of tumor response after locoregional therapies in
hepatocellular carcinoma: are response evaluation criteria in
solid tumors reliable? Cancer 115(3):616–623
Forner A, Vilana R, Ayuso C, Bianchi L, Sole M, Ayuso JR,
Boix L, Sala M, Varela M, Llovet JM, Bru C, Bruix J
(2008) Diagnosis of hepatic nodules 20 mm or smaller
in cirrhosis: Prospective validation of the noninvasive
diagnostic criteria for hepatocellular carcinoma. [Erratum
appears in Hepatology. 2008 Feb;47(2):769]. Hepatology
47(1):97–104
Fuss M, Salter BJ, Rassiah P, Cheek D, Cavanaugh SX,
Herman TS (2004) Repositioning accuracy of a commercially available double-vacuum whole body immobilization
system for stereotactic body radiation therapy. Technol
Cancer Res Treat 3(1):59–67
Germani G, Pleguezuelo M, Gurusamy K, Meyer T, Isgro G,
Burroughs AK (2010) Clinical outcomes of radiofrequency
ablation, percutaneous alcohol and acetic acid injection for
hepatocelullar carcinoma: a meta-analysis. J Hepatol 52(3):
380–388
Herfarth KK, Debus J, Lohr F, Bahner ML, Rhein B, Fritz P,
Hoss A, Schlegel W, Wannenmacher MF (2001) Stereotactic
single-dose radiation therapy of liver tumors: results of a
phase I/II trial. J Clin Oncol 19(1):164–170
Herfarth KK, Hof H, Bahner ML, Lohr F, Hoss A, van Kaick G,
Wannenmacher M, Debus J (2003) Assessment of focal
liver reaction by multiphasic CT after stereotactic singledose radiotherapy of liver tumors. Int J Rad Oncol Biol Phys
57(2):444–451
International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements (ICRU) (1993) Prescribing, recording and reporting
photon beam therapy. vol Report 50. ICRU, Bethesda, MD
International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements (ICRU) (1999) Prescribing, recording and reporting

H. R. Cárdenes and F. Lasley
photon beam therapy; supplement to ICRU Report No. 50,
vol Report 62. ICRU, Bethesda, MD
Kamath PS, Wiesner RH, Malinchoc M, Kremers W, Therneau TM,
Kosberg CL, D’Amico G, Dickson ER, Kim WR (2001) A
model to predict survival in patients with end-stage liver disease.
Hepatology 33(2):464–470
Kim DY, Park W, Lim DH, Lee JH, Yoo BC, Paik SW,
Kho KC, Kim TH, Ahn YC, Huh SJ (2005) Three-dimensional
conformal radiotherapy for portal vein thrombosis of hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 103(11):2419–2426
Kim JW, Seong J, Jun M, Lee IJ, Yoon HI, Cho HJ, Han KH
(2011) Usefulness of positron emission tomography with
fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose in predicting treatment
response in unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma patients
treated with external beam radiotherapy. Int J Rad Oncol
Biol Phys 47(22):6368–6370
Kornberg A, Küpper B, Tannapfel A, Büchler P, Krause B,
Witt U, Gottschild D, Friess H (2011) Patients with (18)
F-FDG non-avid advanced HCC on clinical staging may
achieve recurrence-free long-term survival after liver transplantation. Liver Transpl. doi:10.1002/lt.22416
Kwon JH, Bae SH, Kim JY, Choi BO, Jang HS, Jang JW,
Choi JY, Yoon SK, Chung KW (2010) Long-term effect of
stereotactic body radiation therapy for primary hepatocellular carcinoma ineligible for local ablation therapy or
surgical resection. Stereotactic radiotherapy for liver cancer.
BMC Cancer 10:475
Lawrence TS, Ten Haken RK, Kessler ML, Robertson JM,
Lyman JT, Lavigne ML, Brown MB, DuRoss DJ, Andrews JC,
Ensminger WD et al (1992) The use of 3-D dose volume analysis
to predict radiation hepatitis. Int J Rad Oncol Biol Phys
23(4):781–788
Lencioni R, Cioni D, Crocetti L, Franchini C, Pina CD, Lera J,
Bartolozzi C (2005) Early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma in
patients with cirrhosis: long-term results of percutaneous imageguided radiofrequency ablation. Radiology 234(3):961–967
Lin CY, Chen JH, Liang JA, Lin CC, Jeng LB, Kao CH (2011)
18F-FDG PET or PET/CT for detecting extrahepatic
metastases or recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Radiol
Liu LX, Jiang HC, Piao DX (2002) Radiofrequence ablation of
liver cancers. World J Gastroenterol 8(3):393–399
Liu MT, Li SH, Chu TC, Hsieh CY, Wang AY, Chang TH,
Pi CP, Huang C–C, Lin JP (2004) Three-dimensional
conformal radiation therapy for unresectable hepatocellular
carcinoma patients who had failed with or were unsuited for
transcatheter arterial chemoembolization. Jpn J Clin Oncol
34(9):532–539
Llovet JM, Bruix J (2003) Systematic review of randomized
trials for unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma: Chemoembolization improves survival. Hepatology 37(2):429–442
Llovet JM, Fuster J, Bruix J (1999) Intention-to-treat analysis of
surgical treatment for early hepatocellular carcinoma: resection versus transplantation. Hepatology 30(6):1434–1440
Llovet JM, Real MI, Montana X, Planas R, Coll S, Aponte J,
Ayuso C, Sala M, Muchart J, Sola R, Rodes J, Bruix J,
Barcelona Liver Cancer G (2002) Arterial embolisation or
chemoembolisation versus symptomatic treatment in
patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma: a
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 359(9319):1734–1739

Primary Liver Cancer
Llovet JM, Ricci S, Mazzaferro V, Hilgard P, Gane E,
Blanc JF, de Oliveira AC, Santoro A, Raoul JL, Forner A,
Schwartz M, Porta C, Zeuzem S, Bolondi L, Greten TF,
Galle PR, Seitz J-F, Borbath I, Haussinger D, Giannaris T,
Shan M, Moscovici M, Voliotis D, Bruix J, Group SIS
(2008) Sorafenib in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma.
N Engl J Med 359(4):378–390
Llovet JM, Ricci S, Mazzaferro V, Hilgard P, Raoul J,
Zeuzem S, Poulin-Costello M, Moscovici M, Voliotis D,
Bruix J, For the SHARP Investigators Study Group (2007)
Sorafenib improves survival in advanced hepatocellular
carcinoma: results of a phase III randomized placebocontrolled trial: 2007 ASCO Annual Meeting Proceedings
Part I. J Clin Oncol 25:LBA1 (18S)
Lo SS, Dawson LA, Kim EY, Mayr NA, Wang JZ, Huang Z,
Cardenes HR (2010) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for
hepatocellular carcinoma. Discov 9(48):404–410
Mazzaferro V, Regalia E, Doci R, Andreola S, Pulvirenti A,
Bozzetti F, Montalto F, Ammatuna M, Morabito A,
Gennari L (1996) Liver transplantation for the treatment of
small hepatocellular carcinomas in patients with cirrhosis.
N Engl J Med 334(11):693–699
Mendez Romero A, Wunderink W, Hussain SM, De Pooter JA,
Heijmen BJM, Nowak PCJM, Nuyttens JJ, Brandwijk RP,
Verhoef C, Ijzermans JNM, Levendag PC (2006) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for primary and metastatic
liver tumors: A single institution phase i-ii study. Acta
Oncol 45(7):831–837
Miller AB, Hoogstraten B, Staquet M, Winkler A (1981)
Reporting results of cancer treatment. Cancer 47(1):
207–214
Mornex F, Girard N, Beziat C, Kubas A, Khodri M, Trepo C,
Merle P (2006) Feasibility and efficacy of high-dose threedimensional-conformal radiotherapy in cirrhotic patients
with small-size hepatocellular carcinoma non-eligible for
curative therapies–mature results of the French Phase II
RTF-1 trial. Int J Rad Oncol Biol Phys 66(4):1152–1158
Nicolini A, Martinetti L, Crespi S, Maggioni M, Sangiovanni A
(2010) Transarterial chemoembolization with epirubicineluting beads versus transarterial embolization before liver
transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma. J Vasc Interv
Radiol 21(3):327–332
Okuda K, Ohtsuki T, Obata H, Tomimatsu M, Okazaki N,
Hasegawa H, Nakajima Y, Ohnishi K (1985) Natural history
of hepatocellular carcinoma and prognosis in relation to
treatment. Study of 850 patients. Cancer 56(4):918–928
Orlando A, Leandro G, Olivo M, Andriulli A, Cottone M
(2009) Radiofrequency thermal ablation vs. percutaneous
ethanol injection for small hepatocellular carcinoma in
cirrhosis: meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am
J Gastroenterol 104(2):514–524
Papiez L, Timmerman R, DesRosiers C, Randall M (2003)
Extracranial stereotactic radioablation: physical principles.
Acta Oncol 42(8):882–894
Park HC, Seong J, Han KH, Chon CY, Moon YM, Suh CO
(2002) Dose-response relationship in local radiotherapy for
hepatocellular carcinoma. Int J Rad Oncol Biol Phys
54(1):150–155
Poon RTP, Ng KKC, Lam C-M, Ai V, Yuen J, Fan S-T (2004)
Effectiveness of radiofrequency ablation for hepatocellular

181
carcinomas larger than 3 cm in diameter. Arch Surg 139(3):
281–287
Potters L, Steinberg M, Rose C, Timmerman R, Ryu S, Hevezi
JM, Welsh J, Mehta M, Larson DA, Janjan NA, American
Society for Therapeutic R, Oncology, American College of
R (2004) American Society for Therapeutic Radiology and
Oncology and American College of Radiology practice
guideline for the performance of stereotactic body radiation
therapy. Int J Rad Oncol Biol Phys 60(4):1026–1032
Price TR, Perkins SM, Sandrasegaran K, Henderson MA,
Maluccio MA, Zook JE, Tector AJ, Vianna RM, Johnstone
PA, Cardenes HR (2011) Evaluation of response after
stereotactic body radiotherapy for hepatocellular carcinoma.
Cancer. doi:10.1002/cncr.26404
Pugh RN, Murray-Lyon IM, Dawson JL, Pietroni MC,
Williams R (1973) Transection of the oesophagus for
bleeding oesophageal varices. Br J Surg 60(8):646–649
Robertson JM, Lawrence TS, Dworzanin LM, Andrews JC,
Walker S, Kessler ML, DuRoss DJ, Ensminger WD (1993)
Treatment of primary hepatobiliary cancers with conformal
radiation therapy and regional chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol
11(7):1286–1293
Rusthoven KE, Kavanagh BD, Cardenes H, Stieber VW,
Burri SH, Feigenberg SJ, Chidel MA, Pugh TJ, Franklin W,
Kane M, Gaspar LE, Schefter TE (2009) Multi-institutional
phase I/II trial of stereotactic body radiation therapy for
liver metastases. J Clin Oncol 27(10):1572–1578
Salem R, Hunter RD (2006) Yttrium-90 microspheres for the
treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma: a review. Int J Rad
Oncol Biol Phys 66:S83–S88
Salem R, Lewandowski RJ, Mulcahy MF, Riaz A, Ryu RK,
Ibrahim S, Atassi B, Baker T, Gates V, Miller FH, Sato KT,
Wang E, Gupta R, Benson AB, Newman SB, Omary RA,
Abecassis M, Kulik L (2010) Radioembolization for
hepatocellular carcinoma using Yttrium-90 microspheres:
a comprehensive report of long-term outcomes. Gastroenterology 138(1):52–64
Sangiovanni A, Del Ninno E, Fasani P, De Fazio C, Ronchi G,
Romeo R, Morabito A, De Franchis R, Colombo M (2004)
Increased survival of cirrhotic patients with a hepatocellular
carcinoma detected during surveillance. Gastroenterology
126(4):1005–1014
Seo YS, Kim MS, Yoo SY, Cho CK, Choi CW, Kim JH,
Han CJ, Park SC, Lee BH, Kim YH, Lee DH (2010)
Preliminary result of stereotactic body radiotherapy as a
local salvage treatment for inoperable hepatocellular carcinoma. J Surg Oncol 102(3):209–214
Seong J, Park HC, Han KH, Chon CY (2003) Clinical results
and prognostic factors in radiotherapy for unresectable
hepatocellular carcinoma: a retrospective study of 158
patients. Int J Rad Oncol Biol Phys 55(2):329–336
Shiina S, Teratani T, Obi S, Sato S, Tateishi R, Fujishima T,
Ishikawa T, Koike Y, Yoshida H, Kawabe T, Omata M
(2005) A randomized controlled trial of radiofrequency
ablation with ethanol injection for small hepatocellular
carcinoma. Gastroenterology 129(1):122–130
Siegel R, Ward E, Brawley O, Jemal A (2011) Cancer statistics,
2011: the impact of eliminating socioeconomic and racial
disparities on premature cancer deaths. CA Cancer J Clin
61(4):212–236

182
Silva MA, Hegab B, Hyde C, Guo B, Buckels JAC, Mirza DF
(2008) Needle track seeding following biopsy of liver
lesions in the diagnosis of hepatocellular cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Gut 57(11):1592–1596
Son SH, Choi BO, Ryu MR, Kang YN, Jang JS, Bae SH,
Yoon SK, Choi IB, Kang KM, Jang HS (2010) Stereotactic
body radiotherapy for patients with unresectable primary
hepatocellular carcinoma: dose-volumetric parameters predicting the hepatic complication. Int J Rad Oncol Biol Phys
78(4):1073–1080
Stigliano R, Marelli L, Yu D, Davies N, Patch D, Burroughs AK
(2007) Seeding following percutaneous diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for hepatocellular carcinoma. What is the
risk and the outcome? Seeding risk for percutaneous approach
of HCC. Cancer Treat Rev 33:437–447
Stillwagon GB, Order SE, Guse C, Klein JL, Leichner PK,
Leibel SA, Fishman EK (1989) 194 hepatocellular cancers
treated by radiation and chemotherapy combinations: toxicity
and response: a Radiation Therapy Oncology Group Study.
Int J Rad Oncol Biol Phys 17(6):1223–1229
Takayasu K (2010) Chemoembolization for unresectable
hepatocellular carcinoma in Japan. Oncology 78(Suppl 1):
135–141
Therasse P, Arbuck SG, Eisenhauer EA, Wanders J, Kaplan RS,
Rubinstein L, Verweij J, Van Glabbeke M, van Oosterom AT,

H. R. Cárdenes and F. Lasley
Christian MC, Gwyther SG (2000) New guidelines to
evaluate the response to treatment in solid tumors. European
Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer,
National Cancer Institute of the United States, National
Cancer Institute of Canada. J Natl Cancer Inst 92(3):
205–216
Tse RV, Hawkins M, Lockwood G, Kim JJ, Cummings B,
Knox J, Sherman M, Dawson LA (2008) Phase I study of
individualized stereotactic body radiotherapy for hepatocellular carcinoma and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.
[Erratum appears in J Clin Oncol. 2008 Aug 10, 26(23),
pp 3911–3912]. J Clin Oncol 26(4):657–664
Vilana R, Bruix J, Bru C, Ayuso C, Sole M, Rodes J (1992)
Tumor size determines the efficacy of percutaneous ethanol
injection for the treatment of small hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 16(2):353–357
Wulf J, Hadinger U, Oppitz U, Olshausen B, Flentje M (2000)
Stereotactic radiotherapy of extracranial targets: CT-simulation and accuracy of treatment in the stereotactic body
frame. Radiother Oncol 57(2):225–236
Yin XY, Xie XY, Lu MD, Xu HX, Xu ZF, Kuang M, Liu
G-J, Liang J-Y, Lau WY (2009) Percutaneous thermal
ablation of medium and large hepatocellular carcinoma:
long-term outcome and prognostic factors. Cancer 115(9):
1914–1923

Prostate Cancer
Hiromichi Ishiyama, Alan Katz, Angel I. Blanco, Jose Hinojosa,
Simon S. Lo, Rodney J. Ellis, Bo Xu, Robert J. Amato,
E. Brian Butler, and Bin S. Teh

Contents
1

5

Dose Constraints ...................................................... 187

6

Heterogeneous Versus Homogeneous Dose
Distribution............................................................... 188

7

Cancer Distribution in the Prostate ...................... 189

8

Technical Aspects .................................................... 190

Introduction.............................................................. 184

2

Rationale for Stereotactic Body Radiation
Therapy..................................................................... 184
2.1 Biological Aspect ...................................................... 184
3

Fractionation Schedules .......................................... 187

4

Consecutive-Day Treatment Versus
Every-Other-Day Treatment .................................. 187

H. Ishiyama  A. I. Blanco  B. Xu  E. Brian Butler 
B. S. Teh (&)
Department of Radiation Oncology,
The Methodist Hospital,
Cancer Center and Research Institute,
6565 Fannin, DB1-077, Houston, TX 77030, USA
e-mail: bteh@tmhs.org
H. Ishiyama
Department of Radiology and Radiation Oncology,
Kitasato University School of Medicine,
Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan
S. S. Lo  R. J. Ellis
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center,
Case Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA
R. J. Amato
Department of Internal Medicine,
Division of Oncology, University of Texas Health
Sciences Center, Houston, TX, USA
A. Katz
Flushing Radiation Oncology,
Flushing, NY, USA
J. Hinojosa
ABC Cancer Center, Mexico City, Mexico

9
Clinical Applications ............................................... 190
9.1 Preclinical Data ......................................................... 190
9.2 Clinical Trials and Outcome ..................................... 190
10

Case Examples ......................................................... 193

11

Future Directions..................................................... 194

References.......................................................................... 194

Abstract

Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a
promising treatment option for prostate cancer.
Hypofractionation regimens such as SBRT may be
more advantageous compared to conventional
regimens because low a/b ratio of prostate cancer
has high sensitivity to dose per fraction. In
addition, the estimated higher a/b ratio of rectum
and a smaller and tighter margin with SBRT is
expected to provide acceptable toxicity despite
higher dose per fraction. The successful implementation of SBRT for prostate cancer requires
accurate target and normal tissues delineation,
patient/tumor immobilization, image guidance or
tumor tracking, advanced treatment planning and
delivery. Here we describe the rationale and
effectiveness of SBRT in the management of
prostate cancer, its technical aspects, clinical
applications, and treatment toxicities. Clinical case

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2012_649, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

183

184

H. Ishiyama et al.

examples will be included with clinical settings,
treatment plans, and outcomes.

1

Introduction

Prostate cancer is the leading cancer in men. In 2012,
approximately 241,740 men were diagnosed with
prostate cancer, and 28,170 men were expected to die
from this disease (Siegel et al. 2012). Because of its
low a/b ratio, hypofractionation regimen, with a larger radiation dose delivered in a smaller number of
fractions, is expected to be a more advantageous
option when compared to conventional regimen.
Using 3D conformal radiotherapy (3DCRT) or
intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT), hypofractionation regimens (typically 3 Gy per fraction) have
been examined in numerous institutions from the
early 2000s (Table 1). Although these regimens
reported at least equally effective results compared to
those of conventional fractionation, it was supposed
to be theoretically more effective for prostate cancer
if a larger fraction size could be delivered. The
introduction of stereotactic body radiation therapy
(SBRT) permits a larger biologically effective dose in
a smaller number of fractions (typically 5 fractions of
7 Gy) to be safely delivered. Near-ideal hypofractionation for prostate cancer is available with SBRT.
On the other hand, SBRT is particularly challenging
because of its complexities from a technical point of
view. Quality assessment and quality control of this
advanced technique should be done very carefully.

2

Rationale for Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy

2.1

Biological Aspect

2.1.1 Low a/b Ratio
Brenner and Hall (1999) estimated the a/b ratio for
prostate cancer to be 1.5 Gy by using clinical data to
calculate the linear and quadratic components of cell
killing. After their report, several investigators
reported the similar results. A recent review of 17
studies estimated an average a/b ratio of 1.85 Gy
(Dasu 2007). This low a/b ratio suggests that prostate

cancer has high sensitivity to dose per fraction, and
thus a hypofractionation regimen may be more
advantageous when compared to other type of cancer
with high a/b ratio (Martinez et al. 2011; Ritter 2008).
On the other hand, the a/b ratio of the rectum is as
important as that of prostate cancer for exploring
which hypofractionation regimens will be most beneficial. Although a/b ratio for the rectal wall is not
known precisely, animal studies suggest a/b ratio for
the rectum to be 4–6 Gy (Brenner et al. 1998; Dewit
et al. 1989; Dubray and Thames 1994; Gasinska et al.
1993; Terry and Denekamp 1984; van der Kogel et al.
1988). In addition, Brenner (2004) estimated the a/b
ratio of rectum to be 5.4 for late rectal bleeding using
clinical results of hypofractionated radiotherapy. If
the a/b ratio for rectum is higher than that of prostate,
theoretically, larger hypofractionated doses could be
given with larger clinical gains with the same or lower
complication rates (Fowler et al. 2003).
However, there are some concerns about estimation
of a/b ratio, because it does not take into account the
following factors including non-uniform dose distributions, tumor heterogeneity, hypoxia, reoxygenation,
redistribution, repopulation, relative biologic effectiveness, use of hormonal therapy, and varying overall
treatment times (Dasu 2007). There are some suggestions that the linear-quadratic (LQ) model may overestimate tumor cell kill when this model is used for SBRT.

2.1.2

Universal Survival Curve
and Generalized LQ Models
An overestimation of cell kill with LQ model is
suggested to be significant when it is used for regimens of higher than 8–10 Gy per fraction. The other
classic radiobiological model, namely multitarget
model, is suggested to be more appropriate than LQ
model in regimens using doses higher than 8–10 Gy
per fraction. Park et al. (2008) and Wang et al. (2010)
introduced the universal survival curve (USC) model,
which is a hybridization of LQ and multitarget models, and generalized LQ model, respectively, and they
better predict tumor cell kill in the ablative dose range
over 10 Gy per fraction. More suitable regimens for
SBRT using this generalized LQ model may be
introduced in the future trials. Details of these models are discussed in ‘‘Radiobiology of Stereotactic
Body Radiation Therapy’’.

209

n

36

108

705

52

129

Soete (Soete et al.
2006)

Yeoh (Yeoh et al.
2010)

Livsey (Livsey et al.
2003)

Akimoto (Akimoto
et al. 2004)

Rene (Rene et al.
2010)

770

Kupelian (Kupelian
et al. 2007)

40

41

30

112

Madsen (Madsen et al.
2007)

Freeman (Freeman
and King 2011)

Tang (Tang et al.
2008)

Friedland (Friedland
et al. 2009)

SBRT

50

Pollack (Pollack et al.
2009)

Hypofractionation with IMRT

466

Lukka (Lukka et al.
2005)

Hypofractionation with 3D-CRT

Lloyd-Davies (LloydDavies et al. 1990)

Hypofractionation in 2D era

Author

24

12

60

41

45

39

51

31

48

90

2

68.4

NA

Median
follow-up
(months)

Table 1 Reported hypofractionation schedules

7–7.2

7

35(f)
35–36

7.25

6.7

2.5

2.7

3

3

3.125

2.75

3.5

2.625

4.6/6

Dose per
fraction
(Gy)

36.25

33.5

70

70.2

66

69

50

55

56

52.5

55/36

Total
dose (Gy)

NA

NA

Low, 92.7 % (5 year)

Low, 90 % (4 year)

Low, 94; Int, 83 %; High,
72 % (5 year)

Int and High, 83 % (5 year)

Low and Int, 98 % (5 year)

NA

Low, 82 %; Int, 56 %;
High, 39 % (5 year)

Early stage, 53 %
(7.5 year)(b)

NA

Early state, 40.05 %
(5 year)(a, b)

NA

Free from PSA failure

NA

NA

nadir ? 2

nadir ? 2/
ASTRO(e)

nadir ? 2/
ASTRO(e)

nadir ? 2

nadir ? 2

NA

ASTRO

nadir ? 2/
ASTRO(e)

NA

nadir ? 2

NA

Definition
of failure

0%

13 % at
6m

9.5 %

20 %

7%
(5 years)

25 %
(5 years)

32 %

0.9 %

13 % at
6m

2.5 %

8%

6%
(5 years)

6%
(5 years)

25 %

25 %

5 %(d)

10 %(d)
NA

NA

NA

1.3 %(c)

NA

GI C 2

NA

NA

1.9 %(c)

NA

GU C 2

Late toxicity

(continued)

19 %

3%

no

no

60 %

44 %

NA

all

no

no

NA

no

NA

Hormone

Prostate Cancer
185

18.3
30/18/12

45

20

15/15/15(i)

26

67

Bolzicco (Bolzicco
et al. 2010)

Jabbari (Jabbari et al.
2012)

Boike (Boike et al.
2011)

Oermann (Oermann
et al. 2011)

King (King et al.
2011)

18

Jabbari (Jabbari et al.
2012)

18.3

33

32.4

15

a

Low, low risk; Int, intermediate risk; High, high risk
Including clinical failure
b
Risk criteria is not available
c
Grade 3 or more
d
n = 101 for toxicity assessment
e
Result from nadir ? 2 is shown in this table
f
Once a week over 29 days
g
Divided into two schedules
h
Including combination with EBRT
i
Divided into three schedules

73

Katz (Katz et al. 2010)

SBRT as a boost of EBRT

17/30

50/254(g)

Katz (Katz et al. 2010,
2011)
20

Median
follow-up
(months)

n

Author

Table 1 (continued)

19
+EBRT
45–50

18 to 21
+EBRT45

36.25

36.25

45/47.5/
50

38

35

35/36.25

Total
dose (Gy)

9.5

6–7

7.25

7.25

9/9.5/10

9.5

7

7/7.25

Dose per
fraction
(Gy)

All risk groups, 100 %

Int, 89.5 %; high, 77.7 %
(3 year)

Low and Int, 94 % (4 year)

Low and Int, 100 %

100 %

All risk groups, 100 %

Low and Int, 100 %

Low, 99 %, Int, 100 %,
High, 83 % (last follow-up)

Free from PSA failure

NA

nadir ? 2

nadir ? 2

NA

nadir ? 2

NA

NA

nadir ? 2

Definition
of failure

8.2 %
8 %(h)

13 %(h)

1.8 %

0%

5.5 %

8.8 %

23 %at
6m

7/7/0 %

8 %(h)

13 %(h)
13/20/
7%

2.2 %

0/2.9 %

GI C 2

2.2 %

2/6.3 %

GU C 2

Late toxicity

47 %

50.6 %

no

no

22 %

47 %

38 %

19 %

Hormone

186
H. Ishiyama et al.

Prostate Cancer

187

Table 2 Isoeffective prescription for late complication at a/b = 3 Gy
Number of fractions

Dose per fraction

Total dose (Gy)

Normal tissue (a/b = 3 Gy)
Normalized total dose (Gy)

Tumor (a/b = 1.5 Gy)
Normalized total dose (Gy)

35

2.00

70.00

70.00

70.00

30

2.23

66.92

70.00

71.32

25

2.53

63.28

70.00

72.88

20

2.94

58.88

70.00

74.77

15

3.56

53.37

70.00

77.13

10

4.60

46.03

70.00

80.27

5

7.00

35.00

70.00

85.00

3

Fractionation Schedules

The optimal fractionation in the treatment of prostate
cancer remains controversial. Theoretically, hypofractionation can significantly increase tumor control
rate without increasing toxicity by designing treatment schedules that are based on the iso-late-effects
principle (Fowler et al. 2003). Table 2 shows various
hypofractionation schedules with the starting point at
a standard non-hypofractionated prescription of
70 Gy (35 fractions of 2 Gy). An increase in normalized total dose of 15.0 Gy can be achieved (i.e.,
from 70 to 85 Gy) in a 5-fractions schedule. If the
starting point is placed at a higher non-hypofractionated dose that can be safely delivered with current
image-guidance technology, higher hypofractionation
dose will be achieved. For example, if we assume that
non-hypofractionated dose of 80 Gy (40 fractions of
2 Gy) can be delivered with acceptable complication
rates, by designing the corresponding iso-late-effects,
hypofractionated schedule of 10 of 5 Gy can be
achieved. Many institutions currently use hypofractionation schedules in above mentioned dose ranges
(Table 1). However, these designed fraction schedules are highly dependent on low a/b ratio that has not
yet been completely confirmed. A phase III study
comparing 12-fractions versus 5-fractions SBRT is
currently under review by Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) (Freeman and King 2011).
Another phase III study of the University of Miami
comparing extended fractionation (26 fractions) versus SBRT (5 fractions) is also ongoing (Freeman and
King 2011).

4

Consecutive-Day Treatment Versus
Every-Other-Day Treatment

Theoretically, slow potential doubling time of prostate cancer may not have any detrimental effects on
tumor control even in a long treatment schedule,
different from fast growing cancers such as head and
neck cancer. Thus, the consecutive-day treatment may
not be necessarily essential.
King et al. (2011) compared the toxicity rate
between consecutive-day schedule and every-otherday schedule. The latter schedule resulted in less
frequent grade 1–2 urinary toxicity (17 vs. 56 %,
p = 0.007) and less frequent grade 1–2 rectal toxicity
(5 vs. 44 %, p = 0.001). Although randomized control trial is needed to confirm this result, every-otherday or longer treatment schedule may have an
advantage in more favorable urinary and rectal toxicities. As an example, Tang et al. (2008) also used
the schedule of 35 Gy in 5 fractions with once a week
treatment over 29 days.

5

Dose Constraints

It is reasonable to use the constraints established in
external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) or high dose rate
(HDR) brachytherapy as guidelines for SBRT because
dose constraints for SBRT have not yet been established. Many institutions use their own constraints
derived from EBRT protocol such as RTOG 0126 and
HDR brachytherapy protocols (Friedland et al. 2009).
Dose constraint for rectal wall is well established in

188

H. Ishiyama et al.

Table 3 Reported constraints in SBRT
Author

Rectum

Madsen et al.
(2007)

N/A

Bladder

Freeman and
King (2011)

V50 % \ 50 %
V80 % \ 20 %
V90 % \ 10 %
V100 % \ 5 %
V36 Gy \ 1 cm3

V37 Gy \ 10 cm3

Tang et al.
(2008)

V28 Gy \ 40 %
V32 Gy \ 33 %

V32 Gy \ 40 %

V20 Gy \ 90 %

Friedland
et al. (2009)

V36 Gy \ 1 cm3

Bolzicco
et al. (2010)

D5 % \ 38 Gy

D5 % \ 40 Gy

D25 % \ 29 Gy

Jabbari et al.
(2012)

Max of wall \ 38 Gy
Max of mucosa \ 28.5 Gy

Max \ 45.6 Gy

Max \ 45.6 Gy

Boike et al.
(2011)

Anterior wall \ 105 %
V90 % of lateral wall
\3 cm3 posterior
wall \ 45 %

Max \ 105 %
V18.3 Gy \ 10 cm3

Max \ 105 %

Oermann
et al. (2011)

V50 % \ 50 %
V80 % \ 20 %
V90 % \ 10 %
V100 % \ 5 %
V36 Gy \ 1 cm3

V37 Gy \ 10 cm3

King et al.
(2011)

V50 % \ 50 %
V80 % \ 20 %
V90 % \ 10 %
V100 % \ 5 %

V5 % \ 40 %
V100 % \ 10 %

EBRT experiences, and many institutions set their
constraints for rectum (Table 3). However, the constraints for bladder wall, penile bulb, urethra, and
femoral head are not yet sufficiently established.
Upcoming clinical result of SBRT will give us more
information on the actual constraints for these organsat-risk (OARs).
Wiegner and King (2010) reported erectile function
after SBRT. The rate of preservation of erectile function after SBRT appears comparable to those reported
for other modalities, although there are uncertainties in
the pathophysiology of radiation-induced erectile
dysfunction. Oermann et al. (2011) reported pre- and
post-treatment testosterone level in prostate SBRT.
Testosterone levels slowly decreased after SBRT and
did not increase at 1 year posttreatment. However,
QOL scores (EPIC sexual and hormonal scores) were
not significantly changed by 1 year posttreatment.

Penile bulb

6

Urethra

Femoral head

D5 % \ 41 Gy

V40 % \ 5 %

Heterogeneous Versus
Homogeneous Dose Distribution

There is controversy as to whether HDR-like heterogeneous distribution can achieve better tumor control
rate than that of EBRT-like homogeneous distribution. Generally, raising the dose to the tumor by small
‘‘hot spot’’ offers little advantages, whereas elevating
the dose to the whole tumor could be of great value
(Perez 2004). However, a large hot spot may have
some advantages (Maciejewski 2009). The HDR
brachytherapy allows flexible radiation dose sculpting, with increased dose in the peripheral zone of
the prostate so that the highest radiation dose matches
the cancer distribution (peripheral zone). SBRT is
also able to create very steep dose gradients and able
to make heterogeneous dose distributions similar to

Prostate Cancer

189

Table 4 Reported margin size, PTV constraints, and type of machine
Author

Institution

Machine

Margin size

PTV constraints

Madsen
et al.
(2007)

Virginia Mason
Medical Center

Conventional linear
accelerator

4–5 mm from prostate to block edge

100 % isocenter
prostate covered by
90 % isodose line

Freeman
and King
(2011)

Stanford University
and Naples Radiation
Oncology

CyberKnife

GTV = prostate and proximal 1 cm of
seminal vesicle
CTV = GTV ? 3 mm anteriorly and
laterally, 1 mm posteriorly.
PTV = CTV ? 2 mm anteriorly,
laterally, and posteriorlly

95 % of PTV covered
by prescription dose

Tang et al.
(2008)

University of Toronto

Conventional linear
accelerator

CTV = Prostate
PTV = CTV ? 4 mm

100 % of
CTV [ 35 Gy
99 % of
PTV [ 33.25 Gy
Max \ 105 %

Friedland
et al.
(2009)

Naples Radiation
Oncology

CyberKnife

GTV = Prostate and proximal 1 cm of
seminal vesicle
PTV = GTV ? 3 mm posteriorly and
5 mm all other directions

95 % of PTV covered
by prescription dose

Katz et al.
(2010)

Winthrop-University
Hospital

CyberKnife

GTV for low risk = Prostate
GTV for intermediate, high
risk = Prostate ? half of seminal
vesicle
PTV for low, intermediate
risk = GTV ? 3 mm posteriorly and
5 mm all other directions
PTV for high risk = GTV ? 3 mm
posteriorly, 8 mm involved side, 5 mm
all other directions

96 % of PTV covered
by prescription dose

Bolzicco
et al.
(2010)

San Bortolo Hospital,
Italy

CyberKnife

GTV = Prostate
PTV = GTV ? 3 mm posteriorly and
5 mm all other directions

95 % of PTV covered
by prescription dose

Jabbari
et al.
(2012)

UCSF

CyberKnife

CTV = Prostate +seminal vesicle
PTV = CTV ± 2 mm (no overlap
with rectum)

HDR-like planning
Prescription isodose is
in 60–80 % range

Boike
et al.
(2011)

UT Southwestern
Medical Center

Tomotherapy or
Conventional linear
accelerator

CTV = Prostate
PTV = CTV ? 3 mm

95 % of PTV covered
by prescription dose

Oermann
et al.
(2011)

Georgetown
University

CyberKnife

GTV = Prostate
CTV = Prostate +proximal seminal
vesicle
PTV = CTV ? 3 mm posteriorly and
5 mm all other directions

95 % of PTV covered
by prescription dose

King et al.
(2011)

UCLA/Stanford
University

CyberKnife

PTV = Prostate ? 3 mm posteriorly
and 5 mm all other directions

95 % of PTV covered
by prescription dose

those delivered by means of HDR brachytherapy.
There are two ongoing prospective studies examining
the effects of delivering either a homogeneous,
EBRT-like dose distribution or an HDR-like, heterogeneous distribution (http://qa.accuray.com/ClinicalDevelopment/Clinical-Studies.aspx).

7

Cancer Distribution in the Prostate

Heterogeneous dose increase matching cancer distribution may have some advantages compared to
homogeneous dose coverage. However, cancer does

190

H. Ishiyama et al.

not equally distribute in prostate gland. McNeal et al.
(1988) reported 68 % of cancers as arising in the
peripheral zone, 24 % in the transition zone, and 8 %
in the central zone. On the other hand, Takashima
et al. (2002) reported predominant distribution in the
anterior half of the gland in Japanese male.
Advancement of diagnostic imaging may help to
detect cancer distribution accurately in prostate gland.
With the advent of focal therapy of prostate cancer
such as cryosurgery, several image modalities are
assessed for accurate tumor site detection in the
prostate gland (Lindner et al. 2010). Various types of
ultrasound (US) such as Color Doppler US, Contrastenhanced US, and Elastography or various sequences
of MRI such as diffusion weighted image, MR spectroscopy, and Dynamic Contrast-enhanced MRI may
be useful for tumor localization in patient with prostate cancer (Lindner et al. 2010; Verma and Rajesh
2011). Although positron emission tomography (PET)
with [18F] FDG had limitation in the diagnosis of
tumors in the pelvic region due to its rapid urinary
excretion, some investigators reported a synthetic
amino acid analog may be useful in the diagnosis of
prostate cancer (Asano et al. 2011; Schuster et al.
2007).

8

Technical Aspects

The technical aspects of SBRT such as immobilization, imaging system, beam definition, dose calculation, dose optimization, and verification are discussed
in the other chapters. Because the prostate gland is not
attached directly to any bony structures and its position is significantly affected by the degree of rectal
filling with fecal contents, it is subject to large interand intra-fractional variations. The required margin
size is dependent upon the type of alignment technique such as simple skin marks, electronic portal
images, cone-beam CT, and motion-tracking. It
appears that the motion-tracking system with fiducial
markers is now the most appropriate technique for
SBRT (Tanyi et al. 2010) and it requires the least
planning treatment volume (PTV) margin expansion
for accurate and precise dose delivery. Table 4 shows
reported margin sizes and PTV constraints for prostate SBRT. Generally, a PTV margin of 3–5 mm is
used for prostate SBRT. It is noteworthy that most
institutions use real-time motion tracking system

provided by the CyberKnife system (‘‘CyberKnife
System’’). Larger margin may be needed if no realtime motion tracking is available.

9

Clinical Applications

9.1

Preclinical Data

Lotan et al. (2006) demonstrated that dose–response
relationship for a range of SBRT dose level (15, 22.5,
and 45 Gy, all in 3 fractions respectively) using a
subcutaneous model of C4-2 human prostate cancer
cells. Similarly, we previously demonstrated the efficacy of SBRT resulting in a sustained antitumor control both in vitro and in vivo, when compared to
standard fractionation and control groups using
CWR22RV1 prostate cancer cell line (Teh et al. 2008).

9.2

Clinical Trials and Outcome

Currently, there is no long-term level I evidence to
establish that the SBRT regimens are superior to standard fractionation radiotherapy. However, several
investigators have reported encouraging results of
hypofractionated techniques for prostate cancer. More
recently, some institutions use SBRT as a boost after
EBRT, and they also report encouraging results
(Table 1).

9.2.1

Hypofractionation
in Two-Dimensional Era
Lloyd-Davies et al. (1990) reported their 22 years’
experience between 1962 and 1984. They used 55 Gy
in 12 fractions or 36 Gy in 6 fractions for prostate
cancer treatment using three-field, four-field, or double rotation technique. They reported no major early
or late morbidity.
9.2.2

Hypofractionation with
Three-Dimensional Conformal
Radiation Therapy
Lukka et al. (2005) reported a phase III randomized trial
where a conventional radiation therapy regimen of
66 Gy in 33 fractions was compared with a hypofractionated regimen of 52.5 Gy in 20 fractions (non-inferiority investigation). A total of 470 patients received
the standard fractionation and 466 patients received the

Prostate Cancer

abbreviated fractionation approaches respectively.
Biochemical or clinical failure in the standard fractionation and abbreviated arms were 52.95 and 59.95 %
respectively. They could not exclude the possibility that
the chosen hypofractionated regimen may be inferior to
the standard regimen. Acute toxicity was found to be
slightly higher in the abbreviated arm (11.4 %) compared with the standard arm (7 %), however, late toxicity was similarly low in both arms (3.2 %). The other
reports of hypofractionation with 3D-CRT (Akimoto
et al. 2004; Livsey et al. 2003; Soete et al. 2006; Yeoh
et al. 2010) are shown in Table 1.

9.2.3

Hypofractionation with Intensity
Modulated Radiation Therapy
Pollack et al. (2006, 2009) compared 70.2 Gy in 26
fractions using IMRT with 76 Gy in 38 fractions in a
randomized controlled trial. Up to 4 months of
androgen deprivation was permitted, and long-term
androgen deprivation was used for high-risk patients.
With a median follow-up of 39 months, 5-year biochemical failure was 17 % for the short arm and 21 %
for the standard arm. Five-year grade 2 or higher
gastrointestinal (GI) toxicity was 6 and 8 % and genitourinary (GU) toxicity was 25 and 17 % for the
hypofractionation and standard arms, respectively.
This study demonstrated that hypofractionation with
IMRT is equivalent to standard fractionation. Although
they showed relatively high GU toxicity rate, the reason
is not clear from their abstract (Pollack et al. 2009).
The other reports (Kupelian et al. 2007) are shown
in Table 1.
9.2.4

Clinical Studies of Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy
Among the clinical reports of SBRT, Freeman and
King reported the longest follow-up result (Freeman
and King 2011; King et al. 2009; Pawlicki et al. 2007;
Wiegner and King 2010). Forty-one low-risk patients
received 36.25 Gy in 5 fractions. Patients were treated with implantable gold fiducials for daily localization, as well as intrafraction tracking performed
every 30–90 s. With a median follow-up of 5 years,
biochemical progression-free survival was 93 %.
There was only one grade 3 late GU toxicity but no
grade 3 late GI toxicity.
Other SBRT studies also reported encouraging
results, although their median follow-up did not reach
5 years.

191

A phase I/II trial of SBRT using a linear accelerator and fiducial marker system was reported by
Madsen et al. (2007). Forty low-risk patients received
33.5 Gy in 5 fractions. With a median follow-up of
41 months, 4-year biochemical freedom-from-relapse
was 70 % by the American Society for Radiation
Oncology (ASTRO) definition and 90 % by the
alternative nadir ? 2 ng/mL failure definition. Rates
of acute grade 1 or 2 GU and GI toxicities were
49 and 39 %, respectively. There was a single incidence of grade 3 GU toxicity. Rates of late grade 1 or
2 GU and GI toxicities were 45 and 37 %,
respectively.
Friedland et al. (2009) reported 112 patients with
early stage organ-confined prostate cancer treated with
SBRT delivering 35–36 Gy in 5 consecutive fractions.
A single case of grade 3 rectal toxicity was reported,
although no other significant toxicity was seen.
Tang et al. (2008) reported the result of 30 patients
who received 35 Gy in 5 fractions, once a week over
29 days. At 6 months follow-up, there was no grade 3
toxicity in this report.
Katz et al. (2010) reported the result of 304
patients treated either with 35 or 36.25 Gy in 5
fractions. Rates of grade 2 or higher late GU toxicities
were 2 and 6.3 % for 35 and 36.25 Gy, respectively.
Rates of grade 2 or higher late GI toxicities were
0 and 2.9 % for 35 and 36.25 Gy, respectively.
Bolzicco et al. (2010) reported the result of 45 lowand intermediate-risk prostate cancer patients treated
with SBRT (35 Gy in 5 fractions). There was no
greater than grade 2 acute toxicity. Late toxicities
consisted of one patient (2.2 %) experiencing grade 2
rectal, one patient (2.2 %) with grade 3, and four
patients (8.8 %) with grade 1 urinary toxicity. No
patient had biochemical failure at last follow-up.
Boike et al. (2011) reported the result of phase I
dose-escalation study of SBRT. Three groups of 15
patients received 45, 47.5, and 50 Gy in 5 fractions.
Patients were treated every other day to give time for
tissue recovery. Their total dose and fraction size are
the highest among the published reports (Table 1). For
all patients, grade 2 or higher and grade 3 or higher GI
toxicities occurred in 18 and 2 % of patients, respectively. Grade 2 or higher and grade 3 or higher GU
toxicities occurred in 31 and 4 % of patients, respectively. A rectal balloon was used to displace the posterior rectal wall. Alpha-blocker (Tamsulosin) was
administrated for 6 weeks to reduce the risk of urinary

192

H. Ishiyama et al.

Fig. 1 MRI demonstrates area of hyperintensity with cancer as labeled by arrow (a); corresponding SBRT plan delivering 35 Gy
in 5 fractions (b)

Fig. 2 Homogeneous SBRT
plan delivering 36.25 Gy in
fractions prescribed at 84 %

complications. Dose escalation up to 50 Gy in 5 fractions showed no dose limiting toxicity.
Oermann et al. (2011) reported the result of 26
patients treated with 36.25 Gy in 5 fractions. Grade 2
or higher GU toxicity occurred in 27, 27, and 23 % at
1, 3, and 6 months after treatment. There was no
grade 3 or higher GU toxicity. There was no grade 2

or higher GI toxicity. No patient had biochemical
failure at last follow-up.
King et al. (2011) reported the result of 67 patients
treated with 36.25 Gy in 5 fractions. Late GU grade 2
and 3 toxicity occurred in 5 and 3.5 %, respectively.
There was no grade 4 GU toxicity. Late GI grade 2
toxicity occurred in 2 %. There was no grade 3 or

Prostate Cancer

193

of 18.3 months, 42 and 11 % of patients had grade 2
acute GU and GI toxicity, respectively, with no grade 3
or higher acute toxicity. Two patients experienced grade
3 late GU toxicity. All patients were without evidence of
biochemical or clinical progression.

10

Case Examples

Case 1
A 72-year-old man presented with a PSA of 6.7 ng/mL.
He did not have any urinary symptoms. Digital rectal
examination was normal. Transrectal ultrasound guided
biopsy showed Gleason 6 in two cores at the left base
and two cores of Gleason 8 at the right apex and right
mid gland. MRI with computer-assisted detection
(CAD) showed hyperintensity at the right apex. This
was fused into a CT scan for CyberKnife-based SBRT
treatment planning. The patient then received 35 Gy in
5 fractions to cover the PTV 5 mm around the prostate.
The right apical and mid gland received a minimum of
40 Gy. Patient had no side effects and PSA is 0.18 ng/
mL at 15 months after completion of SBRT. MRI image
with the arrow demonstrating area of hyperintensity
with cancer (Fig. 1a) and the corresponding SBRT
(heterogeneous) treatment plan (Fig. 1b) are shown.

Fig. 3 SBRT plan for the boost, delivering 18 Gy in 3
fractions using CyberKnife

higher GI toxicity. Biochemical no evidence of disease at 4 year was 94 %.

9.2.5

Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy
as a Boost
Katz et al. (2011) reported preliminary result of 73
patients treated with SBRT (18–21 Gy in 3 fractions)
as a boost to EBRT (45 Gy). The median follow-up
was 33 months. Less than 7 % grade 2 and no higher
grade acute toxicities occurred. There was one grade
4 and no grade 5 late toxicities occurred. Three year
biochemical control rates were 89.5 and 77.7 % for
intermediate- and high-risk patients, respectively.
Jabbari et al. (2012) reported the preliminary result
of not only SBRT as monotherapy (38 Gy in 4 fractions)
but also SBRT as post-whole pelvic IMRT boost (19 Gy
in 2 fractions and 45–50 Gy). With a median follow-up

Case 2
A 68-year-old man presented with PSA of 6.5 ng/mL
and Gleason score 6 in 3 of 12 cores. He received
36.25 Gy in 5 fractions in December 2006. SBRT
treatment was delivered on consecutive days. He had
mild urinary frequency and urgency at 18 months
which then resolved. PSA at 12, 36 and 60 months
were 1.8, 0.2, and 0.14 ng/mL respectively. Figure 2
shows SBRT (homogeneous) plan, treated to 84 %
isodose line to cover 95 % of PTV. PTV is 5 mm
from the prostate except 3 mm posteriorly.
Case 3
A 67-year-old man had T1c prostate cancer with PSA of
12.3 ng/mL and Gleason score of 6 in two cores and
Gleason score of 8 in two other cores. CT scans of
abdomen and pelvis and bone scan were negative. He
was treated in 2007 with 45 Gy in 25 fractions to the
whole pelvis followed by 18 Gy in 3 fractions boost with
CyberKnife-based SBRT (Fig. 3). The boost field covered prostate plus 5 mm except 3 mm posteriorly. Initially, PSA dropped as low as 1.8 ng/mL after 12 months.

194

H. Ishiyama et al.

By 2 years, PSA rose to 11.6 ng/mL. Biopsy was done
and showed atrophied glands with no evidence of cancer.
The patient subsequently developed lung nodules and
biopsy was positive for metastatic prostate cancer. He
was then put on androgen deprivation therapy. He
responded well with PSA \1 ng/mL and shrinkage of
the lung nodules.

11

Future Directions

SBRT for prostate cancer is an emerging treatment
approach with promise. However, slightly different
from SBRT for lung, liver tumor, and other tumors,
there are another competing radiotherapy options
including standard fractionation IMRT and brachytherapy, both with long-term treatment efficacy and
favorable toxicity profile. SBRT will inevitably compete with brachytherapy over the same candidates with
low-risk prostate cancer. Both are convenient for the
patients, with one to few fractions respectively. SBRT is
a good treatment option for prostate cancer with a low
a/b ratio and promising as not only monotherapy but
also in combination with conventional EBRT as a boost.
LQ model is a fundamental basis for prostate
cancer SBRT because treatment regimen is highly
dependent on a/b ratio estimated from this model. An
achievement of consensus on low a/b ratio of prostate
cancer is one of the great advances in recent years.
However, several factors such as non-uniform dose
distributions and tumor heterogeneity, might confound the estimation of a/b ratio. This model has not
yet been the perfect ‘‘model’’ so far.
For low-risk prostate cancer patients, it seems there
is no significant difference between various treatment
modalities, although they have not yet been compared
in a randomized control trial. SBRT is also expected to
have favorable treatment result with low-risk patient,
although sufficient long-term data has not been reported. After confirmation of safety and at least equal
efficacy compared to conventional treatment, the next
groups of candidates for SBRT would be intermediaterisk and high-risk patients with careful patient selection.
Currently, RTOG is conducting a phase II randomized trial (RTOG-0938) comparing two different hypofractionated regimens of 36.25 Gy in 5 fractions and
51.6 Gy in 12 fractions for favorable risk prostate cancer using image-guided radiation therapy techniques,
and the results are eagerly awaited (www.rtog.org).

References
Akimoto T, Muramatsu H, Takahashi M, Saito J, Kitamoto Y,
Harashima K, Miyazawa Y, Yamada M, Ito K, Kurokawa K,
Yamanaka H, Nakano T, Mitsuhashi N, Niibe H (2004) Rectal
bleeding after hypofractionated radiotherapy for prostate
cancer: correlation between clinical and dosimetric parameters and the incidence of grade 2 or worse rectal bleeding.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 60(4):1033–1039. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2004.07.695, S0360-3016(04)02091-7 [pii]
Asano Y, Inoue Y, Ikeda Y, Kikuchi K, Hara T, Taguchi C,
Tokushige T, Maruo H, Takeda T, Nakamura T, Fujita T,
Kumagai Y, Hayakawa K (2011) Phase I clinical study of
NMK36: a new PET tracer with the synthetic amino acid
analogue anti-[18F]FACBC. Ann Nucl Med 25(6):414–418.
doi:10.1007/s12149-011-0477-z
Boike TP, Lotan Y, Cho LC, Brindle J, Derose P, Xie XJ, Yan
J, Foster R, Pistenmaa D, Perkins A, Cooley S,Timmerman
R (2011) Phase I dose-escalation study of stereotactic body
radiation therapy for low- and intermediate-risk prostate
cancer. J Clin Oncol. doi:10.1200/JCO.2010.31.4377, JCO.
2010.31.4377 [pii]
Bolzicco G, Favretto MS, Scremin E, Tambone C, Tasca A
(2010) Guglielmi R Image-guided stereotactic body radiation
therapy for clinically localized prostate cancer: preliminary
clinical results. Technol Cancer Res Treat 9(5):473–477
Brenner DJ (2004) Fractionation and late rectal toxicity. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 60(4):1013–1015. doi:10.1016/j.
ijrobp.2004.04.014, S0360301604006480 [pii]
Brenner DJ, Hall EJ (1999) Fractionation and protraction for
radiotherapy of prostate carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 43(5):1095–1101. S0360-3016(98)00438-6 [pii]
Brenner D, Armour E, Corry P, Hall E (1998) Sublethal
damage repair times for a late-responding tissue relevant to
brachytherapy (and external-beam radiotherapy): implications for new brachytherapy protocols. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 41(1):135–138. S0360-3016(98)00029-7[pii]
Dasu A (2007) Is the alpha/beta value for prostate tumours
low enough to be safely used in clinical trials? Clin Oncol
(R Coll Radiol) 19(5):289–301. doi:10.1016/j.clon.2007.
02.007, S0936-6555(07)00518-3 [pii]
Dewit L, Oussoren Y, Bartelink H, Thames HD (1989) The effect
of cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) on radiation damage in
mouse rectum after fractionated irradiation. Radiother Oncol
16(2):121–128. 0167-8140(89)90029-7 [pii]
Dubray BM, Thames HD (1994) Chronic radiation damage in
the rat rectum: an analysis of the influences of fractionation,
time and volume. Radiother Oncol 33(1):41–47. 01678140(94)90084-1 [pii]
Fowler JF, Ritter MA, Chappell RJ, Brenner DJ (2003) What
hypofractionated protocols should be tested for prostate
cancer? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 56(4):1093–1104.
S0360301603001329 [pii]
Freeman DE,King CR (2011) Stereotactic body radiotherapy
for low-risk prostate cancer: five-year outcomes. Radiat
Oncol 6(1):3. doi:10.1186/1748-717X-6-3, 1748-717X-6-3
[pii]
Friedland JL, Freeman DE, Masterson-McGary ME, Spellberg
DM (2009) Stereotactic body radiotherapy: an emerging

Prostate Cancer
treatment approach for localized prostate cancer. Technol
Cancer Res Treat 8(5):387–392
Gasinska A, Dubray B, Hill SA, Denekamp J, Thames HD,
Fowler JF (1993) Early and late injuries in mouse rectum
after fractionated X-ray and neutron irradiation. Radiother
Oncol
26(3):244–253.
http://qa.accuray.com/ClinicalDevelopment/Clinical-Studies.aspx
Jabbari S, Weinberg VK, Kaprealian T, Hsu IC, Ma L, Chuang
C, Descovich M, Shiao S, Shinohara K, Roach M, 3rd,
Gottschalk AR (2012) Stereotactic body radiotherapy as
monotherapy or post-external beam Radiotherapy boost for
prostate cancer: technique, early toxicity, and PSA
response. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. doi:10.1016/j.
ijrobp.2010.10.026, S0360-3016(10)03447-4 [pii]
Katz AJ, Santoro M, Ashley R, Diblasio F, Witten M (2010)
Stereotactic body radiotherapy for organ-confined prostate
cancer. BMC Urol 10:1. doi:10.1186/1471-2490-10-1,
1471-2490-10-1 [pii]
Katz AJ, Santoro M, Ashley R, Diblasio F, Witten M (2011)
Stereotactic body radiotherapy as boost for organ-confined
prostate cancer. Technol Cancer Res Treat 9(6): 575–582.
doi:c4310/Stereotactic-Body-Radiotherapy-as-Boost-forOrgan-confined-Prostate-Cancer-575-582-p17824.html [pii]
King CR, Brooks JD, Gill H, Pawlicki T, Cotrutz C, Presti JC Jr
(2009) Stereotactic body radiotherapy for localized prostate
cancer: interim results of a prospective phase II clinical trial.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 73(4):1043–1048. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp. 2008.05.059, S0360-3016(08)02459-0 [pii]
King CR, Brooks JD, Gill H, Presti JC Jr (2011) Long-term
outcomes from a prospective trial of stereotactic body
radiotherapy for low-risk prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.11.054, S0360-3016
(10)03677-1 [pii]
Kupelian PA, Willoughby TR, Reddy CA, Klein EA,Mahadevan A (2007) Hypofractionated intensity-modulated radiotherapy (70 Gy at 2.5 Gy per fraction) for localized prostate
cancer: Cleveland clinic experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 68(5): 1424–1430. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.01.067,
S0360-3016(07)00535-4 [pii]
Lindner U, Lawrentschuk N, Trachtenberg J (2010) Image
guidance for focal therapy of prostate cancer. World J Urol
28(6):727–734. doi:10.1007/s00345-010-0604-9
Livsey JE, Cowan RA, Wylie JP, Swindell R, Read G, Khoo
VS, Logue JP (2003) Hypofractionated conformal radiotherapy in carcinoma of the prostate: five-year outcome
analysis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 57(5):1254–1259.
S0360301603007521 [pii]
Lloyd-Davies RW, Collins CD, Swan AV (1990) Carcinoma of
prostate treated by radical external beam radiotherapy using
hypofractionation. Twenty-two years’ experience (1962–
1984). Urology 36(2):107–111. doi:10.1016/0090-4295(90)
80207-4, 0090-4295(90)80207-4 [pii]
Lotan Y, Stanfield J, Cho LC, Sherwood JB, Abdel-Aziz KF,
Chang CH, Forster K, Kabbani W, Hsieh JT, Choy H,
Timmerman R (2006) Efficacy of high dose per fraction
radiation for implanted human prostate cancer in a
nude mouse model. J Urol 175(5):1932–1936. doi:
10.1016/S0022-5347(05)00893-1, S0022-5347(05)00893-1
[pii]
Lukka H, Hayter C, Julian JA, Warde P, Morris WJ,
Gospodarowicz M, Levine M, Sathya J, Choo R, Prichard

195
H, Brundage M, Kwan W (2005) Randomized trial comparing two fractionation schedules for patients with localized prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 23(25):6132–6138. doi:
10.1200/JCO.2005.06.153, 23/25/6132 [pii]
Maciejewski B (2009) Boost in radiotherapy: external beam
sunset, brachytherapy sunrise. J Contemp Brachyther 1(1):
5–10
Madsen BL, Hsi RA, Pham HT, Fowler JF, Esagui L,Corman J
(2007) Stereotactic hypofractionated accurate radiotherapy
of the prostate (SHARP), 33.5 Gy in five fractions for
localized disease: first clinical trial results. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 67(4):1099–1105. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2006.10.050, S0360-3016(06)03369-4 [pii]
Martinez AA, Gonzalez J, Ye H, Ghilezan M, Shetty S, Kernen
K, Gustafson G, Krauss D, Vicini F, Kestin L (2011) Dose
escalation improves cancer-related events at 10 years for
intermediate- and high-risk prostate cancer patients treated
with hypofractionated high-dose-rate boost and external
beam radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
79(2):363–370. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.10.035, S03603016(09)03428-2 [pii]
McNeal JE, Redwine EA, Freiha FS, Stamey TA (1988) Zonal
distribution of prostatic adenocarcinoma. Correlation with
histologic pattern and direction of spread. Am J Surg Pathol
12(12):897–906
Oermann EK, Suy S, Hanscom HN, Kim JS, Lei S, Yu X,
Zhang G, Ennis B, Rohan JP, Piel N, Sherer BA, Borum D,
Chen VJ, Batipps GP, Constantinople NL, Dejter SW,
Bandi G, Pahira J, McGeagh KG, Adams-Campbell L, Jha
R, Dawson NA, Collins BT, Dritschilo A, Lynch JH, Collins
SP (2011) Low incidence of new biochemical and clinical
hypogonadism following hypofractionated stereotactic body
radiation therapy (SBRT) monotherapy for low- to intermediate-risk prostate cancer. J Hematol Oncol 4:12. doi:
10.1186/1756-8722-4-12, 1756-8722-4-12 [pii]
Park C, Papiez L, Zhang S, Story M, Timmerman RD (2008)
Universal survival curve and single fraction equivalent
dose: useful tools in understanding potency of ablative
radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 70(3):847–852.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.10.059, S0360-3016(07)04460-4
[pii]
Pawlicki T, Cotrutz C, King C (2007) Prostate cancer therapy
with stereotactic body radiation therapy. Front Radiat Ther
Oncol 40:395–406. doi:10.1159/0000106049, 10.1159/
0000106049 [pii]
Perez CA (2004) Principles and practice of radiation oncology.
Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
Pollack A, Hanlon AL, Horwitz EM, Feigenberg SJ, Konski
AA, Movsas B, Greenberg RE, Uzzo RG, Ma CM,
McNeeley SW, Buyyounouski MK, Price RA Jr (2006)
Dosimetry and preliminary acute toxicity in the first 100
men treated for prostate cancer on a randomized hypofractionation dose escalation trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
64(2):518–526. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2005.07.970, S03603016(05)02228-5 [pii]
Pollack A, Buyyounouski M, Horwitz E, Price S, Feigenberg S,
Konski A, Greenberg R, Uzzo R, Ma C (2009) Hypofractionation for Prostate cancer: interim results of a randomized trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 75(3):S81–82
Rene N, Faria S, Cury F, David M, Duclos M, Shenouda G,
Souhami L (2010) Hypofractionated radiotherapy for

196
favorable risk prostate cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
77(3):805–810. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.05.047, S03603016(09)00829-3 [pii]
Ritter M (2008) Rationale, conduct, and outcome using
hypofractionated radiotherapy in prostate cancer. Semin
Radiat Oncol 18(4):249–256. doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.
2008.04.007, S1053-4296(08)00036-2 [pii]
Schuster DM, Votaw JR, Nieh PT, Yu W, Nye JA, Master V,
Bowman FD, Issa MM, Goodman MM (2007) Initial
experience with the radiotracer anti-1-amino-3-18F-fluorocyclobutane-1-carboxylic acid with PET/CT in prostate
carcinoma. J Nucl Med 48(1):56–63. 48/1/56 [pii]
Siegel R, Naishadham MA, Jemal A (2012) Cancer Statistics.
J Clin 62:10–29
Soete G, Arcangeli S, De Meerleer G, Landoni V, Fonteyne V,
Arcangeli G, De Neve W, Storme G (2006) Phase II study
of a four-week hypofractionated external beam radiotherapy
regimen for prostate cancer: report on acute toxicity.
Radiother Oncol 80(1):78–81. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2006.
06.005, S0167-8140(06)00247-7 [pii]
Takashima R, Egawa S, Kuwao S, Baba S (2002) Anterior
distribution of Stage T1c nonpalpable tumors in radical
prostatectomy specimens. Urology 59(5):692–697. S00904
2950201525X [pii]
Tang CI, Loblaw DA, Cheung P, Holden L, Morton G, Basran
PS, Tirona R, Cardoso M, Pang G, Gardner S, Cesta A
(2008) Phase I/II study of a five-fraction hypofractionated
accelerated radiotherapy treatment for low-risk localised
prostate cancer: early results of pHART3. Clin Oncol (R
Coll Radiol) 20(10):729–737. doi:10.1016/j.clon.2008.08.
006, S0936-6555(08)00357-9 [pii]
Tanyi JA, He T, Summers PA, Mburu RG, Kato CM, Rhodes
SM, Hung AY, Fuss M (2010) Assessment of planning
target volume margins for intensity-modulated radiotherapy
of the prostate gland: role of daily inter- and intra-fraction
motion. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 78(5):1579–1585. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.02.001, S0360-3016(10)00223-3 [pii]

H. Ishiyama et al.
Teh BSGY, Wang X, Zhu J, Mai W, Huang Y, Paulino AC,
Ittmann MBE (2008) In vitro and in vivo efficacy of ablative
hypfractionation radiation/stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) for human prostate cancer. Proceedings
Radiological Society of North America Annual Meeting
abstr # SSA22-01
Terry NH, Denekamp J (1984) RBE values and repair
characteristics for colo-rectal injury after caesium 137
gamma-ray and neutron irradiation. II. Fractionation up to
ten doses. Br J Radiol 57(679):617–629
van der Kogel AJ, Jarrett KA, Paciotti MA, Raju MR (1988)
Radiation tolerance of the rat rectum to fractionated X-rays
and pi-mesons. Radiother Oncol 12(3):225–232. doi:
10.1016/0167-8140(88)90265-4,
0167-8140(88)90265-4
[pii]
Verma S, Rajesh A (2011) A clinically relevant approach to
imaging prostate cancer: review. Am J Roentgenol 196(3
Suppl): S1-10 Quiz S11-14. doi:10.2214/AJR.09.7196, 196/
3_Supplement/S1 [pii]
Wang JZ, Huang Z, Lo SS, Yuh WT, Mayr NA (2010) A
generalized linear-quadratic model for radiosurgery, stereotactic body radiation therapy, and high-dose rate brachytherapy. Sci Transl Med 2(39): 39ra48. doi:10.1126/
scitranslmed.3000864, 2/39/39ra48 [pii]
Wiegner EA, King CR (2010) Sexual function after stereotactic
body radiotherapy for prostate cancer: results of a prospective clinical trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 78(2):
442–448. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.07.1748, S0360-3016
(09)02950-2 [pii]
Yeoh EE, Botten RJ, Butters J, Di Matteo AC, Holloway RH,
Fowler J (2010) Hypofractionated versus conventionally
fractionated radiotherapy for prostate carcinoma: final
results of phase III randomized trial. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.07.1984, S0360-3016
(10)03031-2 [pii]

Renal Cell Carcinoma
Bin S. Teh, Hiromichi Ishiyama, Angel I. Blanco, Lee E. Ponsky,
Simon S. Lo, Bo Xu, E. Brian Butler, Robert J. Amato,
and Rodney J. Ellis

Contents

10

Future Directions..................................................... 205

References.......................................................................... 208
1

Introduction.............................................................. 198

2

Radiobiology of Renal Cell Carcinoma ................ 199

Abstract

3

Goals and Rationale of SBRT................................ 199

4

Preclinical Studies ................................................... 200

5

Clinical Application and Studies ........................... 200

6

Technical Aspects .................................................... 202

7

Toxicity...................................................................... 203

8

Abscopal Effects ....................................................... 203

9

Case Examples ......................................................... 204

Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is traditionally
considered to be a ‘‘radioresistant’’ malignancy.
Surgery has been the mainstay of treatment in the
management of primary RCC, from open to laparoscopic and more recently robotic radical nephrectomy. For selected patients, nephron-sparing partial
nephrectomy is performed. Other local therapy
options include radiofrequency ablation (RFA),
cryoablation, and other ablative procedures. Adjuvant radiotherapy after nephrectomy in high-risk
patients has been shown to improve local control but
not overall survival. These patients have high
propensity for developing distant metastases which
may explain the lack of survival benefits with
adjuvant radiotherapy. In addition, it is also very
difficult to deliver high dose radiation with conventional technique because of the radiation tolerance
of normal tissues, especially the small bowels. With
the approved use of various effective targeted
agents, patients with high risk and metastatic RCC
are now surviving longer and the role of local
therapy for both primary and metastatic RCC
has also become more important. Stereotactic
radiosurgery (SRS) has been shown to be very
effective in the management of RCC brain metastases. Extracranially, conventional radiotherapy has
played an important role in the palliation of metastatic RCC associated symptoms such as pain.
Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT), a
continuum of technological advances in SRS from

B. S. Teh (&)  A. I. Blanco  B. Xu  E. B. Butler
Department of Radiation Oncology, The Methodist
Hospital, Cancer Center and Research Institute,
6565 Fannin, DB1-077, Houston, TX 77030, USA
e-mail: bteh@tmhs.org
H. Ishiyama
Department of Radiology and Radiation Oncology,
Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa, Japan
L. E. Ponsky
Center for Urologic Oncology and Minimally Invasive
Therapies, Urology Institute, University Hospitals Case
Medical Center, Case Western Reserve University School
of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
S. S. Lo  R. J. Ellis
Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospitals
Seidman Cancer Center, Case Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
R. J. Amato
Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Oncology,
University of Texas Health Sciences Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2012_706, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

197

198

B. S. Teh et al.

intracranial to extracranial application, has now
evolved to show promise in the local management of
primary RCC, local recurrence, and various metastatic sites.

1

Introduction

In 2012, an estimated 64,770 new cases of kidney
cancer will be diagnosed in the USA with the
mortality of 13,570 cases (Siegel et al. 2012).
Majority ([90 %) of these kidney cancers are renal
cell carcinoma (RCC). The incidence rates of RCC
have risen by 2–3 % over the past 20 years, which is
likely due to the increased detection of small primary
tumors from increased use of body imaging
(Thompson and Peek 1988).
Surgery remains the mainstay of treatment for
primary localized, nonmetastatic RCC, with the first
radical nephrectomy reported in 1948 (Mortensen
1948). Radical or partial nephrectomy can be performed either as an open procedure or laparoscopically or more recently via robotic approach. Two
randomized controlled trials have shown that radical
nephrectomy performed on patients with metastatic
RCC and receiving systemic interferon could lead to
survival benefit (Flanigan et al. 2001; Mickisch et al.
2001). However, in the current era of molecular
targeted therapy, the role of nephrectomy in patients
with metastatic disease is not certain. Other local
therapeutic options include cryotherapy, radiofrequency ablation (RFA), microwave thermotherapy,
and high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU), are
also being evaluated. The role of metastasectomy in
patients with metastatic disease remains controversial, although it is considered for palliation in patients
with only partial regression of metastases or in those
with prolonged disease regression following systemic
therapy. One possible exception is the use of metastasectomy for solitary metastasis, which can provide
long-term remission rates of up to 30 %, particularly
in cases of metachronous pulmonary metastases.
Recently, consolidative metastatectomy has been
shown to be feasible and safe after targeted therapy in
a selected group of patients with limited tumor
burden (Karam 2011).

For many years, efforts have been taken to
incorporate conventionally fractionated radiotherapy
into the routine management of RCC. Two prospective
clinical trials later failed to show the survival benefit
of preoperative radiotherapy. Van der Werf-Messing
et al. reported no survival benefit with preoperative
radiation to 30 Gy in 15 fractions followed by
immediate nephrectomy in 126 evaluable patients, but
noted an increase in complete resection rate in patients
with T3 lesions (Van der Werf-Messing 1973).
A second study by Juusela et al. utilizing preoperative
radiotherapy at 2.2 Gy per fraction to 33 Gy has
shown inferior overall survival for patients treated
with preoperative radiotherapy (47 versus 63 % at
5 years) (Juusela et al. 1977). Similarly, postoperative
radiotherapy (PORT) failed to show definite survival
benefit despite initial encouraging retrospective
reports. A Copenhagen Renal Cancer Study Group
prospective randomized trial reported worse survival
in patients receiving PORT to 50 Gy in 20 fractions (5
year survival 62 % for nephrectomy alone versus
38 % nephrectomy and adjuvant radiotherapy) as well
as significant complications in 44 % of the patients
receiving PORT (Kjaer et al. 1987). The results of this
study highlights the inability of conventional radiotherapy to deliver high dose radiation to the surgical
bed because of the dose-limiting surrounding critical
normal structures such as bowels, spinal cord, liver
and remaining kidney.
Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a
promising treatment modality in radiation oncology
that delivers a very high dose of radiation to the
tumor target with high precision using single or a
small number of fractions (Potters et al. 2004;
Lo et al. 2010). SBRT is the result of technological
advances in patient/tumor immobilization, image
guidance, as well as treatment planning and delivery
(Teh et al. 2010). In this chapter, radiobiology of
RCC, goals and rationale, preclinical data, clinical
experience, and technical challenges with SBRT in
the management of mainly primary and partly
metastatic RCC will be discussed. Metastatic RCC
involving sites other than kidney treated with SBRT
will also be covered in other chapters of this textbook. Details on stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) for
RCC brain metastases are also beyond the scope of
this chapter.

Renal Cell Carcinoma

2

199

Radiobiology of Renal Cell
Carcinoma

RCC has traditionally been considered intrinsically
radioresistant, although the specific molecular mechanisms responsible for radioresistance have not been
elucidated. However, radioresistance was verified
through laboratory experiments by Deschavanne
et al., indicating that RCC is among the most radioresistant in vitro cell types (Deschavanne and Fertil
1996). Hypoxia has been known to cause resistance to
radiotherapy. Radioresistance has been postulated to
be related to HIFa expression as these protein levels
are increased under hypoxic conditions. A significant
number of RCC are associated with von HippelLindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene which targets
the a subunits of the hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFa)
(Tann et al. 2004). Thus, a characteristic of RCC with
loss of VHL is high levels of HIFa. This may explain
the radioresistance of RCC but the exact mechanism
of this is still not certain. Bhatt et al. has shown that
the decrease in the HIFa levels can lead to the
increase in radiosensitivity (Bhatt et al. 2008).
Another possible explanation may lie in STAT1, a
transcription factor downstream of the interferon
signaling pathway. Recent data from Hui et al.,
demonstrated increased radiosensitivity among
human clear cell RCC samples by the inhibition of
STAT1 expression by fludarabine and siRNA (Hui
et al. 2009). The manipulation of this, and potentially
additional pathways, may help identify agents
allowing for synergistic activity in combination with
RT, further expanding local management options.
Current radiobiologic modeling of dose response
using conventional fraction sizes of 1.8–3 Gy is based
on the concept of biologic effective dose (BED),


where BED ¼ nd 1 þ d (Deschavanne and Fertil
a=b

1996; Fowler 1989). Two retrospective analyses have
utilized the linear quadratic (LQ) model to investigate the biologic effective dose for appropriate palliative management of RCC. In the first, using a
retrospective dataset of 107 patients and 150 irradiated sites, DiBiase et al. revealed an 86 % palliative
response rate after RT, including a 49 % complete
response rate (DiBiase et al. 1997). Multivariate analysis identified performance status and a higher
BED as significant response predictors. Nevertheless,

the study utilized a presumed a/b value 10, which
might be an over estimate based on more recent
studies. A subsequent study by Wilson et al. evaluated
143 palliative treatments among 78 patients with
metastatic RCC and described a similar response rate
of 73 % (Wilson et al. 2003). The LQ model was used
to calculate biologic effective doses using a/b ratios
of 3 and 7. Response type and duration were not
predicted by BED3 or BED7.
The efficacy of conventionally fractionated
palliative radiotherapy for metastatic RCC was best
documented in a well-conducted, prospective phase II
trial by Lee et al., which included 31 patients (Lee
et al. 2005). The authors prescribed 30 Gy in 10
fractions and documented pain, analgesic use, symptoms, and quality of life using validated questionnaire
instruments prior to and at multiple times after RT.
Among patients treated for pain, 83 % experienced
site-specific pain relief after RT, and 48 % did not
require increased analgesic medication. Unfortunately, global pain and quality of life scores were
limited due to progressive systemic disease. Interestingly, the aforementioned response rate of 83 % was
achieved despite a BED10 of 39 Gy, which is lower
than the threshold of 50 Gy previously suggested by
DiBiase (DiBiase et al. 1997). As a result, the authors
supported the continued use of 30 Gy in 10 fractions
as a palliative schedule for RCC, although their small
patient numbers and limited follow-up evaluation
may preclude definitive conclusions, particularly in
the modern area of protracted survival of metastatic
RCC and sequential use of multiple targeted agents.
Despite the inherent controversies in optimizing
radiotherapy management of metastatic RCC relating
to the aforementioned laboratory and clinical
evidence supporting dose escalation, technical
developments in the fields of stereotactic radiosurgery
(SRS), utilized initially for brain tumors and most
recently expanded to extracranial sites, namely
SBRT, have allowed radiotherapy treatment
intensification with acceptable toxicity rates.

3

Goals and Rationale of SBRT

The definitive treatment for primary RCC is still
surgery either radical or partial nephrectomy,
especially robotic surgery in this modern era. Final

200

B. S. Teh et al.

pathology can be confirmed and the mass effects from
local RCC can be relieved with surgery. In selected
patients who are not candidates for surgery, local
therapies e.g., RFA, cryoablation, microwave
thermotherapy, HIFU as well as SBRT is considered.
SBRT is the only noninvasive procedure that can be
performed as outpatient. There is no risk of
anesthesia, bleeding, infection, or pain. SBRT also
allows better dosimetric coverage compared to other
local invasive approaches. About one-third of the
patients presented with RCC have metastatic disease.
They are surviving longer in this era of multiple
effective targeted therapy agents. Thus, the role of
local therapy has become more important. As stated
above, the role of nephrectomy is controversial in the
era of targeted therapy. The goals and roles of SBRT
include local control of primary RCC as well as
metastatic RCC. SBRT can also help in palliating
symptoms such as pain caused by RCC. It has been
observed that SBRT, with more potent radiobiological dose, provides faster and more durable pain relief
compared to conventional radiotherapy (Teh et al.
2007a, b, c; Jhaveri et al. 2008; Jhaveri et al. 2012).
The beneficial abscopal effects have also been
observed and reported with SBRT (Wersall et al.
2006; Ishiyama et al. 2012). There are potential
benefits of combining targeted therapy and radiotherapy (Kasibhatla et al. 2007).

4

Preclinical Studies

Walsh et al. reported the result of ablative high-doseper-fraction radiation i.e., SBRT for implanted A498
human RCC in a nude mouse xenograft model
(Walsh et al. 2006) Tumor-bearing mice were
irradiated with three fractions (once per week) for a
total dose of 48 Gy. The mice receiving SBRT
demonstrated a sustained decrease in tumor volume
and marked cytologic changes with no mitoses when
compared to the control group. Biologically potent
radiation dose delivered with SBRT is one of the
promising means to overcome ‘‘radioresistance’’ in
RCC. The proposed mechanism of cell killing with
SBRT is distinctive from that of conventionally
fractionated radiotherapy (Garcia-Barros et al. 2003).

5

Clinical Application and Studies

Conventional radiotherapy has been shown to be
effective in palliating most metastatic sites of RCC
including lung, bone, and soft tissues in approximately
50 % of patients. (DiBiase et al. 1997) On the other
hand, SRS has been demonstrated to provide an
excellent local control rate as high as 95 % in selected
patients with RCC brain metastases. (Doh et al. 2006;
Hoshi et al. 2002; Noel et al. 2004; Sheehan et al.
2003). More recently, Teh et al. showed pathologic
complete response (CR) in RCC brain metastases after
SRS delivering 20 Gy. (Teh et al. 2007a, b, c) further
suggesting that RCC may not be truly ‘‘radioresistant’’
but more likely to be ‘‘radioresistant’’ to lower fraction
sizes. As in the case of SRS, SBRT is ideal to be
utilized in patients with ‘‘radio-resistant’’ RCC.
SBRT, with the capability to deliver high dose per
fraction, is made feasible by the recent refinement in
precise image-guided radiation therapy (IGRT) and
stereotaxis technology (Doh et al. 2006; Teh et al.
2010). In contrast to other local therapeutic modalities,
SBRT offers the only noninvasive, highly efficient
means to eradicate discreet tumor foci either at a
primary or metastatic site with radiobiologically
potent dose (Lo et al. 2010).
Table 1 shows the results of SBRT for primary and
metastatic RCC (Wersall et al. 2005; Svedman et al.
2006; Nguyen et al. 2010; Svedman et al. 2008;
Gerszten et al. 2005; Beitler et al. 2004; Ponsky et al.
2007; Teh et al. 2007a, b, c; Kaplan et al. 2010;
Zelefsky et al. 2012; Jhaveri et al. 2012). The reported
results were encouraging. Beitler et al. first reported
on nine patients with nonmetastatic RCC (including
two patients with bilateral disease) treated definitively
using conformal techniques to 40 Gy in 5 fractions
(Beitler et al. 2004). Extended survival was noted in
four of the nine patients, all of whom had small
(\3.4 cm), none-negative, organ-confined lesions.
More extensive experience was reported from the
Karolinska Institute (Wersall et al. 2005; Wersäll
et al. 2006; Svedman et al. 2008). Svedman et al.
reported complete response (CR) rate of 21 % from
82 lesions of 30 patients after SBRT of 25–45 Gy in
3–5 fractions (Svedman et al. 2006). Wersall et al.

2004

2005

2005

2006

2007

2007

2008

2010

2010

2012

2012

Beitler

Wersall

Gerszten

Svedman

Ponsky

Teh

Svedman

Nguyen

Kaplan

Zelefsky

Jhaveri

18

NA

12

48

7

16

3

30

48

58

9

Pts
No.

24

105

NA

55

7

25

3

82

60

162

12

Lesions
No.

Metastases

Metastases

Primary

Spinal metastases

Primary and metastatic
lesions for patients with
only one functioning
kidney

Primary 2, metastases 23

Primary

Primary 10, metastases
72

Spinal metastases

Primary 8, metastases
154

Primary

Target

0

0

0

22
patients

0

0

0

0

42
lesions

0

0

Combine
with
EBRT

18–40 Gy in
3–5 fractions

18–24 Gy/1fx
or 24–30 Gy/
3–5 fxs or
others

21 Gy, 28 Gy,
32 Gy, 39 Gy,
all in 3fxs

24 Gy/1fx,
27 Gy/3fxs,
30 Gy/5fxs

30 Gy/3 fxs to
40 Gy/4 fxs

24–40 Gy in
3–6 fxs

16 Gy/4 fxs

25 Gy/5 fxs to
45 Gy/3 fxs

Mean 20 Gy
(17.5–25)/1 fx

18 Gy/3 fxs to
48 Gy/4 fxs

40 Gy/5 fxs

Dose

78 % had pain relief. Patients treated
with BED [ 85 Gy achieved faster
and more durable pain relief

3-yr local progression free 44 %
([ 24 Gy/1fx, 88 %; \ 24 Gy/1fx,
21 %; hypofractionated, 17 %)

PD in 1 of 12 patients

1 year spine tumor progression free
82.1 %

Local control in 6 patients

93 % had symptomatic relief, 2
patients had PD, 87 % local control

Pathological CR in 1 of 3 patients

CR, 21 %; PR, 31 %; SD, 27 %; PD
2 % of all tumor sites

Pain relief in 34 of 38 patients who
were treated for pain. Radiographical tumor control in 7 of 8
patients

CR, 30 %; PR, 22 %; SD, 37 %;
PD, 2 % of all tumor sites

Distant failure in 2 patients, regional
nodal failure in 1 patient, new tumor
in un-irradiated portion in 1 patient

Tumor response

CR, complete response; PR, partial response; SD, stable disease; PD, progressive disease; NA, not available; fx, fraction; G, grade

Years

Author

Table 1 Clinical results of SBRT for primary or metastatic RCC

G1 dermatitis in 1 patient

G2 dermatitis in 2 patients, G4
skin erythema in 1 patient,
fracture in 4 patients

No toxicity

G3 pain in 2 %
G3 anemia in 2 %

Unaffected kidney function in 5
patients

No toxicity

No toxicity

16 in 28 patients, G 1–2

No toxicity

23 of 58 patients had at least one
side effect (1/2 had G3).1 patient
had fatal gastric hemorrhage (G4)

No severe toxicity

Side effect

Renal Cell Carcinoma
201

202

reported CR rate of 30 % from 162 lesions of 58
patients after SBRT of 18–48 Gy in 3–4 fractions
(Wersall et al. 2005). Compared to the typical result
of whole brain radiotherapy (Culine et al. 1998; Fokas
et al. 2010; Maor et al. 1988) that showed almost no
CR rate after 30 Gy in 10 fractions, SBRT has a
significantly higher response rate in primary and
metastatic RCC. Svedman et al. further reported the
results of seven patients with one functioning kidney
who underwent SBRT for primary and metastatic
RCC. They all had initial nephrectomy and then
developed metastases to the contralateral kidney
(Svedman et al. 2008). With SBRT, local control was
achieved in six patients and stable renal function was
maintained in five patients.
Teh et al. reported on the outcome of 14 patients
with 23 extra cranial metastatic RCC lesions, and two
patients with unresectable primary RCC treated with
SBRT (24–40 Gy in 3–6 fractions) (Teh et al. 2007a,
b, c). Thirteen patients (93 %) achieved symptomatic
relief. Two patients had local progression, yielding a
local control rate of 87 %. In the two patients with
primary RCC, tumor size remained unchanged but
their pain improved and their renal function was
unchanged post SBRT. There were no significant
treatment related side effects (Teh et al. 2007a, b, c).
Favorable outcomes for SBRT in the treatment of
RCC spinal metastases have also been reported.
Gertzen et al. described 48 patients with 60 RCC
spine metastases at various levels (Gerszten et al.
2005). Treatment delivery utilized the robotic
Cyberknife system. Mean maximum dose was 20 Gy.
The volume of spinal cord exceeding 8 Gy was
minimized, with mean of 0.64 cubic centimeters.
Results demonstrated pain improvement in 90 % of
patients with tumor control in six of seven patients
treated for radiographic progression.
Questions remain regarding the optimal dose and
fractionation schemes for SBRT of RCC, particularly
with respect to minimum doses required for the
control of oligometastases. A recent analysis by
Stinauer et al. evaluated SBRT outcomes in patients
with metastatic melanoma (n = 17 patients, 28
lesions) or RCC (n = 13 patients, 25 lesions)
(Stinauer et al. 2011). The SBRT dose regimen was
converted to the single fraction equivalent dose
(SFED) for dose–response analysis. Various SBRT
regimens were employed, ranging from 40–60 Gy in
3–5 fractions. At a median follow-up of 28 months

B. S. Teh et al.

for living patients, actuarial local control was 88 % at
18 months. Results suggested optimal outcomes for
larger fraction sizes and SFED regimens exceeding
45 Gy, with comparable control rates with respect to
‘‘classically radiosensitive’’ histologies. Their findings are in need of further validation.
Kaplan et al. reported the result of their Phase I
dose escalation study of SBRT for primary RCC at
ASTRO 2010 annual meeting (Kaplan et al. 2010).
Full report of the trial is awaited. They included only
the tumor up to 5 cm. Dose levels were 21 Gy,
28 Gy, 32 Gy, and 39 Gy in three fractions. Three
patients were recruited in each dose group, respectively. No Radiation Therapy Oncology Group
(RTOG) grade 1 or higher toxicity was reported. One
patient in 21 Gy group had local progression, but the
other patients had no tumor progression.
Ponsky et al. reported pathologic feature of kidney
of patients treated by SBRT (Ponsky et al. 2007). They
treated three patients with four fractions of 4 Gy and
then underwent nephrectomy. One patient has a cavity
with no microscopic evidence of viable tumor after
SBRT. Pathology was consistent with necrotic renal
cell carcinoma, papillary subtype. On CT images, the
tumor decreased slightly from 1.7 to 1.6 cm after
treatment. It evolved from a hyperdense lesion before
treatment to water attenuation after treatment, and post
contrast enhancement was seen. The other two tumors
demonstrated pathologic evidence of renal cell carcinoma (grade I and grade II).

6

Technical Aspects

Similar to other sites, patient immobilization is crucial
for SBRT for RCC in the kidney. The most commonly
used device is the stereotactic body frame or the
BodyFix system. Computerized tomography (CT)
simulation is performed and thin-cut CT images are
obtained. Geometrical verification of tumor location in
the stereotactic system is important. Usually, 4DCT is
performed as kidney has been shown to move with
breathing motion. Internal target volume (ITV) is
delineated with the use of images obtained from the
4DCT datasets. In some centers, an abdominal compression device which can reduce the diaphragm
motions to within 5 mm, is used to minimize the
respiratory motion of the target. For image guidance
during SBRT, fiducial markers may be placed prior to

Renal Cell Carcinoma

simulations. Diagnostic MRI has been incorporated
with simulation CT for target delineation. A radial
margin of 5–10 mm is usually added in the axial images
and 10 mm margin added in the cranial caudal directions as the planning treatment margin (PTV).
The goal during SBRT treatment planning is to
preserve remaining normal renal volume receiving
high dose radiation. The other critical surrounding
normal tissues include small bowels, stomach, adrenal
gland, spinal cord, contralateral kidney, which all need
to be kept below radiation tolerance. The baseline renal
function is of utmost importance. The goal is to spare
the remaining normal renal tissues as much as possible
especially for patients with only one functional kidney
(Svedman et al. 2008). Currently, there is no reported
DVH recommendation for normal kidney as an organ at
risk. Typically, the maximum dose to the stomach and
small bowels are kept below 7 Gy/fraction to avoid
bowel complications. (Svedman et al. 2006, Teh et al.
2007a, b, c; Svedman et al. 2008).
Treatment planning with 3D conformal radiation
therapy (3DCRT) or intensity modulated radiation
therapy (IMRT) approaches are essential. Either
coplanar or noncoplanar beams can be used. Dynamic
conformal arcs using Novalis system, Cyberknife
planning, Helical Tomotherapy, IMRT planning, or
more conventional treatment planning systems as
described in other chapters of this textbook have been
reported. The rapid dose drop-off in the SBRT treatment planning allows the delivery of high dose per
fraction to the renal lesion within the kidney while
sparing the remaining normal renal tissues as well as
the critical surrounding normal structures especially
stomach and small bowels. Dose painting approach
utilizing PET/CT fusion in the treatment planning
imaging allowing higher dose per fraction to be
delivered to the PET avid area within the RCC has
been described (Teh et al. 2007a, b, c). Not all RCC
are PET avid and FDG-18 is excreted via kidney, thus
this approach needs special preparation. The most
common dose fractionation schedules used are
30–40 Gy in 3–5 fractions. This lower dose per
fraction as compared to other SBRT sites e.g., lung
and liver is mainly due to the lower dose tolerance of
small bowels and remaining normal kidney. Dose
escalation trials results are eagerly awaited.
The linear accelerators used to deliver SBRT need to
have the capability of image guidance. As mentioned
above, these include Cyberknife, Tomotherapy, Novalis

203

as well as the more conventional linear accelerators of
Varian and Elekta systems as described in other chapters
of this textbook. The purpose of image guidance to
further enhance the accuracy of delivery as this is high
dose per fraction and the PTV margin is very tight.
Without image-guided radiotherapy (IGRT) approach,
one may miss (under-dose) the tumor target leading to
marginal relapses and overdose the critical surrounding
normal tissues leading to increased toxicity.

7

Toxicity

The toxicity related to SBRT for primary and metastatic RCC in kidney is shown in Table 2. Toxicity
related to metastatic RCC involving other body sites
will be described in other chapters in this textbook.
The main acute toxicity is related to gastrointestinal
tract, namely nausea and vomiting and these are
usually mild and transient. Fatigue may be also
related to targeted therapy that the patients are taking.
Another acute toxicity described is local pain which
is likely related to radiation inflammation. Two
important reported late toxicities are related to
stomach/small bowels as well as renal function. One
patient was described to have significant weight loss
and endoscopic and biopsy proven inflammation of
stomach likely related to radiation (Beitler et al.
2004). Increase in creatinine was described in a
patient with only one functional kidney (Svedman
et al. 2008). There was no reported renal failure or
malignant hypertension.

8

Abscopal Effects

Spontaneous regression (SR) of malignant disease is a
rare phenomenon (Kumar et al. 2010; Ishiyama et al.
2012). Reports of SR of RCC lung metastases after
nephrectomy have been reported (Kumar et al. 2010).
The postulated mechanism of SR or abscopal effects
is through an immune response, which may be evoked
by surgery, tumor necrosis, infection, radiotherapy, or
other treatments. However, a definite mechanism has
not been established. There are two reports describing
SR or abscopal effects after SBRT or stereotactic
radiosurgery (SRS) of primary or metastatic RCC in
the kidney or other sites. (Wersall et al. 2006,
Ishiyama et al. 2012) SR most commonly involves

204

B. S. Teh et al.

Table 2 Toxicity associated with SBRT for primary and metastatic renal cell carcinoma involving kidney
Authors/
Year

No. of Patients

Dose
Fractionation
Schedules

Toxicity
Acute

Late

Beitler et al.
(2004)

9 Patients (2 patients with
bilateral RCC)

40 Gy in 5
fractions

2 patients had nausea and
vomiting

1 patient had weight loss
and gastritis

Wersall
et al. (2005)

13 patients

30–40 Gy in
3–5 fractions

Nausea and pain

None

Svedman
et al. (2006)

10 patients

30–40 Gy in
3–5 fractions

Fatigue and pain (Grade 1–2)

None

Teh et al.
(2007a, b, c)

2 patients

36–40 Gy in
3–5 fractions

None

None

Ponsky et al.
(2007)

3 patients

16 Gy in 4
fractions

None

None

Svedman
et al. (2008)

7 patients (all with only
one functioning kidney)

30–40 Gy in
3–4 fractions

4 patients had Grade 1–2
nausea, fatigue and local pain

2 patients had slight
increase in creatinine level

lung metastases. Ishiyama et al. further postulated that
the SR or abscopal effects may be organ dependent
and may not cross the blood–brain barrier (Ishiyama
et al. 2012). More work is needed to investigate the
abscopal effects induced by SBRT.

9

Case Examples

Case 1
An incidental finding of a mass in the right renal pole
was found on computed tomography (CT) examination in an 81-year-old male patient. His history
includes RCC and left nephrectomy 6 years prior,
colon cancer, bladder cancer, stroke, diabetes, and
hypertension. CT images demonstrated a large
heterogeneous mass in the upper pole of the right
kidney (approximately 9.1 x 7.8 cm) in maximum
transverse dimensions. Biopsy of the right kidney
mass was positive for RCC, clear cell type, Fuhrman
Nuclear Grade 2. The patient’s urologist determined
that the tumor was clinically inoperable, as the patient
was a poor candidate for surgery. The patient was
referred for radiation oncology consultation.
Various treatment options were presented. The
patient elected participation in the second dose escalation arm of a phase II clinical trial. The prescribed
dose was 16 Gy per fraction SBRT for three fractions
to a total dose of 48 Gy using SBRT. She had three
fiducial markers placed in the renal mass. An MRI of
the kidney was acquired for CyberKnife planning,
using limited coronal T2 HASTE and axial T1 VIBE

MR sequences of the upper abdomen without
contrast. Limited MR images found an exophytic
heterogeneous mass lesion in the right kidney upper
pole. The patient was taken to the CyberKnife suite
and placed in proper position for treatment of the right
kidney. Custom immobilization devices to facilitate
accurate and reproducible setup were fabricated using
a body cast. Pre-procedural CT and MR scans (1 to
1.5 mm slices) were used for pretreatment CyberKnife planning, to delineate target and critical structures, as shown in the treatment planning screen
capture at Fig. 1a. With the patient in a Vac-Lok
positioning bag (Civco, Kalona, IA), and a CyberKnife Synchrony Tracking Vest was placed over the
patient for motion detection. Treatment was planned
to deliver 48 Gy to the tumor volume with 5 mm
margin, delivered in 3 fractions over 3 consecutive
days, with the following dose constraint specifications: bowel B 1 cc can receive 8 Gy per fraction for
a total of 24 Gy; cord B 0.3 cc can receive 6.7 Gy
per fraction for a total of 20 Gy; stomach no more
than 1.0 cc can receive 7.3 Gy per fraction to a total
dose of 22 Gy; less than or equal to two-thirds of the
liver volume can receive 5.7 Gy per fraction for a
total dose of 17 Gy (additionally, within that
volume—800 cc should not receive more than 5.0 Gy
per fraction or a total of 15 Gy); per protocol for the
contralateral kidney no more than 5 % of the volume
can receive [4.7 Gy per fraction for a total dose of
14 Gy, though the left kidney was previously resected
in this case. The treatment plan was completed on the
Accuray Multiplan, as shown in Fig. 1b. Treatment

Renal Cell Carcinoma

205

Fig. 1 a Pre-SBRT CT and MR images used for SBRT treatment planning. b CyberKnife-based SBRT treatment plan

was completed at approximately 1 month following
the patient’s diagnostic biopsy. All fractions were
delivered within protocol specifications, and at 3
months post therapy the patient remains without
apparent acute toxicity.
Case 2
A 74–year-old woman with multiple medical
comorbidities presented with left flank and lower
back pain. She was found to have a large mass in the
left kidney as well as multiple lesions involving her
pelvic bones and spine especially lumbosacrum.
A specialized PET/CT revealed a left renal mass with
an area in the center showing elevated SUV (Fig. 2a).
Biopsy of a bone lesion confirmed metastatic RCC.
She is not a candidate for surgery and SBRT was
offered. Figure 2b shows SBRT treatment plan.
A dose painting approach was used with 24 and
36 Gy to the renal mass and PET avid areas in three
fractions, respectively. Figure 2c shows the use of
fiducial markers to aid in image guidance with KV
X ray on the Novalis stereotactic system. The patient
tolerated the SBRT treatment to both her left renal
RCC mass and metastatic RCC in her sacrum very
well with complete pain resolution. Her renal function
remains normal after SBRT and a post SBRT renal
scan (Fig. 2d) done was also normal.

10

Future Directions

SBRT is a promising emerging treatment paradigm
in radiation oncology. The promise to produce a
biologically potent dose over a much shorter
duration and in a noninvasive manner is very
exciting. The role of SBRT in the management of
RCC will continue to evolve. SBRT has been shown
to be safe and effective in primary, local recurrent,
and metastatic RCC despite its believed ‘‘radioresistance’’. There are still many aspects of SBRT in
the treatment of RCC needing further investigations.
The mechanism of ‘‘radioresistant’’ RCC cell killing
with SBRT warrants further research. The optimum
dose fractionation schedules of SBRT in RCC are
still not certain and awaiting prospective clinical
trials. DVH of normal kidney also needs further data
from clinical trials. More prospective clinical trials
including randomized are needed to provide level I
evidence for the use of SBRT. Molecular imaging of
RCC needs further investigation and will aid in the
target delineation, dose fractionation, and evaluation
of SBRT treatment response. Future work should
also look into the effects and side effects of
combination SBRT and targeted agents in the
management of RCC.

206

Fig. 2 a Images of simulation CT, PET, and PET-CT
fusion showing target delineation. Please note the two
separate targets: the larger target without any uptake and
the smaller target with uptake. b Images showing SBRT
treatment plan of 36 (12 Gy per fraction) and 24 Gy (8 Gy
per fraction) to the PET avid RCC target and the non-PET
avid RCC target, respectively. Please note the rapid dose

B. S. Teh et al.

fall off in order to decrease the dose the adjacent small
bowels and spinal cord. Reprinted from Lo et al. (2008),
Copyright (2008), with permission from Expert Reviews
Ltd. c Images showing the use of fiducial markers
(visicoils) for image guidance during SBRT utilizing
Novalis stereotactic system kV X ray. d Images of normal
post SBRT renal scan of the patient

Renal Cell Carcinoma

Fig. 2 (Continued)

207

208

References
Beitler JJ, Makara D, Silverman P et al (2004) Definitive, highdose-per-fraction, conformal, stereotactic external radiation
for renal cell carcinoma. Am J Clin Oncol 27:646–648
Bhatt RS, Landis DM, Zimmer M, Torregrossa J, Chen S,
Sukhatme VP, Iliopoulos O, Balk S, Bubley GJ (2008)
Hypoxia-inducible factor-2alpha: effect on radiation sensitivity and differential regulation by an mTOR inhibitor. BJU
Int 102:358–363
Culine S, Bekradda M, Kramar A et al (1998) Prognostic
factors for survival in patients with brain metastases from
renal cell carcinoma. Cancer 83:2548–2553
Deschavanne PJ, Fertil B (1996) A review of human cell
radiosensitivity in vitro. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
34:251–266
DiBiase SJ, Valicenti RK, Schultz D, Xie Y, Gomella LG, Corn
BW (1997) Palliative irradiation for focally symptomatic
metastatic renal cell carcinoma: Support for dose escalation
based on a biological model. J Urol 158:746–749
Doh L, Curtis AE, Teh BS (2006) Renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl
J Med 354:1095–1096
Flanigan RC, Salmon SE, Blumenstein BA et al (2001)
Nephrectomy followed by interferon alfa-2b compared with
interferon alfa-2b alone for metastatic renal-cell cancer.
N Engl J Med 345:1655–1659
Fokas E, Henzel M, Hamm K et al (2010) Radiotherapy for
brain metastases from renal cell cancer: should whole-brain
radiotherapy be added to stereotactic radiosurgery?: analysis of 88 patients. Strahlenther Onkol 186:210–217
Fowler JF (1989) The linear-quadratic formula and progress in
fractionated radiotherapy. Br J Radiol 62:679–694
Garcia-Barros M, Paris F, Cordon-Cardo C, Lyden D, Rafii S,
Haimovitz-Friedman A, Fuks Z, Kolesnick R (2003) Tumor
response to radiotherapy regulated by endothelial cell
apoptosis. Science 300:1155–1159
Gerszten PC, Burton SA, Ozhasoglu C, Vogel WJ, Welch WC,
Baar J, Friedland DM (2005) Stereotactic radiosurgery for
spinal metastases from renal cell carcinoma. J Neurosurg
3:288–295
Hoshi S, Jokura H, Nakamura H, Shintaku I, Ohyama C, Satoh
M, Saito S, Fukuzaki A, Orikasa S, Yoshimoto T (2002)
Gamma-knife radiosurgery for brain metastasis of renal cell
carcinoma: results in 42 patients. Int J Urol 9:618–625
Hui Z, Tretiakova M, Zhang Z, Li Y, Wang X, Zhu JX, Gao Y,
Mai W, Furge K, Qian CN et al (2009) Radiosensitization
by inhibiting stat1 in renal cell carcinoma. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 73:288–295
Ishiyama H, Teh BS, Ren H, Chiang S, Tann A, Blanco AI
et al. (2012) Spontaneous regression of thoracic metastases while progression of brain metastases after stereotactic radiosurgery and stereotactic body radiotherapy for
metastatic renal cell carcinoma: abscopal effect prevented
by the blood-brain barrier? Clin GU Cancer (E-published
ahead of print)
Jhaveri P, Teh BS, Bloch C, Amato R, Butler EB, Paulino AC
(2008) Stereotactic body radiotherapy in the management of
painful bone metastases. Oncology (Williston Park)
22:782–788

B. S. Teh et al.
Jhaveri P, Teh BS, Paulino AC, Blanco AI, Lo SS, Butler EB,
Amato RJ (2012) A dose-response relationship for time to
bone pain resolution after stereotactic body radiotherapy for
renal cell carcinoma metastases. Acta Oncol 51:584–588
Juusela H, Malmio K, Alfthan O, Oravisto KJ (1977) Preoperative irradiation in the treatment of renal adenocarcinoma.
Scand J Urol Nephrol 11:277–281
Kaplan ID, Redrosa I, Martin C et al (2010) Results of a phase I
dose escalation study of stereotactic radiosurgery for
primary renal tumors. Intl J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
2010(78):S191
Karam JA, Wood CG (2011) The role of surgery in advanced
renal cell carcinoma: cytoreductive nephrectomy and metatarsectomy. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 25:753–764
Kasibhatla M, Steinberg P, Meyer J, Ernstoff MS, George DJ
(2007) Radiation therapy and sorafenib: clinical data and
rationale for the combination in metastatic renal cell
carcinoma. Clin GU Cancer 5:291–294
Kjaer M, Iversen P, Hvidt V, Bruun E, Skaarup P, Hansen JB,
Frederiksen PL (1987) A randomized trial of postoperative
radiotherapy versus observation in stage ii and iii renal
adenocarcinoma. A study by the copenhagen renal cancer
study group. Scand J Urol Nephrol 21:285–289
Kumar T, Patel N, Talwar A (2010) Spontaneous regression of
thoracic malignancies. Respir Med 104:1543–1550
Lee J, Hodgson D, Chow E, Bezjak A, Catton P, Tsuji D et al
(2005) A phase II trial of palliative radiotherapy for
metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Cancer 104:1894–1900
Lo SS, Cardenes HR, Teh BS, Fakiris AJ, Henderson MA,
Papiez L et al (2008) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for
nonpulmonary primary tumors. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther
8(12):1939–1951
Lo SS, Fakiris AJ, Chang EL, Mayr NA, Wang JZ, Papiez L
et al (2010) Stereotactic body radiation therapy: a novel
treatment modality. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 7:44–54
Maor MH, Frias AE, Oswald MJ (1988) Palliative radiotherapy
for brain metastases in renal carcinoma. Cancer 62:
1912–1917
Mickisch GHJ, Garin A, Poppel Hv, Prijck Ld, Sylvester R et al
(2001) Radical nephrectomy plus interferon-alfa-based
immunotherapy compared with interferon alfa alone in
metastatic renal-cell carincoma: a randomized trial. Lancet
358:966–970
Mortensen H (1948) Transthoracic nephrectomy. J Urol
60:855–858
Nguyen QN, Shiu AS, Rhines LD et al (2010) Management of
spinal metastases from renal cell carcinoma using stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
76:1185–1192
Noel G, Valery CA, Boisserie G, Cornu P, Hasboun D, Marc
Simon J, Tep B, Ledu D, Delattre JY, Marsault C, Baillet F,
Mazeron JJ (2004) LINAC radiosurgery for brain metastasis
of renal cell carcinoma. Urol Oncol 22:25–31
Ponsky LE, Mahadevan A, Gill IS et al (2007) Renal
radiosurgery: initial clinical experience with histological
evaluation. Surg Innov 14:265–269
Potters L, Steinberg M, Rose C et al (2004) American society
for therapeutic radiology and oncology and american
college of radiology practice guidelines for the performance
of stereotactic body radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 60:1026–1032

Renal Cell Carcinoma
Sheehan JP, Sun MH, Kondziolka D, Flickinger J, Lunsford LD
(2003) Radiosurgery in patients with renal cell carcinoma
metastasis to the brain: long-term outcomes and prognostic
factors influencing survival and local tumor control. J Neurosurg 98:342–349
Stinauer MA, Kavanagh BD, Schefter TE, Gonzalez R, Flaig T,
Lewis K, Robinson W, Chidel M, Glode M, Raben D (2011)
Stereotactic body radiation therapy for melanoma and renal
cell carcinoma: Impact of single fraction equivalent dose on
local control. Radiat Oncol 6:34
Suzuki K, Ushiyama T, Mugiya S, Kageyama S, Saisu K, Fujita
K (1997) Hazards of laparoscopic adrenalectomy in patients
with adrenal malignancy. J Urol 158:2227
Svedman C, Sandstrom P, Pisa P et al (2006) A prospective
Phase II trial of using extracranial stereotactic radiotherapy
in primary and metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Acta Oncol
45:870–875
Svedman C, Karlsson K, Rutkowska E et al (2008) Stereotactic
body radiotherapy of primary and metastatic renal lesions
for patients with only one functioning kidney. Acta Oncol
47:1578–1583
Tan MH, Rogers CG, Cooper JT, Ditlev JA, Maatman TJ,
Yang X, Furge KA, Teh BT (2004) Gene expression
profiling of renal cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res
10:6315S-6321S
Tanvetyanon T, Robinson LA, Schell MJ et al (2008) Outcomes
of adrenalectomy for isolated synchronous versus metachronous adrenal metastases in non small-cell lung cancer: a
systematic review and pooled analysis. J Clin Oncol
26:1142–1147
Teh BS, Bloch C, Paulino AC, Shen S, Hinckley L, Baskin D,
Butler EB, Amato R (2007a) Pathologic complete response
in renal cell carcinoma brain metastases treated with
stereotactic radiosurgery. Clin Genitourin Cancer 5:
334–337
Teh BS, Bloch C, Galli-Guevara M et al (2007b) The treatment
and metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) with imageguided stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT). Biomed
Imaging Interv J 3(1):e6
Teh BS, Paulino AC, Lu HH, Chiu JK, Richardson SL, Chiang S,
Amato RJ, Butler EB, Bloch C (2007c) Versatility of the
Novalis system to deliver image-guided stereotactic body
radiation therapy (SBRT) for various anatomical sites.
Technol Cancer Res Treat 6:347–354
Teh BS, Ishiyama H, Mathews T, Xu B, Butler EB, Mayr NA,
Lo SS, Lu JJ, Blanco AI, Paulino AC, Timmerman RD

209
(2010) Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) for
genitourinary malignancies. Discov Med 10(52):255–262
Thompson IM, Peek M (1988) Improvement in survival of
patients with renal cell carcinoma-the role of the serendipitously detected tumor. J Urol 140:487–490
Timmerman R, Galvin J, Michalski J, Straube W, Ibbott G,
Martin E, Abdulrahman R, Swann S, Fowler J, Choy H
(2006) Accreditation and quality assurance for radiation
therapy oncology group: Multicenter clinical trials using
stereotactic body radiation therapy in lung cancer. Acta
Oncol 45:779–786
Torok J, Wegner RE, Burton SA, Heron DE (2011) Stereotactic
body radiation therapy for adrenal metastases: a retrospective review of a noninvasive therapeutic strategy. Future
Oncol 7(1):145–151
Twomey P, Montgomery C, Clarck O (1982) Successful
treatment of adrenal metastases from large-cell carcinoma
of the lung. JAMA 248:581–583
Van der Werf-Messing B (1973) Proceedings: carcinoma of the
kidney. Cancer 32:1056–1061
Walsh L, Stanfield JL, Cho LC et al (2006) Efficacy of ablative
high-dose-per-fraction radiation for implanted human renal
cell cancer in a nude mouse model. Eur Urol 50:795–800
Wersäll PJ, Blomgren H, Lax I et al (2005) Extracranial
stereotactic radiotherapy for primary and metastatic renal
cell carcinoma. Radiother Oncol 77:88–95
Wersäll PJ, Blomgren H, Pisa P, Lax I, Kälkner K-M, Svedman
C (2006) Regression of non-irradiated metastases after
extracranial stereotactic radiotherapy in metastatic renal cell
carcinoma. Acta Oncol 45:493–497
Wilson D, Hiller L, Gray L, Grainger M, Stirling A, James N
(2003) The effect of biological effective dose on time to
symptom progression in metastatic renal cell carcinoma.
Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol) 15:400–407
Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A (2012) Cancer statistics,
2012. CA Cancer J Clin 62(1):10–29
Zelefsky MJ, Greco C, Motzer R, Magsanoc JM, Pei X,
Lovelock M, Mechalakos J, Zatcky Fuks Z, Yamada Y
(2012) Tumor control outcomes after hypofractionated and
single-dose stereotactic image-guided intensity-modulated
radiotherapy for extracranial metastases from renal cell
carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 82:1744–1748
Zeng ZC, Tang ZY, Fan J et al (2005) Radiation therapy for
adrenal gland metastases from hepatocellular carcinoma.
Jpn J Clin Oncol 35:61–67

Gynecologic Cancer
Charles A. Kunos, Jeffrey Fabien, Yuxia Zhang,
James Brindle, and Nina A. Mayr

3

Contents
1

Introduction.............................................................. 211

2

Technical Aspects of Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy for Gynecologic Cancer ........
Rationale ....................................................................
Target Localization, Immobilization,
and Simulation for SBRT .........................................
Treatment Planning ...................................................
On-Board Imaging.....................................................
Treatment Delivery and Management
of Intra-Fractional Target Motion.............................

2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5

Clinical Application of Stereotactic Body
Radiotherapy for Gynecologic Cancer .................
3.1 Eligibility Criteria......................................................
3.2 Retrospective Studies ................................................
3.3 Clinical Trials ............................................................

218
218
218
218

212
212

4

Management of Treatment-Related Toxicity
from Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy .................. 219

216
216
217

5

Case Example ........................................................... 220

6

Future Directions..................................................... 221

References.......................................................................... 223
217

Abstract

Gynecologic cancers are leading causes of death in
women worldwide. When relapse occurs after initial
treatment, the use of conventional radiation therapy
is difficult due to relative intolerance of normal
tissue to further therapy. Stereotactic body radiation
therapy (SBRT) has emerged as at least one means to
provide sterilizing doses of radiation among tissues
that have received previous irradiation or exposed to
many courses of chemotherapy. Clinical experience
with SBRT now demonstrates the safety and efficacy
of this treatment modality. Technical aspects, treatment parameters, management of toxicity, and
comments on future directions of SBRT for gynecologic cancer management are discussed.

Authors’ Contributions C.A. Kunos, J. Fabien, Y. Zhang, J.
Brindle, and N.A. Mayr made substantial contributions to the
conception, design, drafting, and writing of this book chapter.
This book chapter has been seen, read, and agreed upon in its
content by all the designated authors.

C. A. Kunos (&)  J. Fabien  Y. Zhang  J. Brindle
Department of Radiation Oncology
and Case Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center
and Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
e-mail: charles.kunos@UHhospitals.org
N. A. Mayr
Department of Radiation Oncology,
Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital,
Ohio State University College of Medicine,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
C. A. Kunos
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University Hospitals of Cleveland,
11100 Euclid Avenue, LTR 6068, Cleveland,
OH 44106, USA

1

Introduction

Collectively labeled as gynecologic cancer, ovarian,
uterine cervix, uterine corpus, vaginal, and vulvar
cancers are leading causes of cancer death in women

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2011_439,  Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

211

212

C. A. Kunos et al.

around the world. For instance, in the United States an
estimate 83,750 women in 2010 were diagnosed with a
gynecologic cancer and an estimated 27,710 (33%)
women died of their disease (American Cancer Society
2010). Worldwide, 1.1 million women were diagnosed
with a gynecologic cancer and an estimated 513,000
(47%) died of their disease (Ferlay et al. 2010). After
initial treatment, up to 40% of women with gynecologic
cancer have disease relapse occurring in previously
irradiated tissues (Duenas-Gonzalez et al. 2011;
Homesley et al. 2009; Rose et al. 2007) or in close
proximity to chemotherapy-taxed bone marrow
(Markman 2006; Randall et al. 2006). Because of prior
surgical, chemotherapy, and radiation treatment, it is
often difficult to use tumor ablative radiation therapy
without risk of injury to normal organ function.
Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT), also called
stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR), allows this
possibility.
Here, the rationale and logistics of SBRT are
described as it pertains to gynecologic cancer
management (Choi et al. 2009; Deodata et al. 2009;
Higginson et al. 2011; Kunos et al. 2008, 2009a, 2011 ).
Technical aspects of SBRT treatment are outlined.
Clinical applications of SBRT are highlighted, with
attention to SBRT treatment parameters that modify
radiobiological effects on cells. A clinically relevant
case example is provided. Management strategies for
common complications of SBRT are discussed in
regard to normal tissue tolerance and to protracted
effects of prior anticancer treatments (such as
chemotherapy or radiation). Clinical outcomes from
initial SBRT treatment of gynecologic cancers are
reviewed, with comment on future plans for SBRT
co-administered with novel anticancer agents.

2

Technical Aspects of Stereotactic
Body Radiation Therapy
for Gynecologic Cancer

2.1

Rationale

Proliferating benign or malignant tumors arising from
gynecologic organs may be treated safely by SBRT
(Choi et al. 2009; Deodata et al. 2009; Higginson
et al. 2011; Kunos et al. 2008, 2009a, 2011). Our
experience with frameless SBRT has focused on the
clinical development of the robotic Cyberknife

system developed by Accuray (Sunnyvale, CA),
although other stereotactic systems are available [i.e.,
Elekta Synergy-S (Elekta, Stockholm, Sweden) and
TomoTherapy (Tomotherapy Inc., Madison, WI)].
Among these choices, our team has chosen to develop
the industrial robotic arm Cyberknife system for its
relative skin-sparing 6 megavolt (MV) photon energy,
and its radiobiologically advantageous linear accelerator dose rate of 800 cGy/min at an 80 cm sourceto-target distance (Kilby et al. 2010). The system
offers advantages in increased freedom in the number
and in the angle of non-coplanar treatment beam
trajectories to focus high dose radiation on localized
area(s) of disease while simultaneously distributing
low radiation dose to critical organs (Fig. 1). The
Cyberknife system also achieves radiation beam
collimation by one of two methods: (a) by inserting 1
of 12 fixed diameter tungsten collimators (5–60 mm)
or preferably (b) by using a tungsten-copper alloy
hexagon IRIS collimator consisting of 2 segment
banks offset by 30 from one another (Echner et al.
2009). Treatment plans using an IRIS collimator often
provide increased target coverage, better conformality, and a reduced number of radiation monitor units
required (Echner et al. 2009). Sub-millimeter accuracy (*0.4 mm) of SBRT delivery has been verified
by end-to-end phantom studies of radiation dose
(Antypas and Pantelis 2008; Hoogeman et al. 2009;
Wilcox and Daskalov 2007). This chapter focuses on
the Cyberknife system, and the reader is referred to
other sources for information about alternative SBRT
treatment platforms
(Benedict et al. 2001; Gerszten et al. 2010; Kim et al.
2009; Lee et al. 2008; Mackie et al. 1993;
Rochet et al. 2008; Swamidas et al. 2009).
However, it is important for the treating radiation
oncologist to carefully consider determinants of
SBRT effectiveness when treating women with persistent or recurrent gynecologic cancers. The SBRT
radiation dose relationship with tumoricidal cell kill
follows a bending linear-quadratic (LQ) dose–
response curve, often modeled either by universal
survival curve model (Park et al. 2008) or by the
recently described generalized LQ model (Wang et al.
2010). In general, higher radiation dose fraction size
elicits greater cancer cell kill. This occurs likewise in
normal cells. It has been observed that normal cells
have a greater tolerance to repair radiation-induced
DNA damage than cancer cells. As such, SBRT has a

Gynecologic Cancer

213

Fig. 1 Robotic stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT). a Our
research team has developed the robotic Cyberknife system
for SBRT for its increased freedom in the number and in the
angle of non-coplanar treatment beam trajectories to focus high
dose radiation on localized area(s) of disease while simultaneously distributing low radiation dose to critical organs. b In a
typical delivery fraction, up to 150 beamlets (blue vectors) of
radiation are focused on clinical target volumes. c The IRIS
collimator allows an automated single unit to vary beamlet
collimation in one of 12 cylindrical diameters ranging

5–60 mm. d Orthogonal right (R) and left (L) fluoroscopic
images taken by treatment room cameras allow on-board realtime tracking of implanted fiducials (green diamonds). Target
motion management can be accommodated by this subsystem,
or the respiratory motion tracking Synchrony subsystem (not
pictured). e With submillimeter accuracy, SBRT can deliver
highly conformal radiation dose plans sparing normal tissues
from excessive radiation dose per fraction. Pictured is a typical
SBRT plan for a pelvic relapse after prior irradiation

greater likelihood to sterilize proliferating cancer cells
than normal cells. It is accepted that if a SBRT
radiation dose were prescribed such that no normal
cell damage occurred, only a limited number of
cancer cells targeted by SBRT would die. On the
other hand, prescribing SBRT dose intending to
eradicate the entire cancer would subject adjacent

normal cells perhaps to irreversible DNA damage.
Normal cell depopulation would disrupt physiological
function. Unacceptable sequelae and even patient
death would likely arise. Thus, SBRT’s therapeutic
aim is to attain best ablative radiation dose with
minimal normal cell damage. Important concepts
include the following:

214

a

C. A. Kunos et al.

b

1.0

Water ion(+) –

α

–

–

–

Ionizing
radiation

α /β

0.1
Proportion Surviving

–

–

8+
8n

–
–

+
β

–

–

+

fast electron

direct

DNA

Water

0.01

indirect

Hydroxyl radical
0.001
200

400

600

800

Radiation (cGy)

Fig. 2 Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) radiobiology.
a The linear-quadratic relationship for radiation dose: cell
survival assumes cell kill happens (a) proportional to dose and
(b) proportional to the square of dose (b) delivered. A best-fit
curve continuously bends. When low SBRT doses are prescribed,
cells may fix sub-lethal base, single-strand, and double-strand
DNA damage and survive (initial bending slope). When higher
SBRT doses are prescribed, radiation-induced DNA damage

done may not be adequately fixed and cells die (terminal linear
slope). b SBRT (6 MV) photons interact with cellular water by a
Compton effect. Incident photons ionize water, produce an ion
radical (H2O+) and a free electron (e-), and generate a hydroxyl
radical (•OH) when reacting with another water molecule.
Hydroxyl radicals disrupt chemical bonds in target proteins and
DNA (•R). Unrepaired DNA damage results in loss of vital genes
in future cell division and cell death

• Fractional cell kill: With delivered radiation dose,
a percentage of the targeted cell population is
eliminated, regardless of malignant or normal cell
origin. At radiation doses delivered per SBRT
session (Fig 2a), a linear-quadratic radiation dose:
cell kill relationship is less dependable (Fowler
2010; Fowler et al. 2004b).
• Radiation dose rate: Clinical linear accelerators, in
both the conventional and SBRT application, deliver radiation dose over minutes [centigray (cGy)
per minute]. Total SBRT treatment may occur over
60–90 min, as compared to the 3 min of conventional therapy. Whether the log cell kill is affected
by protracted delivery times remains debatable
(Fowler et al. 2004b).
• Radiation resistance: Gynecologic cancers are
radiosensitive (Adriaens et al. 2009; Du et al. 2009;

Kunos et al. 2009b). Radiation resistance may be
identified in cells having (a) enhanced cell-mediated
repair of radiation-induced damage (b) active
concentration of chemical radioprotectors, and (c)
cellular hypoxia or nutritional deficiency slowing cell
cycle progression to allow radiation-induced damage
repair. It is anticipated that radiation resistance can be
overcome by high (e.g., 800 cGy) radiation dose per
fraction (Fowler 2010; Fowler et al. 2004a).
• Cell cycle dependency of cell kill: SBRT imposes its
greatest cell death-provoking effect when cells have
their DNA packaged tightly into chromosomes
(mitotic [M]-phase). Here, SBRT ionization events
have a high likelihood of causing lethal double DNA
strand breaks. SBRT radiation has little effect during
the late synthetic phase (S-phase) because replication enzymes are up-regulated and quickly identify

Gynecologic Cancer
40

b
Radiation
Dose (cGy)

a

215

20

0
0

17

34
51
Time (min)

68

85

c

Tissue
voxel

Fig. 3 Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) delivery time
effect. a SBRT involves many converging radiation beamlets
(blue vectors) to dose clinical radiation targets. In this example,
136 beamlets were used to deliver 800 cGy of radiation over
85 min of total SBRT robotic movement, on-board imaging
verification, and ‘on-beam’ time. b When graphically presented, the radiation prescription dose profile over the entire
elapsed treatment time shows ‘‘bursts’’ of radiation dose to any
given tissue subvolume (here depicted for the maximum dose

point voxel). c Thus, a subvolume of tissue may only see
radiation dose periodically. If cells repair sub-lethal DNA
damage incurred prior to the next radiation burst (for example,
the time period between 17 and 34 min after start of the SBRT
treatment), SBRT-targeted cells may indeed survive. Conversely, back-to-back sub-lethal dose beamlets for example, the
time period between 68 and 85 min after start of the SBRT
treatment) perhaps may render insurmountable death-provoking
nuclear DNA damage

altered DNA bases or inappropriate strand breaks
and signal their repair. Cells in G1 or G2 phases are
relatively radiosensitive as compared to S-phase.
Cell cycle state influence on cell radiosensitivity may
be an important consideration in SBRT treatment
due to the ‘lengthy’ time to deliver SBRT fractions
(Fowler et al. 2004b). More study is needed.
• Radiobiology: At clinically relevant photon energies for SBRT, photons interact with cellular water
by a Compton effect (Fig. 2b). Incident photons
may ionize water, producing an ion radical (H2O+)
and a free electron (e-). The ion radical collides
with another water molecule forming a hydroxyl
radical (•OH). Hydroxyl radicals may break
chemical bonds in target biomolecules such as
proteins and DNA (•R). Disruption of chemical
bonds in DNA take the form of base damages,
crosslinks between strands of DNA, single- and
double-strand breaks. Damage in nuclear DNA may
lead to loss of vital genes during subsequent cell
divisions and ultimately cell kill (Munro 1970).
Whether freely diffusing hydroxyl radicals (•OH)
(Hall 2000), or a bystander effect (lethal damage to
cellular proteins, organelles, or the cell membrane
in an irradiated cell can lead to neighboring cell

death in cells which would not have died on their
own accord) (Hall and Hei 2003) predominates
with SBRT high fractional dose remains the subject
of ongoing research.
Daily time duration of SBRT treatment may
impact radiosurgical effectiveness. On any given
treatment day, SBRT radiation dose may be delivered
over a protracted time period (i.e., up to 60–90 min).
Through use of narrowly collimated treatment beams,
only a small targeted cell fraction sustains damage
from any individual, brief radiation beam dose. At the
next SBRT treatment node, radiation beam dose may
or may not produce DNA damage in the cell fraction
just irradiated. If sub-lethal SBRT doses were punctuated over time, cells perhaps would have sufficient
time to fix damage done to DNA prior to the next
SBRT radiation exposure. This could theoretically
lower effectiveness of hypofractionated ablative
regimens. Conversely, if sub-lethal SBRT doses were
back-to-back, cells perhaps would endure overwhelming DNA damage that would initiate molecular
pathways of cell death. Dose-time course relationships are depicted for a maximum point radiation dose
voxel of a typical SBRT plan in Fig. 3. This is an area
of current investigative study.

216

Hypofractionated scheduling of SBRT may also
influence radiobiological effectiveness. Cells respond
to fluctuations in molecular oxygen by altering their
metabolic states and growth rates. Under conditions
of moderate hypoxia (0.1 to *1% oxygen), cells can
undergo G1/S cell cycle arrest to maintain nucleotide
synthesis and show no reduction in long-term viability (Gardner et al. 2001). By protracting time spent in
G1/S cell cycle arrest, hypoxic cells exposed to radiation may have sufficient time to recruit molecular
mechanisms that fix radiation-induced DNA damage.
This in turn results in enhanced cell survival. Nuclear
accumulation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF-1a)
is a major determinant of this response (Goda et al.
2003). HIF-1a binds to enhancer elements in vascular
endothelial growth factor, erythropoietin, and phosphoglycerate kinase genes used to recruit new blood
vessels. Over several days, hypoxia conditions may be
reversed to normoxia (Gardner et al. 2001; Goda et al.
2003). Conceptually, hypofractionated SBRT radiation dose delivered over a few consecutive days may
not allow the normal HIF-1a response promoting
reoxygenation. Fractionated conventional radiotherapy delivered over several weeks, on the other hand,
may permit reoxygenation and may be associated
with improved sterilization of gynecologic cancers
when oxygen supply–demand needs are met (Dunst
et al. 2003; Winter et al. 2004). Further research is
desired.
Previous studies have linked de novo ribonucleotide
reduction and cell survival after radiation (Kunos et al.
2009b; Kunos et al. 2010). To better understand the
importance of ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) on cell
survival after radiation, cervical and rectal cancer cell
lines were exposed to radiation with and without
pharmacological inhibitors of RNR. RNR functions as
a rate-limiting heterotetrameric enzyme containing two
active site large subunits (M1) and two small catalytic
subunits [M2 or M2b (p53R2)] (Eklund et al. 2001;
Kolberg et al. 2004). Cervical and rectal cancer cells
contain wild-type RNR, but interestingly RNR activity
is relatively elevated and unchecked in cervical cancer
cells due to human-papillomavirus E6 promoting p53
degradation. After irradiation, cervical and rectal
cancer cells showed elevated RNR activity, associated
with rise in DNA nucleotide precursors. When RNR
activity was blocked by an RNR inhibitor, enhanced
radiation sensitivity was observed. This effect persisted
at radiation doses (600–1000 cGy) common to SBRT

C. A. Kunos et al.

fractionation. This introduces the clinical possibility of
RNR blockade at the time of SBRT to improve target
sterilization. Perhaps clinical benefit will be achieved
through sensitization of occult cancer cells to lower
doses of radiation that reside on SBRT field margins.

2.2

Target Localization, Immobilization,
and Simulation for SBRT

SBRT distinguishes itself among the various radiation
treatment modalities in that it necessitates precise
SBRT-target control. To achieve SBRT-target control, both cancer and patient localization devices are
used.
For SBRT treatment, precise cancer localization
can be gained by markers (fiducials) inserted into or
around SBRT targets. We recommend that patients
undergo intraoperative or computed tomography
(CT)-guided placement of 3 or more 1.6 9 3 mm
gold cylindrical soft tissue fiducials. When lesions are
subcutaneous or situated near the vaginal canal,
placement of the fiducials is feasible in the treating
physician’s office under local analgesia (e.g., 2%
topical lidocaine). Fiducials need to be positioned at
different tissue depths to allow translational rotation
correction during delivery of SBRT. Also, fiducials
should lie at least 2 cm apart to allow clear tracking
of fiducials by the target localizing system. Fiducials
must be within 4–6 cm ‘boxed’ around the target
lesion so that the target localizing system’s on-board
imaging captures all placed fiducials in a single fieldof-view.
A variety of patient immobilization devices may
be used. Our team uses two-pin knee-sponge localization, among choices of indexed customized Styrofoam casts, evacuated pelvic bean bags, or body-fix
molds with abdominal compression (Dickens 1981;
Sherouse et al. 1990; Wunderink et al. 2008).

2.3

Treatment Planning

Our group recommends that treatment planning occur
one week after fiducial placement to allow fiducials
to heal in place. Patients are simulated in the
supine treatment position. Contiguous axial CT
high-resolution images (1 to 1 pitch, 1.0 mm slice
thickness, voltage 120 kVp, 450 mA, 1000 ms) are

Gynecologic Cancer

obtained. Treatment planning is done by an inverse
computational method using the MultiPlan 3.5.2
Cyberknife Treatment Planning System (Accuray,
Sunnyvale, California). Both a radiation oncologist
and gynecologic oncologist contour clinical SBRT
target volumes (CTV). Other at-risk tissues are
included in the CTV. Normal tissues such as the small
bowel, rectum, bladder, liver, kidneys, lungs, bilateral
proximal femurs, vagina, and sacral nerve roots are
contoured and assigned dose avoidance priorities.
SBRT prescription dose has varied among physician
groups (see Sect. 3.2). In our practice, a radiation
prescription dose of 3 9 800 cGy = 2400 cGy
(commonly to the 70–80% isodose line) has been
selected. As discussed, it is expected that soft-tissue
fiducials are tracked and verified by cross-plane
radiographic imaging up to 40–60 times for each
delivered SBRT fraction. Our research team has considered instances when fiducial tracking in all six
degrees of freedom is not possible due to uncertainties
associated with fiducial migration or target volume
deformity, tracking parameters may be relaxed to three
verifiable degrees of freedom (translations: x, y, and z).
It is important to recognize that SBRT delivery
system accuracy (*0.4 mm) also leads to at least one
potential drawback, geographical radiation miss.
Geographical misses may occur when occult cancerbearing tissues lie outside the radiation treatment zone
such that sterilizing doses of radiation are not delivered. This happens most often when the total tumor
volume was not identified at the time of clinical target
volume contouring or when inadequate dosimetry
margins were applied. In our experiences with the
treatment of relapsed gynecologic cancers, planning
target volume expanded by 0.5 cm has led to
improved sterilization of probable occult microscopic
disease without unnecessary normal tissue injury
(Kunos et al. 2009a, 2008).
Another manner in which our team reduces geographical miss is through incorporation of positron
emission tomography (PET). In cells, hexokinase
traps the molecular radioactive tracer 2-[18F]fluoro-2deoxy-D-glucose (18F-FDG). 18F-FDG facilitates
detection of residual or recurrent gynecologic cancers
(Grigsby et al. 2001; Rose et al. 1999; Schwartz et al.
2007) and in our program 18F-FDG PET/CT has been
added deliberately to SBRT radiation planning in an
effort to improve anatomical and metabolic targeting
of cancer (Kunos et al. 2009a). Implementation

217

of 18F-FDG PET/CT in SBRT treatment planning
is only the start of our effort to image critical
molecular signatures of gynecologic cancers. The
radiology parameters identified in the development of
18
F-FDG PET/CT should be helpful as new cancerrelated imaging molecules are launched for clinical
investigation.

2.4

On-Board Imaging

One of the distinguishing hallmarks of SBRT is its
use of on-board imaging to improve stereotactic
accuracy and precision. The Cyberknife system
relies on its target localizing system (TLS) subsystem
for target discrimination and has been discussed in a
previous chapter. This particular TLS system uses two
ceiling-mounted X-ray sources paired to two floormounted amorphous silicon x-ray image detectors
(Fig. 1). When mounted in this way, radiation therapists may perform automated image registration by
either (a) implanted gold fiducial markers for extracranial soft tissue lesions or (b) rigid anatomical
landmarks (skull for intracranial lesions or spine for
extracranial neuraxis lesions). If anatomical landmarks or fiducials are detected misaligned in any one
of the six degrees of freedom (x, y, z, pitch, roll, and
yaw) beyond predetermined limitations, then treatment is held until the patient is repositioned. While
robotic automation corrects for most spatial shifts in
tracked landmark or fiducial positions, large deviations may necessitate patient body realignment. For
each stereotactic treatment plan, there are a number of
treatment nodes or stops (i.e., perhaps up to 150 or
200) where the TLS system verifies patient positioning prior to turning on the radiation beam.

2.5

Treatment Delivery
and Management of
Intra-Fractional Target Motion

SBRT treatments are delivered in a manner similar to
conventional radiation therapy, following universal
precautions of patient identification, treatment site
and radiation dosimetry verification, and fiducial
tracking.
Targets common for SBRT treatment of gynecologic cancers are associated with positional shifts due

218

C. A. Kunos et al.

to respiratory motion (such as lung, liver, mesenteric
sites). To compensate for respiratory motion, the
Cyberknife system utilizes a second subsystem
designated the Synchrony Respiratory Tracking subsystem (Synchrony) (Ozhasoglu et al. 2008). When
intended SBRT targets are anticipated to move relative to respiratory motion, patients are outfitted with
an elastic vest impregnated with light-emitting diodes
(LED) that can be monitored continuously by a
camera array mounted in the treatment room. Displacements of the chest reflecting respiratory motion
patterns (LED markers) and internal position data
(implanted fiducials) are inputted into Synchrony.
Composite correlation models accounting for respiratory motion of the target allows real-time linear
accelerator adjustments for internal target motion
while delivering radiation monitor units.

3

Clinical Application of Stereotactic
Body Radiotherapy
for Gynecologic Cancer

3.1

Eligibility Criteria

Except for consideration of normal tissue tolerance of
delivered SBRT radiation dose, there have not been
rigid criteria developed for who is and who is not eligible for SBRT in the management of gynecologic
cancer. Target size and delivered radiation dose relationships for acceptable adverse sequelae have been
developed for gamma knife stereotactic radiosurgery
(Shaw et al. 2000). Whether these guidelines are
applicable to extracranial radiosurgery remains
controversial. Extracranial SBRT for treatment of
recurrent gynecologic cancers in previously irradiated
or chemotherapy-exposed tissue is reasonable and has
been met with success (Choi et al. 2009; Deodata et al.
2009; Higginson et al. 2011; Kunos et al. 2008, 2009a,
2011). The present literature on SBRT in gynecologic
cancers does not include persuasive data that SBRT
may be used as a ‘substitute’ for brachytherapy. Thus,
both excitement and caution are warranted.

3.2

Retrospective Studies

Over the past decade, SBRT has been developed
clinically as an extracranial therapeutic radiation

modality. Studies of SBRT for gynecologic cancer
management have been deficient in robust numbers of
treated patients (Choi et al. 2009; Deodata et al. 2009;
Higginson et al. 2011; Kunos et al. 2008, 2009a,
2011). SBRT for gynecologic cancers was introduced
in a case series of three recurrent vulvar cancer
patients (Kunos et al. 2008). SBRT treatment
(2400 cGy = 800 cGy 9 3) led to sterilization of
targeted disease, but untreated occult disease progression beyond the irradiation margin. To reduce
chances of geographical miss, 18F-FDG PET/CT have
been incorporated into our SBRT planning to better
outline radiosurgical targets. SBRT dosimetry plans
(2400 cGy = 800 cGy 9 3) incorporating both tumor
anatomy and metabolic activity resulted in improved
SBRT efficacy (Kunos et al. 2009a).
Single-institutional studies have also provided
evidence that robotic SBRT provides local control of
disease in the para-aortic nodes (Deodata et al. 2009;
Higginson et al. 2011). Again, conventionally fractionated para-aortic nodal irradiation (*4500 cGy)
was given first, and SBRT was used as a radiotherapeutic boost. In one study, a prescription of 3000 cGy
in 3 divided doses (prescribed to 58–80% isodose
line) resulted in a local para-aortic node control rate
of 79%, and the longest duration of disease-free
interval was 19 months. However, a 43% risk of
distant disease progression remained. No grade 3 or
higher posttherapy toxicities were reported. A second
study using an SBRT dose of 3000 cGy in 5 divided
doses found a para-aortic control rate of 84% and a
63% likelihood of non-SBRT targeted disease progression (Deodata et al. 2009). Again, no grade 3 or
higher toxicities were seen.

3.3

Clinical Trials

SBRT clinical trials are now up and coming.
A 30-patient Korean study assessed Cyberknife
SBRT-targeted para-aortic lymph node metastases
from uterine corpus (n = 2) and cervical (n = 28)
cancer. Treatments were not standardized, ranging
between 3300–4500 cGy in three divided doses. Four
patients had 2700 to 4500 cGy of external beam
radiation, with SBRT given as a tumor boost. Twentyfive received SBRT and cisplatin-based chemotherapy (2 pretherapy, 9 co-administered, 14 posttherapy).
Five (17%) of 30 patients had grade 3 or higher

Gynecologic Cancer

hematological adverse events using a Radiation
Therapy Oncology Group/European Organisation for
Research and Treatment of Cancer (RTOG/EORTC)
scale. SBRT treatment response (i.e., greater than
50% reduction in maximum perpendicular lesion
dimension) was 96%. A 48-month local control rate
of 67% was reported.
A prospective phase 2 study of 35 patients with
chemorefractory gynecologic malignancies was presented at the 2011 meeting of the Cyberknife Radiosurgery Summit (Kunos et al. 2011). Enrollees had
cervical (n = 9), endometrial (n = 9), ovarian
(n = 16), and vulvar (n = 1) cancer metastases to
para-aortic (n = 14), pelvis (n = 9), liver (n = 8), and
lung (n = 4) sites of treatment. A standardized dose of
2400 cGy (800 cGy X 3) was used. No chemotherapy
was given during or around the time of SBRT. Common
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE)
version 3 was used to report SBRT-related adverse
events. Through a median follow-up of 5 months
(range 1–16 months), no grade 3 adverse events have
been encountered. A single grade 4 hyperbilirubinemia
has been seen in one patient (3%) in whom a liver lesion
was treated. SBRT treatment response was 94%
(i.e., greater than 50% reduction in maximum perpendicular lesion dimension). Six-month estimated SBRT
target local control was 93% (standard deviation ±5%). Yet, 19 (54%) of 35 patients have had a
non-SBRT targeted occult metastatic disease site with
progression of disease. The rise of occult metastatic
disease has provoked interest in co-administration of
chemotherapy and SBRT. A clinical trial of SBRT plus
chemotherapy has been contemplated.

4

Management of Treatment-Related
Toxicity from Stereotactic Body
Radiotherapy

Complications of SBRT are coined early or late timerelative to administered radiation dose. For this discussion here, early toxicity arises most commonly
from large cell population death happening 30 days or
less from radiation dose delivery. Late effects take
place usually from parenchymal connective tissue
cell loss or blood vessel damage happening greater
than 30 days from radiation dose delivery. Treating
physicians must recognize critical tissues and organ
systems at risk for radiation damage, their tolerance to

219

hypofractionated radiation dose, and effects of radiation dose fraction size. Customarily, at least 24 h
elapses before consecutive SBRT fractions to allow for
normal sub-lethal DNA-damage repair (the shallow,
curvilinear portion of the cell survival curve). Temporary interruption of SBRT treatment for treatmentrelated toxicities occurs infrequently. Management of
SBRT-related complications follows.
Reddening of the skin (erythema) and loss of hair
(epilation) can occur where SBRT beams enter the
body. Dry or moist skin breakdown or desquamation
may also occur due to loss of the actively proliferating
basal layer of the epidermis which renews the overlying epithelium. This is uncommon with SBRT
because non-coplanar high energy radiation beams
sparing surface dose are used and are spread out over
the skin surface such that surfaces skin of the skin
see a small fraction of the prescription dose. Topical
non-metal containing creams reduce discomfort and
promote healing within 2 weeks after completion of
SBRT. Late rough, leathery texture of the skin happens rarely and may be alleviated with pentoxifylline
and vitamin E reducing deep tissue fibrosis after
radiation (Chiao and Lee 2005; Gothard et al. 2005).
Self-renewing organs such as the bladder, rectum,
and large and small bowel are subject to radiationinduced normal tissue damage. As transitional cells of
the urothelium are periodically sloughed off during
urination, SBRT-related radiation cystitis may occur.
Pyridium (which includes an orange dye) anesthetizes
the urethra, providing relief. Hematuria after SBRT is
rare and application of sclerosing solutions or fulguration has not been needed in our experience
(Kunos et al. 2009a). Ureteral stricture, bladder fibrosis, or reduced bladder capacity are late effects in 3% of
SBRT-treated patients at 4 years (Choi et al. 2009).
Likewise, renewable bowel stem cell may become
depleted after SBRT such that diarrhea-inducing sigmoiditis or gastroenteritis may happen in up to 20% of
patients (Murphy et al. 2010). Low-roughage diets and
antispasmodic medications are effective therapy for
less severe cases. Rectal bleeding due to small vessel
vascular damage can be treated with topical steroids.
Risk of injury escalates in bowel at SBRT
doses [1000 cGy (Murphy et al. 2010), such that
bowel diversion through a colostomy may be needed.
Bowel stenosis, obstruction, or enteric fistulas may
develop due to late tissue fibrosis and adhesion formation necessitating bypass surgeries of the intestine.

220

C. A. Kunos et al.

a

b

2400 cGy, 91.5% (52389 mm3)

c
100

CTV

Volume (%)

80

60

40

Rectum
20
0 Bladder
600 1200 1800 2400 3000

3429

Dose (cGy)

Fig. 4 Case example. a Depicted are 162 beamlets converging
on a pelvic relapse of vaginal cancer previously irradiated.
b SBRT prescribed to the 70% isodose line rendered 91.5%
clinical target volume coverage for a dose of 2400 cGy.

c Dose-volume histograms for the clinical target (red) and for
the critical structures of rectum (blue) and bladder (green) are
depicted

Heretofore, no patients have required such services
(Kunos et al. 2008, 2009a, 2011).
Reduction in circulating lymphocytes, granulocytes, platelets, and red blood cells can be seen with
irradiation of bone marrow stem cells residing in the
adult axial skeleton (vertebrae, ribs, and pelvis). No
sizeable reduction in circulating blood cells has been
seen after SBRT (Kunos et al. 2011). Hematopoietic
growth factor stimulating medicines may be given
prior if chemotherapy precedes SBRT treatment,
however, co-administration of red cell growth factors
with SBRT is cautioned because of possible cancer
cell stimulation (Acs et al. 2003; Shenouda et al.
2006) and thromboembolic risk (Thomas et al. 2008).
SBRT treatment to the vagina raises the possibility
of fistulas connecting the vagina and bladder or
vagina and rectum. This may occur when prior radiation treatment has been given and generally takes
place 6 months to 2 years posttherapy. To promote
healing, diverting surgeries may be needed.
Hyperbaric oxygen accelerates cell renewal and may
lead to improved healing of fistulas (Feldmeier 2008).

carcinoma of the vagina [stage I (T1N0M0)]. She
received once weekly cisplatin (40 mg/m2) and daily
pelvic radiation (4500 cGy in 25 fractions) followed by
vaginal canal boost (900 cGy in 5 fractions). Her total
radiation dose prescribed to the vagina was 5400 cGy.
She had no clinical evidence of disease for 2 years. She
then developed a 4 cm unresectable left distal vagina
mass intimately associated with the urethra and fixed to
the pelvic floor. Limited surgical resection was not
advised given adherence of the residual mass to the
pelvic floor and the associated surgical morbidity risk.
She refused exenteration. Posttherapy radiation-related
fibrosis of the vagina and close juxtaposition of her
cancer mass to the urethra precluded safe administration of interstitial brachytherapy.
Given her desire for non-invasive treatment, she
elected SBRT for the treatment of her recurrent disease.
A previously irradiated tissue volume of 57.25 cm3
encompassing her current cancer received 2400 cGy in
3 fractions of 800 cGy prescribed to the 70% isodose
line with a conformality index of 1.34 to achieve 91.5%
target coverage (Fig. 4). For SBRT, 162 non-coplanar
6MV photon beams were used. A 20 mm fixed collimator was applied for treatment. Vaginal tissue fiducials were used to track the target lesion. The source to
axis distance ranged between 79 and 100 cm. Average
elapsed treatment time for each fraction was 42 min.
During her SBRT treatment course, no significant skin,
urinary, or gastrointestinal toxicities were encountered.
Posttherapy, she noted fatigue limiting her activities for 6 days. Her fatigue resolved completely by the
4-week follow-up visit. Pelvic examination done at

5

Case Example

A 74-year-old gravida 3, para 3 woman underwent total
abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy over 30 years ago for benign postmenopausal
bleeding. She then developed new vaginal bleeding
and a partial vaginectomy was done 1 month later,
with pathology identifying a grade 1 squamous cell

Gynecologic Cancer

221

DNA

ionizing
radiation

a

b

c

Ras– Raf– MEK– ERK cascade

Ribonucleotide reductase

Mitotic spindle

receptor tyrosine kinase
clofarabine
gemcitabine

Ras
Raf

GDP

M1

MEK-P

mitotic
spindle
centromere
chromosome

NDP

Raf

dNDP
M2
or
p53M2b

P
ERK

Aurora
kinase
inhibitor

GTP

Ras

P
MEK

fluorouracil

ERK
-P

hydroxyurea
3-AP

topotecan
irinotecan
camptothecin
etoposide

paclitaxel
docetaxel

vinblastine
vincristine

Fig. 5 Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) and proposed
novel anticancer therapies. There is clinical interest in developing novel anticancer agents that have both radiosensitizing
properties to enhance SBRT treatment effect and inherent
cytotoxic effect for treatment of occult metastatic disease.
a Cells activate the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase cascade to promote
cell survival after ionizing radiation. Drugs blocking the
Ras-Raf-MAP/ERK kinase (coined ‘MEK’) in this pathway are

under clinical development. b Ribonucleotide reductase generates deoxynucleotide (dNTP) precursors for DNA replication and
repair. Inhibition of the large subunit (M1) or the small subunits
(M2 or M2b) reduce dNTP production and stall repair of
damaged DNA. Substantial radiosensitization has been documented. c Poisons of the mitotic spindle disrupting assembly and
disassembly of chromosomes or poisons of enzymes responsible
for coiling and uncoiling of DNA are of interest due to their
documented radiosensitizing and cytotoxic properties

this time revealed a two centimeter area of patchy
mucositis along the left distal vagina, but no
intrapelvic tumor. Fifteen months posttherapy, she
remains alive with diagnostic imaging and pelvic
examinations unremarkable.

treatment response and simultaneously sterilizes
occult metastatic disease is yet to be tested. Moreover,
whether SBRT co-administered with cytotoxic or
biologic chemotherapeutics can provide clinical benefit more-so than second-line chemotherapy regimens
should be investigated. The following text discusses
molecular pathways that might be considered for an
SBRT-chemotherapy anticancer strategy (Fig. 5).
Ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) is pivotal to the
cellular response to DNA damage (6–8). Pharmacological blockade of either the M1 or M2 or p53M2b
(p53R2) renders RNR inactive, with timing of the inhibitor and DNA damage important to prolonged DNA
damage repair. The long-lived M1 subunit (detected in

6

Future Directions

First lines of evidence that SBRT targeted treatment
of refractory disease can lead to tumor regression and
sometimes provide durable treatment response which
are emerging (Choi et al. 2009; Kunos et al. 2011).
Whether new anticancer therapeutics improves SBRT

222

all phases of the cell cycle) has a catalytic site that the
suicide-inhibitor gemcitabine can bind covalently and
inactivate RNR. Both the M2 and p53M2b subunits
house a tyrosine free radical stabilized by diferric iron
moieties (9, 10). Hydroxyurea and 3-aminopyridine-2carboxaldehyde thiosemicarbazone (3-AP, Triapine)
both quench the M2/p53M2b free radical impeding
regeneration of the M1 catalytic site during the ribonucleotide reduction reaction. Clofarabine as a purine
nucleoside antimetabolite inhibits the RNR dATP active
site. Fluorouracil (5-fluorouracil) blocks thymidylate
synthase, ultimately disrupting the deoxyribonucleotide
feedback ladder modulating the selectivity site of RNR.
Cervical (Kunos et al. 2009c), endometrial (Karlsson
et al. 2001), and ovarian (Ferrandina et al. 2010) cancers
express relatively high levels of RNR. Better understanding of the interrelated cellular mechanisms regulating RNR activity will guide selection of RNR
inhibitors to combat best purposeful ribonucleotide
reduction for repair of DNA damage after SBRT.
The extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase cascade is
integral to cancer cell proliferation and metastasis.
Ionizing radiation rapidly activates a Ras-Raf-MAP/
ERK kinase (MEK)-ERK pathway to promote cell survival (Bernhard et al. 2000; Sklar 1988). Interestingly,
the Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK cascade provides feed-forward
protein–protein binding-partner regulation of RNR
(Piao et al. 2009). A new investigational agent AZD6244
(selumetinib) is a highly selective inhibitor of MEK1/2
in the Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK cascade by a drug-protein
interaction not competitive with ATP (Chung et al. 2009;
Yeh et al. 2007). Its potential use as a radiation sensitizer
has been studied (Chung et al. 2009). Not only is there
potential for enhanced cytotoxicity after an SBRTAZD6244 combination, but there may be single agent
systemic activity of AZD6244 against cervical (Branca
et al. 2004), endometrial (Pollock et al. 2007), and
ovarian (Hsu et al. 2004) cancers which over-express
MEK1/2. Studies of PD98059 (Holmes et al. 2003) as
MEK1/2 inhibitors are emerging. Further inquiry into
the underlying molecular cross talk of Ras-Raf-MEKERK cascade intermediates and DNA damage response
proteins in turn will reveal potential clinical relevance of
an approach of MEK1/2 inhibition.
Chromosome assembly and packing occurring at
the G2/M-phase transition renders cells not only
susceptible to lethal double DNA strand breaks from

C. A. Kunos et al.

ionizing radiation, but also sensitive to ‘poisons’ of
the mitotic spindle. Plant alkaloids such as vinblastine and vincristine (derived from the periwinkle
plant [Vinca rosea] block assembly of tubulin
causing toxic destruction of the mitotic spindle.
Paclitaxel (and its synthetic analog docetaxel) is
derived from the bark of the Western yew tree
(Taxus baccata) and inhibits depolymerization of
tubulin at the conclusion of mitosis. The epipodophyllotoxin etoposide (derived from the root of the
May apple or mandrake plant) stabilizes DNA strand
breaks made by topoisomerase 2 during supercoiling
of DNA. Camptothecin (and its semisynthetic
derivatives topotecan and irinotecan) comes from a
Tibetan deciduous tree (Camptotheca accuminata)
and blocks topoisomerase I, an enzyme that relaxes
DNA structural tension by facilitating single strand
breaks and re-ligation. Lastly, connecting mitotic
spindle poles to kinetichores at the centromeres of
each chromosome is regulated by Aurora A–C
serine/threonine kinases. Pharmacological agents
targeting Aurora kinases are being studied for their
anticancer properties (Kamei et al. 2010). As cervical (Monk et al. 2009), endometrial (Homesley et al.
2009), and ovarian (Ozols et al. 2003) cancers are
sensitive to the effects of mitotic spindle ‘poisons,’
SBRT co-administered with these agents may have
the desired effect of target radiosensitization and
sterilization of non-targeted occult local and systemic disease. Further study is warranted.
The chemoradiation experience of closely administered or co-administered SBRT and anticancer
chemotherapeutic agents is much more limited than
the clinical experience of chemotherapeutic agents
alone. The nature of clinical trials is that only a limited number of pharmacological agents may be tested
under very restricted conditions. Many strategies
developed in laboratories consequently have yet to be
applied in patient cancer care. Possible strategies for
SBRT-target radiosensitization and simultaneous
cytotoxicity in occult non-targeted disease need
clinical trial testing.
Conflict of Interest There are no potential conflicts of interest
among the authors and this manuscript. There are no financial
or non-financial competing interests. This manuscript has been
seen, read, and agreed upon in its content by all the designated
authors. This manuscript has not been submitted or published
elsewhere.

Gynecologic Cancer

References
Acs G, Zhang P, McGrath C, Acs P, McBroom J, Mohyeldin A,
Liu S, Lu H, Verma A (2003) Hypoxia-inducible erythropoietin singaling in squamous dysplasia and squamous cell
carcinoma of the uterine cervix and its potential role in
cervical carcinogenesis and tumor progression. Am J Pathol
162(6):1789–1806
Adriaens I, Smitz J, Jacquet P (2009) The current knowledge on
radiosensitivity of ovarian follicle development stages. Hum
Reprod Update 15(3):359–377
American Cancer Society (2010) Cancer Facts & Figures 2010.
American Cancer Society, Atlanta
Antypas C, Pantelis E (2008) Performance evaluation of a
CyberKnife G4 image-guided robotic stereotactic radiosurgery system. Phys Med Biol 53:4697–4718
Benedict S, Cardinale R, Wu Q, Zwicker R, Broaddus W,
Mohan R (2001) Intensity-modulated stereotactic radiosurgery using dynamic micro-multileaf collimation. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 50(3):751–758
Bernhard E, Stanbridge E, Gupta S et al (2000) Direct evidence
for the contribution of activated N-ras and K-ras oncogenes
to increased intrinsic radiation resistance in human tumor
cell lines. Cancer Res 60:6597–6600
Branca M, Ciotti M, Santini D, Di Bonito L, Benedetto A,
Giorgi C, Paba P, Favalli C, Costa S, Agarossi A et al
(2004) Activation of the ERK/MAP kinase pathway in
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia is related to grade of the
lesion but not to high-risk human papillomavirus, virus
clearance, or prognosis in cervical cancer. Am J Clin Pathol
122:902–911
Chiao TB, Lee AJ (2005) Role of pentoxifylline and vitamin E
in attenuation of radiation-induced fibrosis. Ann Pharmacother 39(3):516–522
Choi C, Cho C, Yoo S, Kim M, Yang K, Yoo H, Seo W, Kang J,
Lee D, Lee K et al (2009) Image-guided stereotactic body
radiation therapy in patients with isolated para-aortic lymph
node metastases from uterine cervical and corpus cancer. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 74(1):147–153
Chung E, Brown A, Asano H, Mandler M, Burgan W, Carter D,
Camphausen K, Citrin D (2009) In vitro and in vivo
radiosensitization with AZD6244 (ARRY-142886), an inhibitor of mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signalrelated kinase 1/2 kinase. Clin Cancer Res 15(9):3050–3057
Deodata F, Macchia G, Grimaldi L, Ferradina G, Lorusso D,
Salutari V, Cilla S, Valenti V, Cellini N, Piermattei A et al
(2009) Stereotactic radiotherapy in recurrent gynecological
cancer: a case series. Oncol Rep 22(2):415–419
Dickens C (1981) Personalized fixation using a vacuum
consolidation technique. Br J Radiol 54:257–258
Du X, Jiang T, Wen Z, Li Q, Gao R, Wang F (2009)
Differential expression profiling of gene response to ionizing radiation in two endometrial cancer cell lines with
distinct radiosensitivities. Oncol Rep 21:625–634
Duenas-Gonzalez A, Zarba J, Patel F, Alcedo J, Beslija F,
Casanova L, Pattarunataporn P, Hameed S, Blair J, Barraclough H et al (2011) A phase III, open-label, randomized
study comparing concurrent gemcitabine plus cisplatin and
radiation followed by adjuvant gemcitabine and cisplatin

223
versus concurrent cisplatin and radiation in patients with
stage IIB to IVA carcinoma of the cervix. J Clin Oncol
29(13):1678–1685
Dunst J, Kuhnt T, Strauss HG, Krause U, Pelz T, Koelbl H,
Haensgen G (2003) Anemia in cervical cancers: impact on
survival, patterns of relapse, and association with hypoxia
and angiogenesis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 56(3):
778–787
Echner G, Kilby W, Lee M, Earnst E, Sayeh S, Schlaefer A,
Rhein B, Dooley J, Lang C, Blank O et al (2009) The
design, physical properties and clinical utility of an iris
collimator for robotic radiosurgery. Phys Med Biol 54:
5359–5380
Eklund H, Uhlin U, Farnegardh M, Logan DT, Nordlund P
(2001) Structure and function of the radical enzyme
ribonucleotide reductase. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 77(3):
177–268
Feldmeier J (2008) Hyperbaric oxygen therapy for delayed
radiation injuries. In: Neuman T, Thom S (eds) Physiology
and medicine of hyperbaric oxygen therapy. Saunders
Elsevier, Philadelphia, pp 231–256
Ferlay J, Shin H, Bray F, Forman D, Mathers C, Parkin D
(2010) GLOBOCAN 2008 Cancer Incidence and Mortality
Worldwide. Lyon, France: International Agency for
Research on Cancer http://globocon.iarc.fr
Ferrandina G, Mey V, Nannizzi S, Ricciardi S, Petrillo M,
Ferlini C, Danesi R, Scambia G, Tacca M (2010) Expression of nucleoside transporters, deoxycitidine kinase, ribonucleotide reductase regulatory subunits, and gemcitabine
enzymes in primary ovarian cancer. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol 65(4):679–686
Fowler J (2010) 21 years of biologically effective dose. Br J
Radiol 83(991):554–568
Fowler J, Tome W, Fenwick J, Mehta M (2004a) A challenge to
traditional radiation oncology. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
60(4):1241–1256
Fowler J, Welsh J, Howard S (2004b) Loss of biological effect
in prolonged fraction delivery. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
59(1):242–249
Gardner L, Li Q, Park M, Flanagan W, Semenza G, Dang C
(2001) Hypoxia inhibits G1/S transition through regulation
of p27 expression. J Biol Chem 276:7919–7926
Gerszten P, Novotny JJ, Quader M, Dewald V, Flickinger J
(2010) Prospective evaluation of a dedicated spine radiosurgery program using the Elekta Synergy S system.
J Neurosurg 113 Suppl:236–241.
Goda N, Ryan H, Khadivi B, McNulty W, Rickert R, Johnson R
(2003) Hypoxia-inducible factor 1a is essential for cell
cycle arrest during hypoxia. Mol Cell Biol 23(1):359–369
Gothard L, Cornes P, Brooker S, Earl J, Glees J, Hall E, Peckitt C,
Tait D, Yarnold J (2005) Phase II study of vitamin E and
pentoxifylline in patients with late side effects of pelvic
radiotherapy. Radiother Oncol 75(3):334–341
Grigsby PW, Siegel BA, Dehdashti F (2001) Lymph node
staging by positron emission tomography in patients with
carcinoma of the cervix. J Clin Oncol 19(17):3745–3749
Hall EJ (2000) Radiobiology for the radiologist. Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins: Philadelphia. p 588
Hall EJ, Hei TK (2003) Genomic instability and bystander
effects induced by high-LET radiation. Oncogene 22(45):
7034–7042

224
Higginson D, Morris D, Jones E, Clarke-Pearson D, Varia M
(2011) Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT): Technological innovation and application in gynecologic oncology.
Gynecol Oncol 120(3):404–412
Holmes W, Soprano D, Soprano K (2003) Early events in the
induction of apoptosis in ovarian carcinoma cells by
CD437: activation of the p38 MAP kinase signal pathway.
Oncogene 22:6377–6386
Homesley H, Filiaci V, Gibbons S, Long H, Cella D, Spiritos N,
Morris R, DeGeest K, Lee R, Montag A (2009) A
randomized phase III trial in advanced endometrial carcinoma of surgery and volume directed radiation followed by
cisplatin and doxorubicin with or without paclitaxel: A
Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 112(3):
543–552
Hoogeman M, Prévost J-B, Nuyttens J, Pöll J, Levandag P,
Heijmen B (2009) Clinical Accuracy of the Respiratory
Tumor Tracking System of the Cyberknife: Assessment By
Analysis of Log Files. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
74(1):297–303
Hsu C-Y, Bristow R, Cha M, Wang B, Ho C-L, Kurman R,
Wang T-L, Shih I-M (2004) Characterization of active
mitogen-activated protein kinase in ovarian serous carcinomas. Clin Cancer Res 10:6432–6436
Kamei H, Jackson R, Zheleva D, Davidson F (2010) An
integrated pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic model for an
Aurora kinase inhibitor. J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn
37:407–434
Karlsson A, Helou K, Walentinsson A, Hedrich H, Szpirer C,
Levan G (2001) Amplification of Mycn, Ddx1, Rrm2, and
Odc1 in rat uterine endometrial carcinomas. Genes Chromosom Cancer 31(4):345–356
Kilby W, Dooley J, Kuduvalli G, Sayeh S, Maurer C (2010)
The Cyberknife robotic radiosurgery system in 2010.
Technol Cancer Res Treat 9(5):431–438
Kim Y, Kim J, Jeong K, Seong J, Suh C, Kim G (2009)
Dosimetric comparisons of three-dimensional conformal
radiotherapy, intensity-modulated radiotherapy, and helical
tomotherapy in whole abdominopelvic radiotherapy for
gynecologic malignancy. Technol Cancer Res Treat 8(5):
369–377
Kolberg M, Strand KR, Graff P, Andersson KK (2004)
Structure, function, and mechanism of ribonucleotide
reductases. Biochim Biophys Acta 1699(1–2):1–34
Kunos C, Von Gruenigen V, Waggoner S, Brindle J, Zhang Y,
Myers B, Funkhouser G, Wessels B, Einstein D (2008)
Cyberknife radiosurgery for squamous cell carcinoma of the
vulva after prior pelvic radiation therapy. Technol Cancer
Res Treat 7(5):375–380
Kunos C, Chen W, DeBernardo R, Waggoner S, Brindle J,
Zhang Y, Williams J, Einstein D (2009a) Stereotactic body
radiosurgery for pelvic relapse of gynecologic malignancies. Technol Cancer Res Treat 8(5):393–400
Kunos C, Chiu S, Pink J, Kinsella T (2009b) Modulating
radiation resistance by inhibiting ribonucleotide reductase
in cancers with virally or mutationally silenced p53 protein.
Radiat Res 172(6):666–676
Kunos C, Sill M, Waggoner S, Fracasso P (2009c) A phase 1
study using low dose abdominal radiation as a docetaxel
chemosensitizer for recurrent, persistent or advanced ovarian,
peritoneal, or fallopian tube cancer. Gynecol Oncol (in press)

C. A. Kunos et al.
Kunos C, Radivoyevitch T, Pink J, Chiu S, Stefan T,
Jaccobberger J, Kinsella T (2010) Ribonucleotide Reductase Inhibition Enhances Chemoradiosensitivity of Human
Cervical Cancers. Radiation Res 174(5):574–581
Kunos C, Brindle J, Zhang Y, DeBernardo R (2011) A
prospective phase 2 evaluation of stereotactic body radiosurgery for gynecologic malignancies. Cyberknife Robotic
Radiosurgery Summit February 12, San Francisco, CA
Lee Y, Park N, Kim J, Song Y, Kang S, Lee H (2008) Gammaknife radiosurgery as an optimal treatment modality for
brain metastases from epithelial ovarian cancer. Gynecol
Oncol 108(3):505–509
Mackie T, Holmes T, Swerdloff S, Reckwerdt P, Deasy J,
Yang J, Paliwal B, Kinsella T (1993) Tomotherapy: a new
concept for the delivery of dynamic conformal radiotherapy.
Med Phys 20(6):1709–1719
Markman M (2006) Clinical efficacy supporting the role of
intraperitoneal drug delivery in the primary chemotherapeutic management of small-volume residual advanced
ovarian cancer. Semin Oncol 33 (6 (Suppl 12)):S3–S7
Monk B, Sill M, McMeekin D, Cohn D, Ramondetta L,
Boardman C, Benda J, Cella D (2009) Phase III trial of four
cisplatin-containing doublet combinations in stage IVB,
recurrent, or persistent cervical carcinoma: a gynecologic
oncology group study. J Clin Oncol 27(28):4649–4655
Munro T (1970) The relative radiosensitivity of the nucleus and
cytoplasm of the Chinese hamster fibroblast. Radiat Res
42:451–470
Murphy J, Christman-Skieller C, Kim J, Dietrich S, Chang D,
Koong A (2010) A dosimetric model of duodenal toxicity
after stereotactic body radiotherapy for pancreatic cancer.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 78(5):1420–1426
Ozhasoglu C, Saw C, Hungcheng C, Burton S, Komanduri K,
Huq S, Heron D (2008) Synchrony–Cyberknife Respiratory
Compensation Technology. Med Dosimetry 33(2):117–123
Ozols RF, Bundy BN, Greer BE, Fowler JM, Clarke-Pearson D,
Burger RA, Mannel RS, DeGeest K, Hartenbach EM,
Baergen R et al (2003) Phase III trial of carboplatin and
paclitaxel compared with cisplatin and paclitaxel in patients
with optimally resected stage III ovarian cancer: a gynecologic oncology group study. J Clin Oncol 21(17):3194–200
Park C, Papiez L, Zhang S, Story M, Timmerman R (2008)
Universal survival curve and single fraction equivalent
dose: useful tools in understanding potency of ablative
radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 70(3):847–852
Piao C, Jin M, Lee S, Amatya P, Hyun J-W, Chang I-Y, You H
(2009) Ribonucleotide reductase small subunit p53R2
suppresses MEK-ERK activity by binding to ERK kinase
2. Oncogene 28:2173–2184
Pollock P, Gartside M, Dejeza L et al (2007) Frequent
activating FGFR2 mutations in endometrial carcinomas
parallel germline mutations associated with craniosynostosis and skeletal dysplasia syndromes. Oncogene 26:
7158–7162.
Randall M, Filiaci V, Spirtos N, Mannel R, Fowler J, Thigpen J,
Benda J (2006) Randomized phase III trial of wholeabdominal irradiation versus doxorubicin and cisplatin
chemotherapy in advanced endometrial carcinoma: a gynecologic oncology group study. J Clin Oncol 24(1):36–44
Rochet N, Sterzing F, Jensen A, Dinkel J, Herfarth K, Schubert K,
Eichbaum M, Schneeweiss A, Sohn C, Debus J et al (2008)

Gynecologic Cancer
Helical tomotherapy as a new treatment technique for whole
abdominal irradiation. Strahlenther Onkol 184(3):145–149
Rose PG, Adler LP, Rodriguez M, Faulhaber PF,
Abdul-Karim FW, Miraldi F (1999) Positron emission
tomography for evaluating para-aortic nodal metastasis in
locally advanced cervical cancer before surgical staging: a
surgicopathologic study. J Clin Oncol 17(1):41–45
Rose P, Ali S, Watkins E, Thigpen J, Deppe G, Clark-Pearson D,
Insalaco S (2007) Long-term follow-up of a randomized trial
comparing concurrent single agent cisplatin, cisplatin-based
combination chemotherapy, or hydroxyurea during pelvic
irradiation for locally advanced cervical cancer: a gynecologic oncology group study. J Clin Oncol 25(19):2804–2810
Schwartz J, Siegel B, Dehdashti F, Grigsby P (2007)
Association of post-therapy positron emission tomography
with tumor response and survival in cervical carcinoma.
JAMA 298(19):2289–2295
Shaw E, Scott C, Souhami L, Dinapoli R, Kline R, Loeffler J,
Farnan N (2000) Single dose radiosurgical treatment of
recurrent previously irradiated primary brain tumors and
brain metases: Final report of RTOG protocol 90–05. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 47(2):291–298
Shenouda G, Mehio A, Souhami L, Duclos M, Portelance L,
Belenkov A, Chow T (2006) Erythropoietin receptor expression in biopsu specimens from patients with uterine cervix
squamous cell carcinoma. Int J Gynecol Cancer 16(2):752–756
Sherouse G, Bourland J, Reynolds K et al (1990) Virtual
simulation in the clinical setting: some practical considerations. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 19:1059Gú˛1065
Sklar M (1988) The ras oncogenes increase the intrinsic
resistance of NIH 3T3 cells to ionizing radiation. Science
239:645–647

225
Swamidas V, Mahantshetty U, Goel V, Engineer R,
Deshpande D, Sarin R, Shrivastava S (2009) Treatment
planning of epithelial ovarian cancers using helical tomotherapy. J Appl Clin Med Phys 10(4):96–105
Thomas G, Ali S, Hoebers F, Darcy K, Rodgers W, Patel M,
Abulafia O, Lucci Jr, Begg A (2008) Phase III trial to
evaluate the efficacy of maintaining hemoglobin levels
above 12.0 g/dL with erythropoietin vs above 10.0 g/dL
without erythropoietin in anemic patients receiving concurrent radiation and cisplatin for cervical cancer. Gynecol
Oncol 108(2):317–325.
Wang J, Huang H, Lo S, Yuh W, Mayr N (2010) A generalized
linear-quadratic model for radiosurgery, stereotactic body
radiation therapy, and high-dose rate brachytherapy. Sci
Transl Med 2(39):39–48
Wilcox E, Daskalov G (2007) Evaluation of GAFCHROMIC
EBT film for Cyberknife dosimetry. Med Phys 34(6):
1967–1974
Winter Wr, Maxwell G, Tian C, Sobel E, Rose G, Thomas G,
Carlson J (2004) Association of hemoglobin level with
survival in cervical carcinoma patients treated with concurrent cisplatin and radiotherapy: a Gynecologic Oncology
Group Study. Gynecol Oncol 94(2):495–501
Wunderink W, Mendez Romero A, de Kruijf W, de Boer H,
Levendag P, Heijmen B (2008) Reduction of respiratory liver
tumor motion by abdominal compression in stereotactic body
frame, analyzed by tracking fiducial markers implanted in
liver. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 71(3):907–915
Yeh T, Marsh V, Bernat B et al (2007) Biological characterization of ARRY-142886 (AZD6244), a potent, highly selective
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1/2 inhibitor.
Clin Cancer Res 13:1576–1583

Pancreatic Cancer
A. Yuriko Minn, Daniel T. Chang, and Albert C. Koong

Contents

Abstract

1

Introduction.............................................................. 227

2

Patient Selection....................................................... 228

3
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4

Technical Aspects ....................................................
Tumor Motion and Gold Fiducial Seeds..................
Treatment Planning ...................................................
Prescription ................................................................
Treatment Delivery....................................................

Cancer of the pancreas is the fourth leading cause
of death in the United States. Patients with pancreatic cancer have a poor prognosis. The majority of
patients are unresectable at the time of diagnosis.
The use of stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT)
for pancreas cancer is promising with the clinical
experience showing excellent local control. Major
advantages of SBRT include intensified treatment
and short treatment time allowing for continued
intensive systemic chemotherapy.

228
228
229
229
230

4
Studies Using SBRT for Pancreas Cancer ........... 230
4.1 Studies from Stanford University ............................. 230
4.2 Studies from Other Institutions................................. 232
5

Toxicity...................................................................... 233

6

Case Examples ......................................................... 234

7

Conclusions ............................................................... 236

References.......................................................................... 236

A. Y. Minn  D. T. Chang  A. C. Koong (&)
Department of Radiation Oncology,
Stanford University Medical Center,
875 Blake Wilbur Drive MC 5847,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
e-mail: akoong@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

Cancer of the pancreas is the fourth leading cause of
cancer death in the United States (Siegel et al. 2011).
The 5-year overall survival (OS) for all patients is less
than 5% (Sener et al. 1999). Prognosis is poor even
for patients who undergo surgery. Nonetheless, surgery with R0 resection is the primary curative treatment option (Verbeke 2008). Unfortunately, the
majority of patients are unresectable at the time of
diagnosis, which have led investigators to pursue a
strategy of chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy.
For locally advanced unresectable pancreatic cancer
patients, combined chemoradiation has been shown to
provide a survival benefit in patients treated with 5fluorouracil (5FU) and radiation therapy compared to
radiation therapy or chemotherapy alone (Moertel et al.
1981, 1988). Other trials investigating the benefit of
chemoradiotherapy have shown no benefit when adding

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2011_456, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

227

228

radiation therapy to chemotherapy (Klaassen et al.
1985; Chauffert et al. 2008), however, a recent Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) study randomized patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer to
either gemcitabine alone or gemcitabine with concurrent radiation. This study demonstrated a survival
benefit in patients treated with concurrent gemcitabine
and radiation compared with gemcitabine alone (Loehrer et al. 2011). In patients with stabilization of disease with chemotherapy, chemoradiotherapy may
improve overall survival (Huguet et al. 2007).
While systemic disease is the primary cause of
disease-related mortality, local progression is a significant cause of morbidity and impairment of quality
of life. In an autopsy series of 76 patients from Johns
Hopkins University, 30% patients were found to have
locally destructive disease at the time of their death
with minimal evidence of distant progression. DPC4
immunostaining in these tumors was highly correlated
with the presence of locally destructive pancreatic
cancer (Iacobuzio-Donahue et al. 2009). These data
strongly suggest that in a subset of patients, control of
local pancreatic progression is an important clinical
endpoint. Thus, radiation therapy can play an
important role in local control with the potential
benefit of improved patient survival. Recently, stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) has emerged as
an attractive mode of radiation delivery. One of the
major advantages of SBRT compared to conventional
fractionated radiation therapy is the intensified treatment can both control localized disease and alleviate
symptoms in a shortened delivery time, avoiding long
treatment times in patients with a shortened life
expectancy. In addition, the abbreviated treatment
schedule allows for continued full-dose chemotherapy with minimal interruption compared with conventionally fractionated radiation therapy schedules.
Advances in radiation therapy techniques, including
four-dimensional (4D) CT and daily onboard imaging capabilities allow reduced treatment margins that
deliver high doses to conformal targets while limiting dose to critical normal structures. At Stanford
University, we have pursued a strategy of SBRT for
locally advanced pancreas cancer with superior local
control results compared with historical series
(Koong et al. 2004, 2005; Schellenberg et al. 2008;
Chang et al. 2009).

A. Y. Minn et al.

2

Patient Selection

There are no established criteria for patient eligibility for
SBRT. Ideally, the patient has localized disease with no
clinical lymph node involvement or distant metastasis
and has unresectable or marginally resectable disease.
While there is no absolute size cut-off, tumor size of
\5 cm is preferred. More importantly, the anatomy with
respect to critical structures (particularly the duodenum/
small bowel and stomach) plays an equally critical role
in selection. Tumors that have less adjacent normal
stomach and duodenum are more favorable. Indeed, a
risk-adapted dosing strategy based on duodenum proximity, as developed by investigators at Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, can be used (Mahadevan
et al. 2010, 2011). Since many patients are at risk of
distant progression, an initial course of systemic therapy
may be appropriate to determine the natural history of
the disease, especially in those patients with markedly
elevated tumor markers or with suspicious but indeterminate lesions in the liver or other organs.

3

Technical Aspects

3.1

Tumor Motion and Gold Fiducial
Seeds

Upper abdominal organs including the pancreas have
complex motion due to the proximity to the diaphragm, so it is important to account for this motion
in treatment planning and delivery. With normal
respiration, pancreatic tumors can move as much as
2–3 cm in the superior–inferior (SI) aspect (Bussels
et al. 2003; Gierga et al. 2004; Feng et al. 2009). In a
study of pancreatic cancer patients treated with
CyberKnifeÒ SBRT, significant pancreas movement
was observed in the SI direction (mean up to
12.7 mm), left–right direction (mean up to 9.4 mm),
and anterior–posterior direction (mean up to 5.5 mm;
Minn et al. 2009). Understanding the extent of tumor
movement allows the clinician to use reduced and
potentially non-uniform expansions around the tumor
volume to avoid increased normal tissue toxicity
while still maintaining adequate margins to prevent
‘‘marginal misses.’’

Pancreatic Cancer

Fig. 1 FDG-PET done at the time of simulation is fused to the
treatment planning CT. The FDG-PET assists in target delineation of the GTV (pink). The PTV is noted in red

To this end, our technique relies on the use of 3–5
gold implanted fiducial seeds into or around the tumor
for tracking to increase targeting and setup accuracy.
Our preferred approach is via endoscopic placement,
however, seed placement may also be accomplished
by CT guidance, laparoscopy, laparotomy, or at the
time of surgical attempt at resection. This procedure
is typically performed at least 5 days prior to treatment-planning simulation scanning to minimize the
impact of seed migration.

229

the Varian Real-Time Position Management system
(RPM, Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto, CA).
The gross tumor volume (GTV) is contoured on
the axial slices of the biphasic CT, and is usually best
seen as a hypodense lesion during the early arterial
phase. Uptake on the FDG-PET scan is also useful
when contouring to help delineate the extent of
the tumor. When using the respiratory tracking on
CyberKnifeÒ (Accuray, Sunnyvale, CA) for treatment, the fiducial seeds are used as registration points
for fusion of the end-inhalation and exhalation phases
of the 4D-CT in order to adjust the GTV for tumor
deformation. When using respiratory-gated treatment
delivery, selected 4D-CT scan phases encompassing
the gating window were selected and fused to
the treatment-planning scan by DICOM coordinates.
The gating window is chosen after visual inspection
of the pancreatic tumor motion through the respiratory cycle seen on the 4D-CT and is centered around
the end-expiration phase.
The internal target volume (ITV) is determined by
adjusting the GTV to include changes in tumor
position as seen on the 4D-CT phases representing the
gating window. The planning treatment volume
(PTV) is defined as the ITV plus 2–3 mm for set-up
error. Regional lymph nodes are not included in the
target volume. In addition, fiducial markers were
contoured and projected onto the fluoroscopic images
during treatment.

3.3
3.2

Prescription

Treatment Planning

Patients are simulated and treated supine with arms
placed above the head. They are immobilized using
a custom-made Alpha Cradle (Smithers Medical
Products, North Canton, OH). Intravenous contrastenhanced arterial and venous (biphasic) pancreatic
protocol CT scan are obtained at 1.25 mm cuts.
Typically, arterial phase scans are acquired during
expiration phase. Patients fast for 8 hours prior to the
scan, and oral contrast is not used. 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) is
obtained as part of the simulation scan to assist in
target delineation as well as to survey for occult
metastases, Fig. 1. In addition, a 4D-CT scan is performed and respiratory phases are reconstructed using

In our initial studies, the prescription dose was 25 Gy in a
single fraction prescribed to the isodose line that covers
95% of the target. Normal tissue constraints for the liver,
kidney, spinal cord, stomach, duodenum, and other
bowel were given, with the highest priority placed on
limiting the duodenal and stomach dose. The additional
constraint that the 50% isodose line should not reach the
distal (nonadjacent) wall of the lumen was given.
Our current protocol used prescribes 33 Gy in
5 fractions, using either conventional stepand-shoot IMRT or gated RapidArcÒ. Normal tissue
constraints for treatment planning are shown in
Table 1. Figure 2a shows a representative plan of a
patient with locally advanced pancreas cancer and
associated dose volume histogram (Fig. 2b).

230

A. Y. Minn et al.

Table 1 Normal tissue constraints for 33 Gy in 5 fractions
Organ

Constraint

Liver

Mean \5 Gy
50% of volume \4 Gy
70% of volume \2.5 Gy

Kidney

75% of volume of each kidney \5 Gy

Spinal cord

Maximum dose \5 Gy

Stomach

V15 Gy \ 9 cc
V25 Gy \ 3 cc

when the seeds exit as the patient moves through the
respiratory cycle (Fig. 3). Once confirmed, the treatment is delivered. During the course of treatment,
orthogonal kV images are obtained at the beginning
of the gated phase to confirm the location of the
implanted fiducials.

4

Studies Using SBRT for Pancreas
Cancer

4.1

Studies from Stanford University

V33 Gy \ 1 cc
Duodenum

V15 Gy \ 9 cc
V25 Gy \ 3 cc
V33 Gy \ 1 cc

Other bowel

V15 Gy \ 9 cc
V25 Gy \ 3 cc
V33 Gy \ 1 cc

3.4

Treatment Delivery

SBRT delivered using the CyberKnifeÒ with the
SynchronyÒ (Accuray Inc.) respiratory tracking system was the mode of delivery in our initial studies.
The imaging system is composed of 2 orthogonal
X-ray sources on the ceiling paired with amorphous
silicon detectors that capture digital radiographic
imagines of the patient in real time. The SynchronyÒ
respiratory tracking system develops a correlation
model between the movement of the fiducials and the
LEDS placed on the patient’s chest wall that is
updated continuously. This model enables near realtime respiratory tracking of the tumor.
The alternative delivery method we have used
is via a conventional linear accelerator using the
TrilogyTM or TrueBeamTM (Varian, Palo Alto, CA),
linear accelerator. On the day of treatment, prior to
radiation delivery, orthogonal kilovoltage images are
used for alignment to bony anatomy. Cone-beam CT
(CBCT) is used on occasion to aide in this process as
well. After initial alignment, fluoroscopic images with
an overlay of the position of the fiducial ITV (fiducial
plus a small 2–3 mm margin) from the digitally
reconstructed radiograph (DRR) are taken in the AP
and lateral positions. This step allows for alignment
of the fiducial seeds and adjustment of the gating
window to confirm that the radiation beam is ‘‘on’’
when the fiducials enter the fiducial ITV and ‘‘off’’

Fifteen patients with locally advanced pancreatic
cancer were treated with 15, 20, or 25 Gy in a single
fraction in a Phase I dose escalation study at Stanford
(Koong et al. 2004). The primary clinical end point of
local control was achieved at 25 Gy and therefore the
trial was stopped prior to reaching the maximum
tolerated dose. Median OS was 11 months and 100%
local control at time of death or last follow-up (Koong
et al. 2004).
Koong et al. (2005) then conducted a Phase II
study with conventionally fractionated radiotherapy
using intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT)
followed by CyberKnifeÒ SBRT boost to the primary
tumor. The primary tumor and regional lymph nodes
were treated using IMRT to 45 Gy with concurrent
5FU or capecitabine chemotherapy followed by a
SBRT boost of 25 Gy in a single fraction to the primary tumor. Local control rate was 94% and median
OS was 33 weeks. Two patients developed grade 3
gastrointestinal (GI) toxicity and 4 patients with grade
2 GI toxicity (Koong et al. 2005). Because of
increased toxicity and progression of systemic disease, the treatment strategy was altered to include
gemcitabine chemotherapy.
The practice of 25 Gy SBRT sandwiched between
full-dose 1,000 mg/m2 gemcitabine chemotherapy
was studied in a Phase II study. Of the 16 patients,
19% had local progression as some component of
progression and the median survival was 11.4 months
(Schellenberg et al. 2008). Survival was comparable
to that of conventional chemoradiation, but the incidence of duodenal ulcers was increased with SBRT.
Five patients developed grade 2 bowel ulcers, 1
patient had grade 3 stenosis and 1 patient had a grade
4 bowel perforation (Schellenberg et al. 2008).

Pancreatic Cancer

231

Fig. 2 a Sample plan on one
axial slice. GTV outlined in
red (thick). The adjacent
duodenum is in yellow. The
50% isodose line does not
reach the distal wall of the
lumen. The GTV volume
measures 50.78 mL and the
PTV volume measures
76.15 mL. b Corresponding
dose volume histogram
(DVH) for the same patient.
The PTV at 33 Gy is covered
by 95%. Mean dose of the
duodenum at PTV (blue) and
duodenum (orange) is
883 cGy and 585 cGy,
respectively. The additional
constraints of 50% of volume
\12.5 Gy for the duodenum
at PTV, 15% of volume
\25 Gy for the duodenum,
and 50% of the volume
\15 Gy for the duodenum are
met. Dose to the following
structures are also reviewed:
stomach (pink), spinal cord
(green), liver (yellow), left
kidney (pink), right kidney
(brown)

Chang et al. conducted a retrospective pooled
analysis of 77 patients treated with 25 Gy SBRT.
Most patients (96%) received chemotherapy, typically
gemcitabine-based. One-year freedom from local
progression and OS was 84% and 21%, respectively
(Chang et al. 2009). There was no difference in 1-year
freedom from local progression rate based on tumor
location (head/uncinate vs body/tail). Median OS
from time of diagnosis was 11.9 months. However, it
is difficult to compare the OS rate to other studies
since some patients in this series received prior
chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy. Five patients
experienced grade 2 or higher acute toxicity and 13
patients experienced grade 2 or higher late toxicity. Ten
developed stomach or small bowel ulcers, 3 patients

had biliary stricture, 1 had a duodenal stricture, and 1
patient had a duodenal perforation. The actuarial rates
of Cgrade 2 toxicity at 6-month and 12-month was 11
and 25%, respectively (Chang et al. 2009).
The mode of delivery of SBRT for locally
advanced pancreatic cancer has largely shifted to the
use of a conventional linear accelerator. Schellenberg
et al. reported Stanford’s experience of treating
locally advanced pancreatic cancer with single fraction 25 Gy using TrilogyTM. Similar to the previous
CyberKnifeÒ experience, the 1-year freedom from
local progression rate was 94% (Schellenberg et al.
2011). Median survival was 11.8 months, comparable
to our prior experience. Toxicity did not change with
the change in machine used to deliver the SBRT.

232

A. Y. Minn et al.

Fig. 3 a Sample image of
respiratory trace and
fluoroscopic image where the
fiducials are outside of the
target and thus the beam is
‘‘off’’ (blue). b Sample image
of fluoroscopic image where
the fiducials are within the
target and the beam is ‘‘on’’
(yellow)

Late grade 4 toxicity occurred in one patient who
required surgery for a duodenal perforation (Schellenberg
et al. 2011).

4.2

Studies from Other Institutions

A few other institutions have also investigated SBRT
for locally advanced pancreatic cancer summarized in
Table 2. Giving 45 Gy in 3 fractions, Hoyer et al.

(2005) reported that 27% of 22 patients developed
local progression as a component of failure, and only
1 patient had isolated local tumor progression. The
investigators reported significant GI toxicity. However, this is likely due to the larger fields irradiated
compared to our patients at Stanford University.
Using CyberKnifeÒ, Mahadevan et al. report on
their outcomes for 39 patients with locally advanced,
unresectable pancreas cancer. Patients began with 2
cycles of gemcitabine then restaged. If there was

Pancreatic Cancer

233

Table 2 Summary of published SBRT trials for pancreatic cancer
Study

Number of
patients

Koong et al., Phase I

15

Dose (Gy/
fraction)

Local control (%)

Overall survival
(months)

15 Gy/1

100

11

20 Gy/1
25 Gy/1
Koong et al., Phase II

16

25 Gy/1 (boost)

94

7.5 (33 weeks)

Schellenberg et al., Phase
II

16

25 Gy/1

81

11.4

Schellenberg et al., Phase
II

20

25 Gy/1

94

11.8

Hoyer et al.

22

25 Gy/3

57

5.7

Polistina et al.

23

30 Gy/3

82.6

10.6

Mahadevan et al. (2011)

39

24–36 Gy/3

85

20

Mahadevan et al. (2010)

36

24–36 Gy/3

78

14.3

Rwigema et al.

71

20–24 Gy/2–3

77 (\15 mL); 58
([15 mL)

10.3

Didolkar et al.

85

15–30 Gy/3

91.7

8.65

stable disease, patients received an additional cycle of
chemotherapy then received 24–36 Gy in 3 fractions.
Dose was dependent on the relationship of the pancreas
to the duodenum. Local control was 85% (Mahadevan
et al. 2011). Late grade 3 toxicity occurred in three
patients (2 with gastrointestinal bleeding, 2 with gastric
outlet obstruction; Mahadevan et al. 2011). In an earlier
series of 36 patients, Mahadevan et al. (2010)
reported 78% local control with 24–36 Gy in 3 fractions. The authors concluded that SBRT could be used
to treat locally advanced pancreatic cancer with
acceptable side effects and minimal interference of
chemotherapy.
At the University of Pittsburgh, Rwigema et al.
reviewed the outcomes of 71 patients treated with
SBRT for pancreatic cancer. Patients received a
median dose of 24 Gy (range 18–25 Gy). Most
patients (94%) received single fraction SBRT,
while 6% of patients received fractionated SBRT in
2–3 fractions to 20–24 Gy. Local control was 77%
in tumors \15 mL and 58% in tumors [15 mL
(Rwigema et al. 2011). Thirteen out of 16 patients
reported complete pain relief after SBRT. No patient
experienced bowel perforation due to SBRT.
In an Italian study, 23 patients with locally
advanced pancreas cancer received 30 Gy in 3 fractions. Nineteen patients had either a partial response,
complete response, or stable disease, while the

remaining four showed local progression (Polistina
et al. 2010). Multivariate analysis showed that nodal
metastases, response to treatment, and surgical
resection had statistically significant effects on quality
of life and survival (Polistina et al. 2010).
In a series by Didolkar et al. (2010), 85
patients with unresectable pancreatic cancers received
15–30 Gy in 3 fractions. Seventy-eight patients had
complete response, partial response or stable disease
for a median of 8 months. Grade III/IV toxicity was
noted in 19 patients including duodenitis, gastritis,
diarrhea, and renal failure (Didolkar et al. 2010).

5

Toxicity

The adjacent duodenum and stomach are the primary
dose-limiting organ when considering SBRT for
pancreas cancer. Due to their often very close proximity to the primary tumor, irradiation of portions of
these critical structures is unavoidable.
To assess the toxicity effects of SBRT on the
duodenum, Murphy et al. analyzed the outcomes of
73 previously unirradiated patients who received
25 Gy in a single fraction at Stanford University.
Overall 12 patients (16.4%) experienced grade 2 or
higher toxicity, and this correlated with the volume
irradiated by SBRT. The V10 (the volume in cm3 that

234

A. Y. Minn et al.

Fig. 4 Plan on one axial slice
of patient in case Example 1.
PTV is outlined in red. The
adjacent duodenum is in
yellow. The 50% isodose line
(light blue) does not reach the
distal wall of the lumen.
Prescription dose is 33 Gy in
5 fractions

received 10 Gy or more), V15, V20, and V25 correlated with the development of Grade 2–4 toxicity at
12 months (Murphy et al. 2010). The one-year actuarial rate of grade 2–4 toxicity was 29%, however the
authors found that keeping V15 \ 9.1 cm3,
V20 \ 3.3 cm3, and Dmax \ 23 Gy resulted in significantly decreased duodenal toxicity (Murphy et al.
2010). The most common toxicity was ulceration.
This data is the first to model duodenal tolerance in
the setting of SBRT, which confirms that the risk of
toxicity is dose- and volume-related. While this data
applies for single fraction SBRT, it does not address
multi-fraction courses.

6

Case Examples

Case 1
A 54-year-old woman presented with abdominal
pain, jaundice, and 10 pound weight loss. She underwent an abdominal ultrasound and ERCP and she was
thought to have gallbladder disease and subsequently
underwent cholecystectomy. However, etiology of her
jaundice was not clear and she subsequently underwent
a pancreatic protocol CT scan which showed a hypodense lesion in the head of the pancreas with limited
involvement of the superior mesenteric vein (SMV).
She underwent a second ERCP procedure with stent
placement and her jaundice improved. Endoscopic
ultrasound-guided biopsy revealed adenocarcinoma of

the pancreas. She was diagnosed with borderline
resectable pancreatic cancer and started on gemcitabine
chemotherapy. CA 19-9 was 34. She was felt to be a
good candidate for SBRT.
After completion of one cycle of chemotherapy,
she completed a course of SBRT to her pancreas
lesion to 33 Gy in 5 fractions using a respiratory
gated arc technique on an IGRT enabled linear
accelerator. Treatment plan is shown in Fig. 4. She
tolerated her course of radiation well experiencing
transient grade 1 nausea.
One week after completion of her SBRT, she
resumed gemcitabine chemotherapy. A CT scan one
month after completing SBRT revealed a slight
decrease in size of her main pancreatic mass. She was
evaluated by an oncologic surgeon who discussed the
possibility of definitive surgical resection with portal
vein reconstruction. Approximately 6 weeks after
completion of SBRT, no metastatic disease was noted
on exploratory laparotomy, thus she underwent a
Whipple pancreaticuoduodenectomy with portal vein
reconstruction. Final pathology revealed a well differentiated T2 N0 tumor with 0/14 lymph nodes involved.
CT scan 3 weeks post-operatively revealed post
operative changes but no signs of recurrent disease.
She resumed gemcitabine chemotherapy. She completed an additional 4 cycles of chemotherapy. At her
6 month follow-up, her CA 19-9 was 8 (within
normal limits) and a CT scan showed no clear signs of
residual or recurrent disease.

Pancreatic Cancer

235

Fig. 5 Plan on one axial slice
of patient in case Example 2.
PTV is outlined in red. The
nearby small bowel is in
yellow. Prescription dose is
33 Gy in 5 fractions

Case 2
A 54-year-old man presented with epigastric pain,
bloating, and weight loss. CT scan showed a 3.7 cm
hypovascular mass centered within the uncinate process of the pancreas, encasing the superior mesenteric
artery (SMA) and occluded the SMV. Fine needle
aspiration revealed adenocarcinoma. CA 19-9 at diagnosis was 3294. He began chemotherapy initially with
gemcitabine and erlotinib, but switched to a dosereduced chemotherapy with oxaliplatin, irinotecan,
fluorouracil, and leucovorin (FOLFIRINOX). He
completed 6 cycles of dose-reduced FOLFIRINOX.
Restaging CT scan revealed a stable pancreatic
mass measuring 3.7 9 3.0 cm continuing to encase
the SMA and occlude the SMV. CA 19-9 was 79.
His case was presented a multi-modality tumor
board and a course of SBRT was recommended.
Fiducial seeds were placed, and the patient underwent
simulation.
He completed a course of SBRT to his pancreatic
mass consisting of 33 Gy in 5 fractions using 10MV
photons using a respiratory gated arc technique on an
IGRT enabled linear accelerator (Fig. 5). He completed his course of treatment in 5 sequential days
without acute toxicities.
At follow-up 6 months since completion of SBRT,
the patient felt well without complaints of GI toxicities. CT done at this time showed stable primary

tumor without evidence of recurrent or metastatic
disease.
Case 3
A 69-year-old woman presented with abdominal
distension. CT scan revealed a 2.5 9 2.6 cm mass in
the uncinate process of the pancreas, encompassing
the SMA. Fine needle aspiration was diagnostic for
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. CA19-9 was 45.
She completed SBRT to her locally advanced
pancreatic tumor to 25 Gy in a single fraction using a
linac-based approach (Fig. 6). She was treated with
respiratory gated IMRT plan. She completed her
treatment without treatment breaks or acute toxicity.
She resumed her gemcitabine chemotherapy after
the completion of her radiation therapy. Her first PET
scan after 6 weeks post treatment showed interval
decrease of FDG uptake in the pancreas with no
lymphadenopathy or distant metastases. A pancreas
protocol CT demonstrated that the pancreatic mass
was unchanged with continued encasement of the
SMA. The hepatic artery was narrowed by the mass,
and also abutted the celiac artery. Subsequent CT
scans every 3 months for the first year were stable and
PET scans showed no FDG activity in the pancreatic
mass. A PET scan at 2 year follow-up showed no
evidence of metabolically active disease. A CT scan
at 3 years showed a stable pancreatic mass with
encasement of SMA, and narrowing of left hepatic

236

A. Y. Minn et al.

Fig. 6 Plan on one axial slice
of patient in case Example 3.
PTV is outlined. The adjacent
duodenum is outlined. The
50% isodose line does not
reach the distal wall of the
lumen. Prescription dose is
25 Gy in a single fraction

artery and splenic-portal venous confluence. CA 19-9
was within normal limits.
To date, she has been doing well at last follow-up
3.5 years since completing her SBRT treatment.

7

Conclusions

Surgery is still the standard of care of patients with
resectable disease. The use of SBRT for unresectable
pancreatic disease is promising with the clinical
experience showing excellent local control, however,
no significant changes in patient survival are
observed. In a minority of patients, borderline or
unresectable patients may become resectable after
radiation therapy. Most patients will experience
systemic spread which enforces the concept of integrating SBRT with optimized chemotherapy. For
patients whose disease is stable or well controlled
with systemic therapy, they may benefit from a course
of SBRT to the tumor bed for local control, as local
progression could impact these patients’ quality of
life as well as survival. However, SBRT should be
considered for palliation of symptoms related to local
progression even in the setting of metastatic disease.
We favor the approach of systemic chemotherapy
for all locally advanced patients at initial diagnosis
for 2–4 months, then imaging studies to determine
treatment response. SBRT should be considered in
those with stable or better disease. This approach was

proposed by a recent German study, indicating a
benefit of radiotherapy for patients who did not progress in their systemic disease after 3–6 months of
initial gemcitabine chemotherapy (Huguet et al.
2007). Further study is required to determine how best
to integrate SBRT with more intensified yet toxic
chemotherapy regimens such as FOLFIRINOX
(Conroy et al. 2011).
The optimal integration of SBRT with systemic
chemotherapy is yet to be defined. In addition, a riskadapted approach of choosing a fractionation schedule based on the risk of bowel toxicity may be
possible as we understand the tolerance of bowel with
hypofractionated radiation.

References
Bussels B, Goethals L et al (2003) Respiration-induced
movement of the upper abdominal organs: a pitfall for the
three-dimensional conformal radiation treatment of pancreatic cancer. Radiother Oncol 68(1):69–74
Chang DT, Schellenberg D et al (2009) Stereotactic radiotherapy for unresectable adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.
Cancer 115(3):665–672
Chauffert B, Mornex F et al (2008) Phase III trial comparing
intensive induction chemoradiotherapy (60 Gy, infusional
5-FU and intermittent cisplatin) followed by maintenance
gemcitabine with gemcitabine alone for locally advanced
unresectable pancreatic cancer. Definitive results of the
2000-01 FFCD/SFRO study. Ann Oncol 19(9):1592–
1599

Pancreatic Cancer
Conroy T, Desseigne F et al (2011) FOLFIRINOX versus
gemcitabine for metastatic pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med
364(19):1817–1825
Didolkar MS, Coleman CW et al (2010) Image-guided
stereotactic radiosurgery for locally advanced pancreatic
adenocarcinoma results of first 85 patients. J Gastrointest
Surg 14(10):1547–1559
Feng M, Balter JM et al (2009) Characterization of pancreatic
tumor motion using cine MRI: surrogates for tumor position
should be used with caution. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
74(3):884–891
Gierga DP, Chen GT et al (2004) Quantification of respirationinduced abdominal tumor motion and its impact on IMRT
dose distributions. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 58(5):
1584–1595
Hoyer M, Roed H et al (2005) Phase-II study on stereotactic
radiotherapy of locally advanced pancreatic carcinoma.
Radiother Oncol 76(1):48–53
Huguet F, Andre T et al (2007) Impact of chemoradiotherapy
after disease control with chemotherapy in locally advanced
pancreatic adenocarcinoma in GERCOR phase II and III
studies. J Clin Oncol 25(3):326–331
Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Fu B et al (2009) DPC4 gene status of
the primary carcinoma correlates with patterns of failure in
patients with pancreatic cancer. J Clin Oncol 27(11):
1806–1813
Klaassen DJ, MacIntyre JM et al (1985) Treatment of locally
unresectable cancer of the stomach and pancreas: a randomized
comparison of 5-fluorouracil alone with radiation plus concurrent and maintenance 5-fluorouracil—an Eastern cooperative oncology group study. J Clin Oncol 3(3):373–378
Koong AC, Le QT et al (2004) Phase I study of stereotactic
radiosurgery in patients with locally advanced pancreatic
cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 58(4):1017–1021
Koong AC, Christofferson E et al (2005) Phase II study to
assess the efficacy of conventionally fractionated radiotherapy followed by a stereotactic radiosurgery boost in patients
with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 63(2):320–323
Loehrer PJ Sr, Feng Y et al (2011) Gemcitabine alone versus
gemcitabine plus radiotherapy in patients with locally
advanced pancreatic cancer: an Eastern cooperative
oncology group trial. J Clin Oncol 29(31):4105–4112
Mahadevan A, Jain S et al (2010) Stereotactic body radiotherapy and gemcitabine for locally advanced pancreatic cancer.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 78(3):735–742
Mahadevan A, Miksad R et al (2011) Induction gemcitabine
and stereotactic body radiotherapy for locally advanced

237
nonmetastatic pancreas cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
81(4):e615–e622 [Epub]
Minn AY, Schellenberg D et al (2009) Pancreatic tumor motion
on a single planning 4D-CT does not correlate with
intrafraction tumor motion during treatment. Am J Clin
Oncol 32(4):364–368
Moertel CG, Frytak S et al (1981) Therapy of locally
unresectable pancreatic carcinoma: a randomized comparison of high dose (6000 rads) radiation alone, moderate dose
radiation (4000 rads ? 5-fluorouracil), and high dose radiation ? 5-fluorouracil: The Gastrointestinal Tumor Study
Group. Cancer 48(8):1705–1710
Moertel C, Frytak S, Hahn R et al (1988) Treatment of locally
unresectable carcinoma of the pancreas: comparison of
combined-modality therapy (chemotherapy plus radiotherapy)
to chemotherapy alone: gastrointestinal tumor study group.
J Natl Cancer Inst 80(10):751–755
Murphy JD, Christman-Skieller C et al (2010) A dosimetric
model of duodenal toxicity after stereotactic body radiotherapy for pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
78(5):1420–1426
Polistina F, Costantin G et al (2010) Unresectable locally
advanced pancreatic cancer: a multimodal treatment using
neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (gemcitabine plus stereotactic radiosurgery) and subsequent surgical exploration.
Ann Surg Oncol 17(8):2092–2101
Rwigema JC, Parikh SD et al (2011) Stereotactic body
radiotherapy in the treatment of advanced adenocarcinoma
of the pancreas. Am J Clin Oncol 34(1):63–69
Schellenberg D, Goodman KA et al (2008) Gemcitabine
chemotherapy and single-fraction stereotactic body radiotherapy for locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 72(3):678–686
Schellenberg D, Kim J et al (2011) Single-fraction stereotactic
body radiation therapy and sequential gemcitabine for the
treatment of locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 81(1):181–188
Sener SF, Fremgen A et al (1999) Pancreatic cancer: a report
of treatment and survival trends for 100, 313 patients
diagnosed from 1985–1995, using the national cancer
database. J Am Coll Surg 189(1):1–7
Siegel R, Ward E et al (2011) Cancer statistics, 2011:
the impact of eliminating socioeconomic and racial disparities on premature cancer deaths. CA Cancer J Clin
61(4):212–236
Verbeke CS (2008) Resection margins and R1 rates in
pancreatic cancer—are we there yet? Histopathology 52(7):
787–796

Benign and Malignant Primary Spinal
Tumors
Brett Cox, Iris C. Gibbs, and Yoshiya Yamada

Contents

Abstract

1

Introduction.............................................................. 239

2
2.1
2.2
2.3

Technical Aspects ....................................................
Simulation ..................................................................
Target Delineation .....................................................
Treatment Planning and Delivery .............................

240
240
240
241

3
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4

Clinical Applications ...............................................
Eligibility Criteria......................................................
Retrospective Studies ................................................
Clinical Trials ............................................................
Treatment of Recurrent Disease ...............................

242
242
243
245
245

4

Toxicities ................................................................... 245

5

Case Examples ......................................................... 245

6

Future Directions..................................................... 248

References.......................................................................... 248

B. Cox (&)  Y. Yamada
Department of Radiation Oncology,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA
e-mail: coxb@mskcc.org
I. C. Gibbs
Department of Radiation Oncology,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA

Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) is increasingly being used in the definitive treatment of
patients with primary spine tumors. SBRT-based
regimens are used to treat unresectable primary
spine tumors and are administered as a neoadjuvant or adjuvant treatment in those receiving
definitive surgery. SBRT-based treatments optimize structural, mechanical, and functional outcomes and are emerging as the radiation treatment
of choice for several primary tumors of the spine.

1

Introduction

Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) is increasingly being used in the management of primary
benign and malignant tumors of the spine, where local
failure is catastrophic and tumors abut sensitive critical normal tissues such as spinal cord, cauda equina,
and esophagus. Primary spinal tumors are challenging
to treat because of the critical mechanical, functional,
and neurologic functions served by the spinal cord,
mobile spine, and sacrum (Wang et al. 2008). Local
control is essential to achieve cure, but primary spine
tumors are rarely amenable to en bloc resection
strategies secondary to multi-compartmental tumor
involvement and intimate relationships with critical
normal structures, where wide resection is associated
with significant loss of neurologic and mechanical
function (Guest et al. 1993). Intensive rehabilitation
efforts and complex tissue reconstructive strategies
are required after these en bloc surgical approaches
(Chang et al. 2007). Furthermore, intralesional

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2011_534, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

239

240

resection strategies are associated with a high rate of
recurrence even after administration of adjuvant
radiation therapy (Bilsky et al. 2001). SBRT-based
treatments with or without more limited surgical
resection have already been shown to confer equivalent local control rates compared to aggressive en bloc
resection strategies without the associated functional
and medical risks (Bilsky et al. 2009).
Treatment regimens involving conventionally
fractionated radiation therapy are often suboptimal for
primary spine tumors because prescribed doses are
limited by the tolerance of adjacent critical normal
structures (Flickinger et al. 2003), precluding
administration of doses associated with high levels of
local control (Delaney et al. 2007; Kepka et al. 2005;
Yang et al. 1998; Zagars and Ballo 2003). Therefore,
SBRT is particularly desirable for treating spine
tumors, given the combination of image guidance to
remediate inter and intrafraction motion and advanced
inverse treatment planning algorithms to achieve
highly conformal dose distributions. Unlike nonSBRT treatments, this permits delivery of treatment
plans with steep dose gradients between target volumes and adjacent organs at risk, maximizing the
therapeutic radio of treatment (Benzil et al. 2004;
Lovelock et al. 2005b; Ryu et al. 2001). By minimizing the geometric uncertainty normally associated
with conventional radiation techniques, SBRT permits minimized planning treatment volume (PTV)
margins on the order of 2–3 mm and decreases the
volume of adjacent normal tissues exposed to high
doses of radiation. SBRT has been demonstrated to
deliver biologically effective doses [70 Gy in close
proximity to the spinal cord (Gerszten et al. 2007).
Another advantage of SBRT for primary spine
tumors is the ability to overcome radioresistant tumor
phenotypes due to increased rates of irreparable DNA
damage (Brown and Koong 2008) and the process of
endothelial cell apoptosis, a phenomenon exclusively
seen in high dose, single fraction regimens (GarciaBarros et al. 2003). Through these mechanisms, certain SBRT regimens can essentially remove the histological dependence for local control and overcome
radioresistant phenotypes, as has been validated
clinically in a single institution cohort (Yamada et al.
2008). Several primary spinal tumors, including
chordoma, chondrosarcoma, and osteogenic sarcoma,
are considered resistant to conventionally fractionated
radiation therapy. Therefore, SBRT-based treatment

B. Cox et al.

paradigms are being increasingly applied to make use
of its biologic benefits.

2

Technical Aspects

2.1

Simulation

The technical considerations for paraspinal SBRT
simulation are fully detailed in the chapter on SBRT
in the spinal metastatic setting. Institutional techniques for immobilization, simulation, planning, and
delivery of treatment with intrafractional motion
control have been previously described (Coste-Maniere et al. 2005; Gibbs et al. 2007; Lovelock et al.
2005a; Ryu et al. 2001). Advanced inverse treatment
planning algorithms with intensity modulation, custom immobilization with noninvasive body frames,
and the use of image guidance treatment delivery are
recommended for delivery of paraspinal SBRT
(Yamada et al. 2005). As with any SBRT technique,
treatment delivery and intrafractional motion control
must be tailored to the specific treatment platform
used.
At Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
(MSKCC), patients undergo supine computed
tomography (CT) simulation preceded by a myelogram to assist with delineation of the spinal cord and
any epidural component of disease (Lovelock et al.
2005b; Yamada et al. 2008). Intravenous (IV) contrast
and positron emission tomography (PET)-CT simulations are performed when clinically indicated.
Pretreatment magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
images may be fused with the treatment planning scan
to assist with target volume and spinal cord contour
delineation. Immobilization is generally achieved
with an alpha cradle and a custom cradle for patients
with lesions at or below T4 and with an alpha cradle
with five-point mask for patients with lesions above
T4 (Fig. 1). Axial CT images are obtained at 2 mm
intervals and transferred to the treatment planning
system, confirming adequacy of the myelography.

2.2

Target Delineation

Formal ICRU nomenclature should be used to delineate target volumes. The gross tumor volume (GTV)
should be defined as the complete extent of the gross

Benign and Malignant Primary Spinal Tumors

241

Fig. 1 MSKCC immobilization system for paraspinal radiosurgery with simulation myelography

tumor using all available clinical information and
imaging modalities, including MRI, CT, myelography, plain films, and functional imaging studies like
PET-CT. If present, all epidural and paraspinal
components of tumor should be included as a component of the GTV. The clinical target volume (CTV)
should account for subclinical spread of disease in the
adjacent bony and soft tissue compartments. In general, for lesions involving the vertebral column, the
CTV is represented by the vertebral body and
involved pedicle(s). Alternatively, when the majority
of the vertebral body is uninvolved by tumor and the
pedicles or posterior elements are also uninvolved, the
GTV alone may be used for treatment. PTV margins
should be generated on a case by case basis considering all pertinent variables to ensure adequate CTV
target coverage and sparing of adjacent normal
tissues. PTV contour expansions must account for
inter and intrafraction motion management techniques, uncertainty associated with different treatment
platforms and immobilization methods, and the prescription dose-fractionation schedule used. In general,
CTV to PTV margins should typically be 3 mm or less,
modified at the dural margin and adjacent critical
structures to allow spacing at the discretion of the
treating physician. The PTV should never overlap with
the spinal cord or cauda equina and should encompass
the entire GTV and CTV. Improvements in immobilization and image guidance techniques will likely allow
for further reduction of the CTV to PTV margin in the
future.
CTV generation is especially complex in primary
spinal tumors. In spinal sarcomas and chordomas, the
concerns of microscopic tumor spread beyond the
GTV are a particularly important consideration. Only
10–15% of mobile spine sarcomas are considered
candidates for radical wide local excision with

definitive intent because the need for wide marginal
excision of microscopic disease would cause excessive functional or neurologic impairment (Bilsky
et al. 2001; Rao et al. 2008). This propensity for
microscopic extension beyond the gross tumor generally leads to larger target volumes and a larger CTV
expansion than seen in metastatic tumors. For example, chordomas of the sacrum have a propensity for
local recurrence in the piriformis muscle (DeLaney
et al. 2009). Therefore CTV delineation should
include areas of adjacent muscle and soft tissue at risk
for microscopic involvement and should also include
any areas potentially contaminated by needle biopsy
or prior surgical manipulation, including during any
definitive open resection.
Another consideration during the treatment planning process for primary spinal tumors is the consideration of wound toxicity for patients undergoing
surgery as a planned component of definitive treatment. Attempts should be made to spare soft tissues
adjacent to the perioperative area, if possible, to
minimize the likelihood of radiation-associated
wound complications. Furthermore, if wound reconstruction is being considered after surgical resection,
any areas of skin or musculature to be used in a
planned tissue flap procedure should be aggressively
spared.

2.3

Treatment Planning and Delivery

The treatment planning process must be tailored to
account for the treatment platform, planning system
used, and other clinical variables. At MSKCC, inverse
treatment planning with intensity modulation is
performed using in-house software. Treatment plans
are generated using a fluence-based, gradient search

242

B. Cox et al.

optimization algorithm and typically uses 7–9 coplanar beams delivered with dynamic multileaf collimation. Plans are normalized to the 100% isodose line
to maximize percentage of PTV receiving prescription dose without exceeding normal tissue dose limits.
Treatment is prescribed to the 100% isodose line
delivered with 6 and/or 15 MV photons. The dose to
the spinal cord is limited to a maximum point dose of
14 Gy for single fraction treatments. Other organspecific institutional dose volume constraints are used
in the inverse planning optimization algorithm. At
Stanford University, treatment is delivered with a
CyberKnife unit using non-isocentric circular collimated beams and a robotic image-guided system. The
treatment plans are generated by inverse planning and
the MultiPlan commercial software. Resulting treatment plans typically contain 100–150 beams using
1–3 collimators ranging in diameter from 5 to 35 mm.
Plans are normalized to the maximum dose and the
prescription dose is described based on the optimal
coverage of the target volume.
On the day of treatment, patients are immobilized
and aligned to in-room lasers before performing pretreatment three-dimensional (3D) kV cone beam CT
(CBCT) imaging to match regional internal target
bony anatomy to the simulation scan. Rotational and
translational errors are corrected with further CBCT
imaging as needed to confirm positioning. 2D kV
orthogonal verification scans are obtained immediately prior to treatment to confirm patient alignment.
Infrared imaging is used to monitor patient movement
during treatment. For motion [2 mm, treatment is
stopped and the positioning process repeated.

3

Clinical Applications

3.1

Eligibility Criteria

3.1.1 Benign Lesions
There is a body of evidence supporting the role of
SBRT in the management of intradural tumors
including schwannomas, neurofibromas, and meningiomas (Gerszten et al. 2008; Sachdev et al. 2011).
While typically benign, these lesions can display
aggressive growth patterns with a significant burden
of pain and neurologic deficits due to mass effect
within the enclosed space of the spinal canal. While
surgical resection continues to play a major role in

treatment, SBRT is an attractive option for patients in
whom resection is not possible or in which minimized
morbidity is a clinical necessity. For example, in
patients with recurrent or multiple lesions, as is the
case with familial syndromes including the neurofibromatoses, schwannomatosis, and Von Hippel-Lindau
syndrome, SBRT can arrest or reverse mass effect,
producing significant improvements in quality of life
and function with minimal associated morbidity.
There is little clinical experience regarding the use
of SBRT for the common extradural benign spine
tumors including osteoblastoma, osteoid osteoma,
giant cell tumor of bone, aneurysmal bone cyst, and
Langerhans cell histiocytosis. It is recommended that
treatment of these benign lesions be on a case-by-case
basis, as no evidence-based recommendations can be
made. Their treatment should preferably be done on a
protocol basis.

3.1.2 Malignant Lesions
Patients with primary malignant spine sarcomatous
tumors, particularly osteogenic sarcomas, malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors, and chondrosarcomas, should be considered candidates for multimodality therapy, with surgery, radiation therapy, and
chemotherapy integrated as appropriate to maximize
the therapeutic ratio. High local recurrence rates are
seen in patients with a soft tissue sarcoma in a deep
trunk location like the paraspinal region (Ballo et al.
2004). Negative surgical margins are notoriously
difficult to achieve for primary spine sarcomas, yet en
bloc resection to achieve a wide margin is necessary
for surgical cure (Boriani et al. 1997). Only 10–15%
of patients with primary spine tumors are candidates
for definitive en bloc resection (Bilsky et al. 2001).
Wide resection is paramount, as intralesional resection of primary spinal sarcomas combined with
adjuvant post-operative conventionally fractionated
radiation therapy yields suboptimal outcomes with
poor local control and an overall survival rate of
26 months as published by Bilsky et al. in a series
with 70 spine sarcomas treated between 1985 and
1997 (Bilsky et al. 2001). Additionally, even with en
bloc resection techniques pioneered by Tomita, Boriani, and Gokaslan, recurrence rates with surgery
alone are high and adjuvant therapy is indicated.
Boriani reported a series of 22 patients with low grade
chondrosarcomas of the mobile spine with a median
follow-up of approximately 70 months. They found

Benign and Malignant Primary Spinal Tumors

that even with the selective use of low dose, conventionally fractionated radiation, 100% of patients
treated with surgical curettage recurred, and 25% of
those undergoing en bloc resection recurred (Boriani
et al. 2000).
Chordomas behave similar to the spinal sarcomas
wherein they are notoriously difficult to control locally
and therefore tend to be insidiously progressive
tumors. Complete surgical resection is again required
for cure (Boriani et al. 2006), with incomplete resection predisposing to high rates of local recurrence.
Recurrence rates are on the order of 40–50% with
surgery alone (Boriani et al. 1997; Cheng et al. 1999;
Osaka et al. 2006; Schwab et al. 2009). Chordomas are
also notoriously resistant to conventionally fractionated radiation therapy regimens. When primary radiotherapy is used to achieve doses on the order of C80
CGE with the use of particle beam therapy, local
recurrence rates still exceed 50% (Debus et al. 2000).
Similarly, for other types of primary spine tumors,
recurrence rates are high with conventionally fractionated radiation therapy, even after delivery of dose
escalated radiation doses on the order of 66 Gy delivered with image guidance and intensity modulation.
Terezakis et al. presented a case series of 27 patients
treated with post-operative radiation therapy for spinal
tumors, with 23 patients having primary spine tumors.
At a median dose of 66 Gy in 33 fractions, the local
recurrence rate was 26% with a median time to progression of 9.4 months (Terezakis et al. 2007).
Given this body of published literature, neoadjuvant
hypofractionated SBRT followed by surgical resection
is an increasingly attractive treatment paradigm. A preoperative SBRT strategy should therefore be considered.
The role of preoperative radiation therapy has been
demonstrated in randomized trials of sarcomas (DeLaney et al. 2009). Hypofractionated regimens that SBRT
permits has long been supported in the sarcoma literature, where altered fractionation treatment strategies
have long been proposed to overcome the radioresistant
nature of these tumors (Thames and Suit 1986).

3.2

Retrospective Studies

3.2.1 Intradural Tumors
Although the majority of published reports regarding paraspinal SBRT focus on extradural primary
spine tumors, there is evidence to support SBRT for

243

intradural and intramedullary tumors. Colleagues from
Stanford University reported the largest series of
extramedullary intradural tumors treated with SBRT. A
total of 103 tumors (32 meningiomas, 47 schwannomas, 24 neurofibromas) were treated using single or
multi-fraction dose regimens to a mean dose of 19.4 Gy
over an average of 2 fractions (Sachdev et al. 2011).
With mean follow-up of 33 months all but 1 tumor
remained radiographically controlled (40% of tumors
decreased in size; 59% were stable). In terms of pain
response, patients with meningiomas and schwannomas
attained the best outcomes with 100% of meningiomas
and 89% of schwannomas being improved or stable
(Sachdev et al. 2011). However, poorer outcomes
(67%) were achieved with neurofibromas.
Gerszten et al. (2008) reported another series of 73
benign intradural, extramedullary spine tumors treated
with radiosurgery. The treated tumors were predominantly neurofibromas, schwannomas, and meningiomas. SBRT was given for a variety of indications,
including progressive disease after surgical resection,
planned adjuvant treatment after surgery, and for
definitive treatment of unresectable tumors. The mean
maximum intratumoral dose was 21.64 Gy (range
15–25 Gy) and the median follow-up was 37 months.
Long-term radiographic control was obtained for all
treated cases, with 73% experiencing significant
symptomatic improvement. Radiation myelopathy as a
result of treatment developed in a single patient in the
Stanford University series and in three patients in the
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center series. While
preliminary, these studies suggest a role for single or
multi-fraction SBRT in the management of benign
spinal tumors, especially in cases where open surgical
intervention is not an option.
Ryu et al. examined the role of SBRT for intramedullary spinal cord tumors. They reported a series
of 10 intramedullary tumors (7 hemangioblastomas
and 3 ependymomas) treated with SRS between 1998
and 2003 (Ryu et al. 2003). Radiation was given for a
variety of indications, including recurrent tumor,
inoperable tumors, medical contraindications to surgery, or declined surgery. Radiation doses ranged
from 18 to 25 Gy given in 1–3 fractions, with a mean
dose of 21 Gy. With a median follow-up of
12 months, no significant treatment-related complications were noted. Six tumors remained radiographically stable without progression and 3 showed a
partial response. These results were confirmed by a

244

larger series from Stanford University, which reported
a series of 92 spinal or cranial hemangioblastomas in
32 patients (26 with von Hippel-Lindau disease)
treated with stereotactic radiosurgery between 1992
and 2007 (Moss et al. 2009). The mean radiation dose
to the tumor periphery was 23.4 Gy, and the mean
tumor volume was 1.8 cm3. With a median follow-up
of 69 months, the local control rates at 3 and 5 years
were 85 and 82% and radiosurgery improved lesionassociated symptoms in 36/41 symptomatic tumors.
Both reports concluded that SBRT was a feasible,
safe, and effective way to deliver high dose, conformal radiation to intramedullary spinal lesions while
minimizing the radiation exposure to the remaining
spine. These data support SBRT as an attractive
alternative to open surgery for patients with intramedullary tumors.

3.2.2 Malignant Extradural Tumors
Small retrospective studies report the efficacy of
hypofractionated or single fraction SBRT for malignant extradural spinal tumors. Wu et al. (2009) published an illustrative case report of an L3 chordoma
that received 24 Gy in a single fraction with definitive
intent. The patient was not an operative candidate due
to medical co-morbidities. A biopsy was performed
8 weeks after completion of single fraction SBRT
when the patient underwent kyphoplasty which
showed viable disease. Sixteen weeks after single
fraction SBRT, the patient was taken for surgical
resection for suspected interval tumor progression.
Pathological analysis of this open resection specimen
revealed 99% necrosis of the chordoma. This
impressive pathologic response to single fraction
radiation has led to this neoadjuvant treatment paradigm to be more widely applied to primary spinal
tumors, as the presence of significant necrosis and
sterilized margins may obviate the need for en bloc
resection of tumors demonstrating this degree of
pathologic response.
Several small series with early follow-up have
been published examining the role of high dose stereotactic radiosurgery for skull base chordomas
(Krishnan et al. 2005; Lunsford et al. 2007; Martin
et al. 2007) demonstrating promising initial results.
Two more recent reports using hypofractionated carbon ion therapy for large sacral chordomas demonstrated local control rates of 94–100% at a median
follow-up of 43–58 months when a 16 fraction

B. Cox et al.

regimen was used of approximately 4.4 GyE/fraction
(Imai et al. 2004; Serizawa et al. 2009). Both studies
demonstrated a significant post-treatment reduction in
tumor volumes. These promising early results suggest
that SBRT is a promising new treatment paradigm in
the treatment of chordomas.
When looking at a wider range of histologies,
Levine et al. (2009) reported a series of primary and
metastatic sarcomas of the spine treated with SBRT.
Of 30 total treated lesions, 14 were primary spine
sarcomas (4 fibromyxosarcomas, 3 chondrosarcomas,
2 leiomyosarcomas, 2 undifferentiated sarcomas, 1
dedifferentiated liposarcoma, 1 angiosarcoma, and 1
synovial sarcoma). Seven of the primary tumors were
treated with definitive SBRT and 7 were treated with
surgical resection and SBRT. Treatment was given
with the Cyberknife system. Actual treatment doses
ranged from 20 to 36 Gy delivered in 1–5 fractions,
with doses prescribed to the 70–85% isodose lines.
Plans were delivered with 150–300 pencil beams.
With a mean follow-up time of 33 months, all seven
patients with primary spine sarcomas treated with
SBRT experienced excellent pain relief and were
alive. Two patients experienced complete tumor
regression, three experienced partial regression, and
two experienced recurrences. Acute toxicities included one patient with nausea and one patient with
malaise. Late toxicities included one patient with a
sacral sarcoma developing a fistula between the tumor
cavity and the rectum, requiting diverting colostomy.
In the combined surgery and SBRT group, 3 were
treated preoperatively and four were treated postoperatively. Dose prescriptions were similar to the group
above. One patient treated preoperatively had complete tumor necrosis at the time of en bloc resection.
The other two patients had viable disease at surgery
and died of local and distant disease. All 4 postoperatively treated patients had positive margins at
surgery but remained alive and disease free with a
mean follow-up of 43.5 months. Two patients had
temporary treatment-related radiculopathy that
resolved.
Gwak at al reported the results of hypofractionated
stereotactic radiation therapy for the cervical spine
and skull base (Gwak et al. 2005). Varying grades of
chondrosarcoma and chordoma were included in their
cohort of 9 patients, 4 of which were treated postoperatively. Prescribed doses ranged from 21 to
43.6 Gy in 3–5 fractions, and the conformity indices

Benign and Malignant Primary Spinal Tumors

ranged from 1.01 to 1.83. Dosimetric analysis
demonstrated with the relative dose to volume percent
of any critical structures was lower in the postoperative surgical group as compared to the group
treated without surgery, suggesting a possible dosimetric benefit to surgical decompression. At a median
follow-up of 24 months, only one patient experienced
a recurrence. Acute toxicities were mild, with a
transient esophagitis and otitis media noted. Late
toxicities included two patients developing a radiation
induced myelopathy. The authors concluded that
SBRT is safe and effective for treating radioresistant
tumors like chordomas and chondrosarcomas.
Martin et al. (2011) reported results from a cohort
of spine tumors treated with SRS in the United
Kingdom. Of the 53 total lesions treated, 14 were
primary cancers. Prescription doses range from 8 to
30 Gy in 1–3 fractions. For the entire cohort of 53
patients at a median follow-up of 11.1 months, the
local control and overall survival rates were 91 and
65% respectively. Only three lesions experienced a
grade 3 or higher toxicity, all of which were transient
pain flare episodes that responded to a course of
corticosteroids.

3.3

novel approaches such as epidural plaque brachytherapy, HDR interstitial brachytherapy, vascular
embolization, and intra-arterial chemotherapy are all
considered promising therapies in the recurrent setting of primary spine tumors.

4

Toxicities

The toxicities of single fraction or hypofractionated
radiation for primary spine tumors are similar to those
of metastatic spine tumors treated with SBRT. These
are fully described in the chapter on SBRT for metastatic spine tumors, with a late myelopathy rate of
less than 1% (Gibbs et al. 2009), vertebral body
fracture rate up to 40% (Rose et al. 2009), and a
grade C 3 late esophageal toxicity rate of 5%.
Patients are generally pre-medicated with dexamethasone to prevent acute treatment-related edema and
pain before a course of paraspinal SBRT, particularly
with single fraction regimens. Due to concerns for
synergistic or potentiating interactions, practitioners
should consider restricting patients from receiving
cytotoxic or other systemic therapy for 7–10 days
before and after SBRT.

Clinical Trials

There are no published prospective trials of contemporary SBRT for primary spinal tumors.

3.4

245

Treatment of Recurrent Disease

Treatment of recurrent primary spine tumors mirrors
that of recurrent disease in the metastatic setting,
when local control is paramount and additional surgery, radiation therapy, and other treatment modalities should be deployed as safely permitted. Even in
the recurrent irradiation scenario, higher doses of
radiation are shown to be superior to lower doses of
radiation and prudent dose escalation should be considered. Damast et al. (2011) demonstrated that when
recurrent paraspinal tumors are treated, there was a
significant decrease in local failures after SBRT if a
6 Gy 9 5 regimen was used rather than a 4 Gy 9 5
regimen without an increased incidence of myelopathy. Due to difficulties in repeating surgery and
radiation therapy in some multiply recurrent tumors,

5

Case Examples

Case 1: Near-Complete Pathological Response of
L3 Chordoma to Single Fraction SBRT
The first case demonstrates the biological effectiveness of SBRT in primary spine tumors, as shown by
the pathological response of a chordoma specimen
after single fraction SBRT treatment (Wu et al. 2009).
The patient was a 72-year-old man who presented
with pain in the lower back. Imaging revealed an L3
vertebral mass without evidence of metastatic disease.
An open surgical biopsy yielded a diagnosis of
chordoma. The patient was not deemed a surgical
candidate due to multiple medical co-morbidities and
elected to be treated with definitive SBRT. The
patient underwent CT simulation with myelography
after being immobilized in a custom body cradle
(Lovelock et al. 2005b). The isocenter was placed
within the L3 vertebral body lesion. Target volumes
were drawn, with the GTV representing the gross
tumor and the CTV representing areas at risk for

246
Fig. 2 Near-complete
pathologic response after
preoperative single fraction
SBRT for spinal chordoma
(Wu et al. 2009). a Patient
received 24 Gy in a single
fraction to the L3 tumor;
b Pretreatment low power
H&E; c Pretreatment high
power H&E. d Posttreatment
high power H&E showing
99% necrosis. Figures reused
with the permission of
Wolters Kluwer Health,
Inc./Lippincott Williams
and Wilkins

Fig. 3 Sacral Chordoma
Treated with SBRT. The
patient received 24 Gy in a
single fraction to the sacral
chordoma. a Pretreatment
axial T1 post-contrast images
showing a 7 cm chordoma
centered in the sacrum;
b 3 month posttreatment scan
showing significant treatment
effect, including reduction in
the size of the mass as well
as central necrosis;
c Pretreatment sagittal T1
post-contrast images;
d Posttreatment sagittal
T1 post-contrast
images 3 months after
treatment again showing
significant treatment effect

B. Cox et al.

Benign and Malignant Primary Spinal Tumors

247

Fig. 4 a Pretreatment MRI, b Treatment Plan: 16 Gy in 1 fraction; Maximum cord dose 12 Gy, c Follow-up MRI at 2 years

microscopic spread. The PTV was generated by making a 3 mm expansion around the CTV, with modifications to avoid overlap of the spinal cord and cauda
equina. The PTV was 90 cm3 in volume. Adjacent
normal tissues were identified, including cauda equina,
spinal cord, small bowel, and kidneys. An intensitymodulated plan was generated to deliver a prescription
dose of 24 Gy to the planning target volume in a single
fraction (Fig. 2). Planning constraints included a
maximum point dose limit of 14 Gy to the spinal cord
and a limit of 16 Gy to the cauda equina. Treatment was
delivered with CBCT localization and intrafraction
motion tracking with an infrared camera. There were
acute toxicities associated with treatment. Sixteen
weeks after single fraction SBRT the patient was taken
to surgery due to the development of new-onset
mechanical radiculopathy in the tumor bed and suspected interval tumor progression. An L3 corpectomy
and anterior reconstruction via an anterior retroperitoneal approach was performed without complication.
Pathological analysis of this open resection specimen
revealed 99% necrosis of the chordoma. There was no
radionecrosis of the adjacent bone. The patient had an
uneventful recovery. This case demonstrates that high
dose, single fraction SBRT can have extensive biologic
effect on tumor histologies thought to be resistant to
conventionally fractionated radiation therapy.

pain while sitting and a decrease in the caliber of bowel
movements. Imaging studies included an MRI scan
that showed a 7 cm heterogeneously appearing tumor
centered in the sacrum (Fig. 3). A biopsy was preformed that showed nests and cords of epithelioid and
vacuolated cells entrapped in a myxoid matrix, consistent with conventional chordoma. The patient
declined surgical intervention for his disease and
elected to be treated with definitive radiation therapy.
Due to the size and aggressive nature of the tumor, a
single fraction, SBRT technique was selected rather
than a high dose, conventionally fractionated
approach. The patient underwent CT simulation in a
custom cradle in the supine position. Target and
critical normal structures were contoured. A treatment plan was generated that delivered 24 Gy to the
PTV. This was delivered in a single fraction without
apparent complication. Three months after treatment
the patient reported a substantial decrease in his
pain. Imaging revealed extensive treatment changes
of the chordoma, with extensive reduction in the size
of the tumor in the axial and sagittal planes as well
as a marked central necrosis. The patient had no
complications from treatment and at last follow-up
had no evidence of disease progression.

Case 2: Sacral Chordoma

This was a 39-year-old woman with residual tumor
and persistent symptoms of burning neck pain radiating down the left arm and intermittent tingling after
subtotal resection of left C3-4 schwannoma (Fig. 4a).
She was treated by Cyberknife-based SBRT to 16 Gy
in 1 fraction (Fig. 4b). MRI scan (Fig. 4c) was stable
at 2 years.

SBRT is particularly attractive for large primary sacral
tumors, where en bloc resection strategies including
sacrectomy carry significant neurologic, functional,
and mechanical morbidities in the postoperative period. As an example, a 65-year-old man presented with

Case 3: Benign Intradural Spinal Tumor

248

6

B. Cox et al.

Future Directions

SBRT, particularly single fraction radiosurgery, is a
promising new modality in the treatment of spine
tumors because it allows safe dose escalation and
overcomes the radioresistant phenotype seen in some
primary spine tumors. SBRT, alone or in combination
with open surgery, offers the potential for curative
treatment with minimization of neurologic, mechanical, and functional compromise. The long-term efficacy of spinal radiosurgery will be determined with
longer follow-up and the development of prospective
clinical trials.

References
Ballo MT, Zagars GK, Cormier JN, Hunt KK, Feig BW, Patel
SR, Pisters PW (2004) Interval between surgery and
radiotherapy: effect on local control of soft tissue sarcoma.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 58(5):1461–1467. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2003.09(079).S0360301603020224[pii]
Benzil DL, Saboori M, Mogilner AY, Rocchio R, Moorthy CR
(2004) Safety and efficacy of stereotactic radiosurgery for
tumors of the spine. J Neurosurg 101(3):413–418. doi:10.3171/
jns.2004.101.supplement3.0413
Bilsky MH, Boland PJ, Panageas KS, Woodruff JM,
Brennan MF, Healey JH (2001) Intralesional resection of
primary and metastatic sarcoma involving the spine: outcome
analysis of 59 patients. Neurosurgery 49(6):1286–1287
Bilsky MH, Laufer I, Burch S (2009) Shifting paradigms in the
treatment of metastatic spine disease. Spine Phila Pa 1976
34(22):S101–S107. doi:10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181bac4b20000
7632-200910151-00013[pii]
Boriani S, Weinstein JN, Biagini R (1997) Primary bone tumors
of the spine. Terminology and surgical staging. Spine Phila
Pa 1976 22(9):1036–1044
Boriani S, De Iure F, Bandiera S, Campanacci L, Biagini R, Di
Fiore M, Bandello L, Picci P, Bacchini P (2000) Chondrosarcoma of the mobile spine: report on 22 cases. Spine Phila
Pa 1976 25(7):804–812
Boriani S, Bandiera S, Biagini R, Bacchini P, Boriani L, Cappuccio
M, Chevalley F, Gasbarrini A, Picci P, Weinstein JN (2006)
Chordoma of the mobile spine: fifty years of experience. Spine
Phila Pa 1976 31(4):493–503. doi:10.1097/01.brs.0000200038.
30869.2700007632-200602150-00021[pii]
Brown JM, Koong AC (2008) High-dose single-fraction
radiotherapy: exploiting a new biology? Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 71(2):324–325. doi:S0360-3016(08)00297-6[pii]
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.02.003
Chang DW, Friel MT, Youssef AA (2007) Reconstructive
strategies in soft tissue reconstruction after resection of spinal

neoplasms. Spine Phila Pa 1976 32(10):1101–1106. doi:
10.1097/01.brs.0000261555.72265.3f00007632-20070501000011[pii]
Cheng EY, Ozerdemoglu RA, Transfeldt EE, Thompson RC Jr
(1999) Lumbosacral chordoma. Prognostic factors and
treatment. Spine Phila Pa 1976 24(16):1639–1645
Coste-Maniere E, Olender D, Kilby W, Schulz RA (2005)
Robotic whole body stereotactic radiosurgery: clinical
advantages of the Cyberknife integrated system. Int J Med
Robot 1(2):28–39. doi:10.1002/rcs.39
Damast S, Wright J, Bilsky M, Hsu M, Zhang Z, Lovelock M,
Cox B, Zatcky J, Yamada Y (2011) Impact of dose on local
failure rates after image-guided reirradiation of recurrent
paraspinal metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
81(3):819–826. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.06.013
Debus J, Schulz-Ertner D, Schad L, Essig M, Rhein B,
Thillmann CO, Wannenmacher M (2000) Stereotactic
fractionated radiotherapy for chordomas and chondrosarcomas of the skull base. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 47(3):
591–596. doi:S0360-3016(00)00464-8[pii]
Delaney TF, Kepka L, Goldberg SI, Hornicek FJ, Gebhardt MC,
Yoon SS, Springfield DS, Raskin KA, Harmon DC,
Kirsch DG, Mankin HJ, Rosenberg AE, Nielsen GP,
Suit HD (2007) Radiation therapy for control of soft-tissue
sarcomas resected with positive margins. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 67(5):1460–1469. doi:S0360-3016(06)03499-7
[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2006.11.035
DeLaney TF, Liebsch NJ, Pedlow FX, Adams J, Dean S, Yeap BY,
McManus P, Rosenberg AE, Nielsen GP, Harmon DC, Spiro IJ,
Raskin KA, Suit HD, Yoon SS, Hornicek FJ (2009) Phase II
study of high-dose photon/proton radiotherapy in the management of spine sarcomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 74(3):
732–739. doi:S0360-3016(08)03504-9[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2008.08.058
Flickinger JC, Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD (2003) Radiobiological analysis of tissue responses following radiosurgery.
Technol Cancer Res Treat 2(2):87–92. doi:d=3015&c=
4107&p=11646&do=detail[pii]
Garcia-Barros M, Paris F, Cordon-Cardo C, Lyden D, Rafii S,
Haimovitz-Friedman A, Fuks Z, Kolesnick R (2003) Tumor
response to radiotherapy regulated by endothelial cell apoptosis. Science 300(5622):1155–1159. doi:10.1126/science.
1082504300/5622/1155[pii]
Gerszten PC, Burton SA, Ozhasoglu C, Welch WC (2007)
Radiosurgery for spinal metastases: clinical experience in
500 cases from a single institution. Spine Phila Pa 1976 32(2):
193–199. doi:10.1097/01.brs.0000251863.76595.a200007632200701150-00009[pii]
Gerszten PC, Burton SA, Ozhasoglu C, McCue KJ, Quinn AE (2008)
Radiosurgery for benign intradural spinal tumors. Neurosurgery
62(4):887–895 discussion 895–886. doi:10.1227/01.neu.0000
318174.28461.fc 00006123-200804000-00025 [pii]
Gibbs IC, Kamnerdsupaphon P, Ryu MR, Dodd R, Kiernan M,
Chang SD, Adler JR Jr (2007) Image-guided robotic
radiosurgery for spinal metastases. Radiother Oncol
82(2):185–190. doi:S0167-8140(06)00653-0[pii]10.1016/
j.radonc.2006.11.023

Benign and Malignant Primary Spinal Tumors
Gibbs IC, Patil C, Gerszten PC, Adler JR Jr, Burton SA (2009)
Delayed radiation-induced myelopathy after spinal radiosurgery.
Neurosurgery 64(2 suppl):A67–A72. doi:10.1227/01.NEU.0000
341628.98141.B600006123-200902001-00011[pii]
Guest C, Wang EH, Davis A, Langer F, O’Sullivan B, Noria S,
Bell RS (1993) Paraspinal soft-tissue sarcoma. Classification of 14 cases. Spine Phila Pa 1976 18(10):1292–1297
Gwak HS, Yoo HJ, Youn SM, Chang U, Lee DH, Yoo SY,
Rhee CH (2005) Hypofractionated stereotactic radiation
therapy for skull base and upper cervical chordoma and
chondrosarcoma: preliminary results. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg 83(5–6):233–243. doi:91992[pii]10.1159/000091992
Imai R, Kamada T, Tsuji H, Yanagi T, Baba M, Miyamoto T, Kato S,
Kandatsu S, Mizoe JE, Tsujii H, Tatezaki S (2004) Carbon ion
radiotherapy for unresectable sacral chordomas. Clin Cancer Res
10(17):5741–5746. doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-04-030110/
17/5741[pii]
Kepka L, DeLaney TF, Suit HD, Goldberg SI (2005) Results of
radiation therapy for unresected soft-tissue sarcomas. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 63(3):852–859. doi:S0360-3016
(05)00415-3[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2005.03.004
Krishnan S, Foote RL, Brown PD, Pollock BE, Link MJ,
Garces YI (2005) Radiosurgery for cranial base chordomas
and chondrosarcomas. Neurosurgery 56(4):777–784 discussion 777–784
Levine AM, Coleman C, Horasek S (2009) Stereotactic radiosurgery
for the treatment of primary sarcomas and sarcoma metastases of
the spine. Neurosurgery 64(2):A54–A59. doi:10.1227/01.NEU.
0000339131.28485.4A00006123-200902001-00009[pii]
Lovelock DM, Hua CH, Wang P, Hunt M, Fournier-Bidoz N,
Yenice K, Toner S, Lutz W, Amols H, Bilsky M, Fuks Z,
Yamada Y (2005a) Accurate setup of paraspinal patients
using a noninvasive patient immobilization cradle and
portal imaging. Med Phys 32(8):2606–2614. doi:10.1118/
1.1951042
Lovelock DM, Hua C, Wang P, Hunt M, Fournier-Bidoz N,
Yenice K, Toner S, Lutz W, Amols H, Bilsky M, Fuks Z,
Yamada Y (2005b) Accurate setup of paraspinal patients
using a noninvasive patient immobilization cradle and
portal imaging. Med Phys 32(8):2606–2614
Lunsford LD, Niranjan A, Martin JJ, Sirin S, Kassam A,
Kondziolka D, Flickinger JC (2007) Radiosurgery for
miscellaneous skull base tumors. Prog Neurol Surg
20:192–205. doi:100114[pii]10.1159/0000100114
Martin AG, Cowley IR, Taylor BA, Cassoni AM, Landau DB,
Plowman PN (2011) (Stereotactic) radiosurgery XIX: spinal
radiosurgery—two year experience in a UK centre. Br J
Neurosurg. doi:10.3109/02688697.2011.603857
Martin JJ, Niranjan A, Kondziolka D, Flickinger JC, Lozanne
KA, Lunsford LD (2007) Radiosurgery for chordomas and
chondrosarcomas of the skull base. J Neurosurg 107(4):
758–764. doi:10.3171/JNS-07/10/0758
Moss JM, Choi CY, Adler JR, Jr., Soltys SG, Gibbs IC, Chang SD
(2009) Stereotactic radiosurgical treatment of cranial and
spinal hemangioblastomas. Neurosurgery 65(1):79–85 discussion 85. doi:10.1227/01.NEU.0000348015.51685.D2 0000
6123-200907000-00019 [pii]
Osaka S, Kodoh O, Sugita H, Osaka E, Yoshida Y, Ryu J
(2006) Clinical significance of a wide excision policy for

249
sacrococcygeal chordoma. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 132(4):
213–218. doi:10.1007/s00432-005-0067-3
Rao G, Suki D, Chakrabarti I, Feiz-Erfan I, Mody MG,
McCutcheon IE, Gokaslan Z, Patel S, Rhines LD (2008)
Surgical management of primary and metastatic sarcoma of
the mobile spine. J Neurosurg Spine 9(2):120–128. doi:
10.3171/SPI/2008/9/8/120
Rose PS, Laufer I, Boland PJ, Hanover A, Bilsky MH, Yamada
J, Lis E (2009) Risk of fracture after single fraction imageguided intensity-modulated radiation therapy to spinal
metastases. J Clin Oncol 27(30):5075–5079. doi:JCO.2008.
19.3508[pii]10.1200/JCO.2008.19.3508
Ryu SI, Chang SD, Kim DH, Murphy MJ, Le QT, Martin DP,
Adler JR Jr (2001) Image-guided hypo-fractionated stereotactic radiosurgery to spinal lesions. Neurosurgery 49(4):
838–846
Ryu SI, Kim DH, Chang SD (2003) Stereotactic radiosurgery
for hemangiomas and ependymomas of the spinal cord.
Neurosurg Focus 15(5):E10. doi:150510[pii]
Sachdev S, Dodd RL, Chang SD, Soltys SG, Adler JR, Luxton G,
Choi CY, Tupper L, Gibbs IC (2011) Stereotactic radiosurgery yields long-term control for benign intradural, extramedullary spinal tumors. Neurosurgery 69(3): 533–539
discussion 539. doi:10.1227/NEU.0b013e318218db2300006
123-201109000-00002[pii]
Schwab JH, Healey JH, Rose P, Casas-Ganem J, Boland PJ
(2009) The surgical management of sacral chordomas.
Spine Phila Pa 1976 34(24):2700–2704. doi:10.1097/BRS.
0b013e3181bad11d00007632-200911150-00016[pii]
Serizawa I, Imai R, Kamada T, Tsuji H, Kishimoto R, Kandatsu S,
Tsujii H, Tatezaki S (2009) Changes in tumor volume of sacral
chordoma after carbon ion radiotherapy. J Comput Assist
Tomogr 33(5):795–798. doi:10.1097/RCT.0b013e31818f0d4
900004728-200909000-00028[pii]
Terezakis SA, Lovelock DM, Bilsky MH, Hunt MA, Zatcky J,
Yamada Y (2007) Image-guided intensity-modulated photon
radiotherapy using multifractionated regimen to paraspinal
chordomas and rare sarcomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
69(5):1502–1508. doi:S0360-3016(07)00846-2[pii]10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2007.05.019
Thames HD, Suit HD (1986) Tumor radioresponsiveness versus
fractionation sensitivity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
12(4):687–691. doi:0360-3016(86)90081-7[pii]
Wang VY, Potts M, Chou D (2008) Sarcoma and the spinal
column. Neurosurg Clin N Am 19(1):71–80. doi:S10423680(07)00095-2[pii]10.1016/j.nec.2007.10.001
Wu AJ, Bilsky MH, Edgar MA, Yamada Y (2009) Near-complete
pathological response of chordoma to high-dose single-fraction
radiotherapy: case report. Neurosurgery 64(2): E389 390
discussion E390. doi:10.1227/01.NEU.0000338073.49649.
1A00006123-200902000-00023[pii]
Yamada Y, Lovelock DM, Yenice KM, Bilsky MH,
Hunt MA, Zatcky J, Leibel SA (2005) Multifractionated
image-guided and stereotactic intensity-modulated radiotherapy of paraspinal tumors: a preliminary report. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 62(1):53–61. doi:S0360-3016
(04)02565-9[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2004.09.006
Yamada Y, Bilsky MH, Lovelock DM, Venkatraman ES,
Toner S, Johnson J, Zatcky J, Zelefsky MJ, Fuks Z (2008)

250
High-dose, single-fraction image-guided intensity-modulated radiotherapy for metastatic spinal lesions. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 71(2):484–490. doi:S0360-3016(07)046585[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.11.046
Yang JC, Chang AE, Baker AR, Sindelar WF, Danforth DN,
Topalian SL, DeLaney T, Glatstein E, Steinberg SM,
Merino MJ, Rosenberg SA (1998) Randomized prospective

B. Cox et al.
study of the benefit of adjuvant radiation therapy in the
treatment of soft tissue sarcomas of the extremity. J Clin
Oncol 16(1):197–203
Zagars GK, Ballo MT (2003) Significance of dose in
postoperative radiotherapy for soft tissue sarcoma. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 56(2):473–481. doi:10.1016/
s0360-3016(02)04573-x

Non-Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer
Farzan Siddiqui, David Raben, Sue S. Yom, Jiade J. Lu,
and Min Yao

Contents

5

Toxicities ................................................................... 259

6

Case Examples ......................................................... 259

1

Introduction.............................................................. 251

7

Future Directions..................................................... 260

2

Radiobiology Considerations.................................. 253

References.......................................................................... 263

3
3.1
3.2
3.3

Technical Aspects ....................................................
Immobilization and Organ Motion ...........................
Target Delineation and Treatment Planning ............
On-Board Imaging and Treatment Delivery ............

4

Clinical Applications ............................................... 257

254
254
255
256

Abstract

The standard treatment for non-skull base head and
neck cancer is surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or various combinations of the above.
Treatment options are often limited in patients with
recurrence after radiation therapy. Although reirradiation can be offered there is an increased risk of
serious complications. Stereotactic body radiation
therapy (SBRT) has been used as a boost or salvage
therapy for head and neck cancer in the skull base,
such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma, with promising
results. The use of stereotactic body radiation therapy
for head and neck cancer in sites outside of the base of
skull region is emerging. This chapter review will
highlight the technical and clinical advances in SBRT
for non-skull base head and neck cancer.

Authors’ Contributions FS, DB, SY, JL and MY made
substantial contributions to the conception, design, drafting, and
writing of this book chapter. This book chapter has been seen,
read, and agreed upon in its content by all the designated authors.
F. Siddiqui (&)
Department of Radiation Oncology,
Henry Ford Health System,
2799 W Grand Blvd, Detroit, MI 48202, USA
e-mail: fsiddiq2@hfhs.org
D. Raben
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Colorado Denver, Aurora,
CO 80045, USA
S. S. Yom
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of California, San Francisco,
CA 94143, USA
J. J. Lu
Department of Radiation Oncology,
National University Cancer Institute of Singapore,
National University of Singapore,
Singapore
M. Yao
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center,
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland,
OH 44106, USA

1

Introduction

Head and neck cancer accounts for approximately
52,000 cases and 11,500 deaths in the United States
(Siegel et al. 2011). An overwhelming majority of these
are squamous cell cancers. Management of these cancers
involves a multidisciplinary team including the head and
neck surgical oncologist, medical oncologist, radiation
oncologist, radiologist, pathologist, nutrition counselor,
speech and swallowing pathologist etc. The gradual

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2011_448, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

251

252

emergence of this multidisciplinary approach stems
from the recognition that any one modality of treatment
is unlikely to afford reasonable chance of success.
Combined modality therapy with organ and function
preserving approach is now the standard of care for head
and neck cancers (Pignon et al. 2009).
The predominant pattern of recurrence in head and
neck cancer is locoregional. Studies in locally advanced
head and neck cancers treated using radiation therapy
with concurrent chemotherapy in laryngeal, oropharyngeal, nasopharyngeal, and oral cavity cancers
reported local failure rates of 45–55% (Adelstein et al.
2003; Bonner et al. 2006; Calais et al. 1999; Fu et al.
2000). Surgical resection followed by radiation and
concurrent chemotherapy provides better results.
However, the local recurrence rates are still approximately 20% (Bernier et al. 2004; Cooper et al. 2004).
Local and regional recurrences are extremely difficult to
control as the patient has usually exhausted all curative
options especially with regard to radiation therapy. This
results in a correspondingly low overall survival for
those patients. It is postulated that improved local
control could translate into improved survival with one
meta-analysis showing that a 10% improvement in the
2-year locoregional control could lead to a 6.7%
improvement in the 5-year overall survival (Wadsley
and Bentzen 2004). Additionally, patients may develop
second primary cancers in the previously radiated field.
Treatment options for locally or locoregionally
recurrent head and neck cancers and second primary
cancers in the treatment field are limited. These patients
have usually received high doses of radiation with or
without chemotherapy in the past and safe delivery of a
tumoricidal re-irradiation dose is generally not possible
without increased risk of prohibitive toxicities. Surgical resection of the recurrent lesion is usually recommended but it is feasible in only about 20% of cases
(Janot et al. 2008; Taussky et al. 2005; Temam et al.
2005). Depending on the pathologic features, this may
be followed by radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy to a dose limited by the tolerance of critical
structures or organs such as the spinal cord, brachial
plexus, mandible, and internal carotid arteries. The
problems with re-irradiation in the head and neck
include severe acute toxicities which may sometimes
be life-threatening. Re-irradiation can be done using
brachytherapy, 3D conformal radiation therapy (CRT)
or intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT)
(Duprez et al. 2009; Kasperts et al. 2005; Kolotas

F. Siddiqui et al.

et al. 2007; Sher et al. 2010). Chemotherapy can also be
administered concurrently with radiation therapy
and this approach has demonstrated some marginal
success at the expense of treatment-related morbidity
(De Crevoisier et al. 1998; 2001; Langendijk and
Bourhis 2007), such as neutropenia, mucositis, and
sepsis. Brachytherapy requires the use of general
anesthesia and involves an invasive procedure in
already compromised tissues. 3D-CRT and IMRT are
noninvasive and can deliver radiation conformally
around the target volume. However, they can be associated with greater mucosal toxicity as a larger volume
of normal tissue is included in the radiation field to
account for daily setup uncertainties (Lu et al. 2004).
The volume and dose of radiation that can be delivered
in patients with recurrent head and neck cancer after
prior radiation therapy is limited (Popovtzer et al.
2009). The suboptimal radiation dose leads to poor
tumor control. In a report on the use of salvage
re-irradiation for recurrent head and neck cancers, Lee
et al. reported on 65 patients whose response was
assessed after a median re-irradiation dose of 59.4 Gy
(Lee et al. 2007). They observed a complete plus partial
response rate of 26% (17/65). In a Radiation Therapy
Oncology Group (RTOG) phase II trial (RTOG 96-10)
for recurrent head and neck cancer, they reported on the
use of hydroxyurea and 5-FU with a median re-irradiation dose of 60 Gy (Spencer et al. 2001). The median
overall survival was 8.2 months and the 1-year survival
rate was 42%. However, there was treatment-related
mortality in 6 out of 81 patients. Grade 3–4 radiation
mucositis was seen in 17%, and grade 3–5 neutropenia
in 26% of the patients. As a result of the toxicities,
approximately 20% of the patients did not receive the
planned chemotherapy dose. RTOG 99-11 used concurrent split course hyperfractionated radiotherapy
with cisplatin and paclitaxel and reported a median
overall survival of 12 months and a 2-year overall
survival of 25.9%. However, this was at the expense of
28% grade 4 or higher toxicity and the death of 8
patients (Langer et al. 2007). These experiences
underscore the importance of striking a balance
between delivery of adequate tumoricidal dose of
radiation to the recurrent disease and avoidance of
prohibitive toxicities from very high combined radiation doses to surrounding normal tissue.
Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is an
attractive treatment option for patients with recurrent
head and neck cancer. It allows precise delivery of

Non-Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer

tumoricidal doses of radiation with acceptable toxicity.
This technique has its roots in stereotactic neurosurgery
where intracranial lesions were defined in terms of
x, y, and z coordinates in space. Initially, the Cartesian
system was used followed by the polar coordinate
system. This gave rise to the use of stereotactic radiosurgery for intracranial lesions using cobalt-60 sources
(Gamma Knife). This work was pioneered by Lars
Leksell, a neurosurgeon, in Sweden (Leksell 1951;
Leksell et al. 1987). The relative immobility of intracranial structures and the ability to delineate tumors
encouraged the use of high-dose per fraction radiation
therapy in a confident manner. In recent years, the
stereotactic approach has moved out of cranium and is
being actively investigated and utilized in cases of
primary cancers in the lung, liver, pancreas, kidney, and
prostate and oligometastases in lung, liver, adrenal
gland, and spinal column (Lo et al. 2010a–2010d).
In the head and neck region, this technique was initially
used in the spatially more rigid base-of-skull or nasopharyngeal region. Most recently, more groups and
institutions are exploring the use of SBRT in head and
neck sites outside of the base of skull.
Another very important parallel development that
has led to further acceptance and utilization of SBRT
is image-guided radiation therapy (IGRT). The term
IGRT is hard to define as it is not confined to any one
particular technique, modality, or method. At its basic
core is the fact that some form of radiologic imaging
is being used at some or all steps of the radiation
treatment delivery. This includes, but is not limited
to diagnosing and staging of the cancer, computed
tomography (CT)-based simulation for RT planning,
target delineation using CT/MRI/PET-CT information, and visualization of the tumor and surrounding
normal structures during radiation therapy itself.
Even during radiation therapy, IGRT could be used
to verify the position of the target volume before
daily treatment (interfraction), during the delivery of
treatment (intrafraction) or over the course of therapy
to modify volumes if necessary (adaptive radiation
therapy). Improved diagnostic imaging modalities
including PET/CT scan and MRI allow the radiation
oncologists to define the tumors with greater precision, while CT-scan based simulation and image
verification prior to and sometimes during each
radiation fraction allows highly conformal dose
delivery to the intended target with minimal inclusion
of normal or uninvolved tissues. This, in turn, allows

253

for the use of higher tumoricidal doses of radiation
per fraction with acceptable early and late normal
tissue toxicity.
This chapter will highlight the technical and clinical advances in the development and implementation
of IGRT and SBRT in head and neck cancers outside
of the base of skull region.

2

Radiobiology Considerations

Image guidance provides the ability to deliver high
doses of radiation per fraction in SBRT. The maximum dose per fraction and the total dose delivered are
still largely empirical and vary across series and
reports in the literature. Data generated for tumor
control, normal tissue toxicity, and outcomes have
largely been based on daily doses of 1.8–2 Gy. Most
of the mathematical models used to explain dose–
response or cell-survival curves, like the single-hit
multi-target, multi-hit multi-target, repair-misrepair
model, lethal-potentially lethal model, and the linearquadratic (LQ) model are based on a multi-fractionated course of treatment. The radiobiology of large
doses per fraction is still not well understood.
The most commonly used is the LQ model.
A simplistic view and adoption of this formula has
been used by most investigators to decide SBRT head
and neck dose fractionations. However, the LQ model
does not take into account the vascular and stromal
damage that is believed to be caused by high doses
per fraction as used in SBRT and also ignores
the impact of radioresistant populations of cells
(Kirkpatrick et al. 2008). There is evidence that vascular endothelial cell damage may be triggered at
doses greater than 10 Gy given in a single fraction
(Fuks and Kolesnick 2005; Garcia-Barros et al. 2003).
Single dose radiation of [8–10 Gy is thought to cause
endothelial membrane alterations leading to translocation of endothelial cell ASMase into glycosphingolipid and cholesterol- enriched plasma membrane
rafts, leading to hydrolysis of sphingomyelin resulting
in ceramide formation. Ceramide is a proapoptotic
second messenger which initiates apoptotic signaling.
Others, however, are of the opinion that the LQ
model has been validated experimentally and theoretically for doses up to 10 Gy per fraction and it
would be reasonable to use this formalism for doses
up to 18 Gy per fraction (Brenner 2008). Due to lack

254

F. Siddiqui et al.

of availability of any other theoretical or mathematical model for high doses per fraction, the LQ model
continues to be used for comparison of fractionation
schemes. Clinical data are being generated at a rapid
pace for SBRT in head and neck cancers and the
development of such a model may become possible in
the near future. There are data for tumor response and
local control; and data are also becoming available for
early and late normal tissue toxicities. Most reports
thus far are limited by the small numbers of patients
treated and the low numbers of toxicity events do not
permit a robust estimation of tolerance of limits of
various organs and structures such as bone, soft tissues, blood vessels, and nerves.
A model has been proposed by Park et al. (2008)
combining the LQ and multi-target models in a single
‘‘Universal Survival Curve’’ (USC). The rationale for
doing so was the fact that the LQ model for cell
survival, which is continuously bending, does a better
job of predicting cell survival at low doses and
overpredicts the biologically effective dose at high
doses per fraction. On the other hand, cell survival at
high doses is better modeled by the multi-target
equation. The universal cell survival curve follows the
LQ line at low doses and multi-target line at high
doses with transition occurring at a transition dose
(DT). Based on reports of 12 non-small cell lung
cancer cell lines from the National Cancer Institute,
the authors calculated DT to be 6.2 Gy. The experimental validity of the Universal Survival Curve was
tested in the H460 non-small cell lung cancer cell line
by comparing the theoretical fits of the LQ and USC
models with clonogenic cell survival. The USC model
fits the experimental data better. The concept of single
fraction effective dose (SFED) for clinical data in
lung SBRT trials was also presented in that article.
Wang et al. proposed a generalized LQ model for the
ablative dose range and the model provides consistent
interpretation across the full dose range (Wang et al.
2010).

3

Technical Aspects

3.1

Immobilization and Organ Motion

Proper immobilization of the patient is an extremely
important step in the delivery of stereotactic treatment. Rigid invasive frame-based stereotactic RT

is still preferred in intracranial and base of skull
SRS/SBRT. However, when treating other areas in the
head and neck with fractionated SBRT, placement of
a frame for every fraction may not be feasible. Hence,
frameless SBRT techniques have been developed.
The system relies on the use of custom headrest
and thermoplastic immobilization masks. Different
institutions have adopted different techniques for
construction of these thermoplastic masks. One of the
authors (F.S.) of this chapter uses a head and neck
shoulder immobilization mask with indentation made
into the external auditory canals bilaterally and the
mask is also tucked into the oral cavity and anchored
to the maxillary alveolus. This allows relative rigidity
and fixation of the cranium and base of skull. Image
guidance allows soft tissue-based setup as opposed to
the bony anatomy-based setup with frame-based
systems. The overall accuracy of frameless mask
systems is on the order of 2–4 mm (Ali et al. 2010;
Hong et al. 2009; Jin et al. 2006).
In addition to external setup errors, motion due to
swallowing and breathing can also contribute to errors
in dosimetry and dose distribution. Assessment of
intrafractional motion revealed that while the maximal displacement during swallowing could be more
than 20 mm, in the non-swallowing state, the maximum displacements ranged from 0.3 to 11.5 mm
(van Asselen et al. 2003). Most of this motion is
thought to be related to breathing. The total time
duration of swallowing in this study was approximately 0.45% of the total RT time. Hence, the authors
concluded that adjustments in PTV margins do not
need to be made to account for swallowing motion.
Prevost et al. assessed the motion of oropharyngeal
tumors using fluoroscopic techniques with fiducial
implantation (Prevost et al. 2008). During the act of
swallowing, peak motions in the anteroposterior and
craniocaudal directions were up to approximately
10 mm on average. However, in the non-swallowing
phase, the maximum motion was noted to be less than
1.5 mm. This was attributed to breathing. As the
duration of swallowing time is only about 1 s,
adjustments in margins to account for swallowing are
not thought to be necessary.
A more recent analysis was done using dynamic
MRI in patients with oropharyngeal, laryngeal, and
hypopharyngeal cancers (Bradley et al. 2011).
Assessment of motions of the gross tumor volume
(GTV), soft palate, vocal cord, and epiglottis were

Non-Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer

carried out. The greatest degree of displacement was
noted to be in the superior direction with the GTV,
soft palate, vocal cords and epiglottis morning, on
average, 11.6, 12.9, 16.1 and 12.2 mm, respectively.
In the non-deglutition state, the maximum mean displacements in the superior direction were 3.1, 2.3, 3.2
and 3.2 mm, respectively for the four sites studied.
Mean swallowing duration for the 22 patients ranged
from 0 to 6.1 s. As in the previously quoted studies,
the authors concluded that motion due to deglutition
did not need to be accounted for in radiation planning
as this would result in only 0.5% reduction in the total
planned doses.
Based on the above analysis we recommend PTV
margins of 5 mm to ensure adequate coverage of the
lesion while taking into account any potential motion
due to deglutition and breathing. Smaller margins can
be considered in areas and structures that potentially
are less mobile based on the clinicians judgment.
Smaller and more customized margins also allow
better tissue sparing during SBRT.

3.2

Target Delineation and Treatment
Planning

Target delineation in patients receiving high doses per
fraction with SBRT is crucial. The importance of
proper diagnostic imaging-based delineation cannot
be overemphasized. All possible diagnostic tools
should be utilized to identify both the recurrent or
second primary lesion and also the normal organs and
structures at risk. Prior radiation therapy and/or surgery can distort normal tissue anatomy and hence can
introduce artifacts. Both MRI and PET/CT scans
should be performed and fused with the treatment
planning CT. Tumor and normal tissue contouring
should be performed in collaboration with a neuroradiologist and, in some circumstances, the head and
neck oncologic surgeon who takes care of the patient.
Nakamoto et al. 2009 studied the clinical value of
MRI and PET/CT fusion in patients with head and
neck cancers. MRI offers superior soft tissue delineation, however, it is confounded by post-treatment
changes. PET scans have poorer resolution but draw
attention to metabolically active sites. Hence, the two
modalities can complement each other. The sensitivity of either alone is 70 and 50% for recurrent and
second primary cancers, respectively. This increases

255

to 90 and 100% for the two cases after image fusion
with PET scans. In this study image fusion allowed
detection of more true positive lesions (95 vs. 55%).
PET-CT scans for planning purposes should ideally be acquired in the treatment position on a flat top
couch with the patient in the custom headrest and
thermoplastic mask. This eliminates the need for
image registration of the PET-CT scan with the
planning CT and thus reduces chances of errors in
tumor volume delineation. Also, a dedicated head and
neck CT can be performed instead of the whole body
PET-CT.
Diagnostic MRI images should also be obtained
and fused to the planning CT. Radiation therapy
planning requires Hounsfield unit information from
the CT scan which provides electron density information for dose calculations. MRI images are prone
to distortion which can induce errors in target volume
delineation. Quality assurance of MR-CT registration
should be performed to ensure fidelity. Moore et al.
demonstrated that the distortion effects on MR images
can be minimized by choosing suitable (C ± 30 kHz)
receiver bandwidth (Moore et al. 2004).
The use of PET scans for tumor volume definition
also introduces sources of error and is subject to
significant variability (Berson et al. 2009; Riegel
et al. 2006). There is no standard or well-accepted
method for tumor volume definition, however many
methods have been described (Dandekar et al. 2010).
These include (a) visual assessment of PET scans
whereby the radiation oncologist uses his or her
clinical judgment and other imaging studies to define
the target, (b) SUV (standardized uptake value) based
method where the target is defined above an arbitrary
selected SUV cutoff, (c) threshold method based on
fixed percentages (e.g. 40 or 50%) of the maximum
signal intensity in the tumor, (d) background cutoff
method and (e) automated isointensity contouring
(Schinagl et al. 2007; Simon et al. 2009).
Schinagl et al. 2007 compared all five methods and
noted that PET scans may significantly increase CTbased and physical examination-based tumor volume
definition. Using an isocontour for SUV [ 2.5 resulted in a very large volume in 45% of cases and was
not recommended. PET-based GTV generated by
visual delineation resulted in a volume closest to CTor MRI-based anatomic delineation while all other
methods result in smaller volumes. While no single
method can be recommended as ideal, institutions and

256

F. Siddiqui et al.

practitioners needs to identify methods that would
work best for them.
CT-, MRI-, and PET-based target delineation was
compared to resected surgical specimens in laryngeal
and pharyngeal cancers (Daisne et al. 2004). No significant difference was noted between the average
GTV delineated by CT and MRI. However, PETbased GTVs were significantly smaller with differences ranging from 28 to 37%. The volume of the
surgical specimen was the smallest. One concerning
finding of this study was that while the volumes were
quantitatively similar, they did not overlap well with
mismatch noted in one-third to half of all cases
between the different modalities. This underscores the
importance of proper utilization of all available
imaging information and volume definition by experienced neuroradiologists and radiation oncologists
when delivering high doses of radiation to very precise targets.
IMRT-based treatment planning is typically used
for SBRT for non-skull base head and neck cancer.
Prescription isodoses in linear accelerator-based
stereotactic treatment range between 80 and 90%.
This allows a sharp falloff of dose beyond the
prescription isodose. Institutions must validate and
confirm their individual practices and determine the
prescription isodose that gives the tightest possible
dose distribution in their hands. Alternatively, if a
CyberKnife unit is used, the treatment planning
software also allows for inverse planning after constraints are set for various organs-at-risk (OARs).

3.3

On-Board Imaging and Treatment
Delivery

The development of IGRT has allowed for the
delivery of high doses of radiation per fraction with
increased confidence and safety. There has been a
gradual move from more conventional methods like
port films of treatment fields to more sophisticated
and complex methods.
Before the advent of IGRT, portal films were used
in image-guided verification of setup accuracy in
most patients. Patients are placed in the treatment
position, the isocenter and treatment fields are set, and
a film placed beyond the patient is exposed to megavoltage radiation. The developed film is then compared to the treatment planning films or digitally

reconstructed radiographs (DRRs). Special techniques, skill, and expertise of the radiation therapist
are required to obtain satisfactory images using MV
film-based portal imaging. Proper film and screen
combinations are needed to image different parts of
the body (Droege and Bjarngard 1979a; 1979b). This
method of image guidance using port films has the
advantage of a permanent physical record of the
radiation treatment fields. However, it suffers from
poor image quality at megavoltage (MV) energy
range and is not amenable to small degrees of
movement, which are in the order of millimeters,
required for stereotactic setup and treatments. Electronic portal imaging overcomes some of the disadvantages of film-based portal imaging. These images
can be obtained prior to daily treatment for a patient,
seen in real-time, digitally enhanced, and archived.
However, as with film-based portal imaging, soft
tissue visualization is poor and patient positioning is
based on bony landmarks.
With the sophistication of technology, it is possible
to verify the treatment setup using stereoscopic X-ray
or volumetric images generated prior to treatment.
The CT-on-rails setup involves a CT-scanner placed
in the same room as the linear accelerator. The CTsystem is placed on rails and can be moved to allow
CT imaging of patient anatomy in the treatment
position, image verification and treatment delivery
without the need to move the patient off the treatment
couch. In-room orthogonal systems utilize two floor
or ceiling mounted X-ray sources with opposing
amorphous silicon flat-panel detectors. After the
patient is placed in the treatment position, orthogonal
films are obtained and digitally reconstructed for
verification of isocenter placement based on bony
anatomy. An example of such a system is the BrainLAB ExacTracÒ system. This uses floor mounted Xray sources with detectors in the ceiling. Additionally,
an infrared camera system is also combined with this
to allow optical tracking of the patient’s surface
anatomy.
Cone-beam CT scans are now being increasingly
employed for setup verification. It is being provided as
an option by most linear accelerator manufacturers
nowadays and can be either kilovoltage CBCT
(Varian Trilogy, Novalis TX, and Elekta Synergy) or
megavoltage CBCT (Siemens Oncor). To obtain conebeam images, the X-ray source is turned on as the
gantry rotates 180 degrees or more around the patient

Non-Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer

in the treatment position. Multiple planar projection
images are acquired and 3-dimensional images
reconstructed using a filtered back-projection algorithm (Feldkamp et al. 1984; Jaffray et al. 2002).
Unlike a conventional helical CT-scanner, where the
images are obtained by longitudinal translation of the
patient through a narrow X-beam being generated by a
rotating X-ray source, CBCT uses a broad beam of
X-ray with a 2D detector array to provide a larger field
of view. Megavoltage CBCTs use the linear accelerator as the source of X-rays. The gantry can rotate
200° in 45 s with one image per degree being captured
on the electronic portal imaging device (EPID) (Morin
et al. 2006). The 3D images are again reconstructed
using the filtered back-projection algorithm.
Helical megavoltage computed tomography
(MVCT) or ‘‘slice therapy’’ was first proposed by
Mackie et al in 1993 (Mackie et al. 1993). The
concept was further developed for commercial use
and is now available as the Hi-ArtÒ treatment system
(TomoTherapy Inc., Madison, WI). In this design, the
MV linear accelerator is mounted on a CT-like
gantry. As with the acquisition of helical CT scan, the
patient is translated through the rotating gantry to
produce images in the treatment position. These
images can be matched and compared with the
treatment planning CT. If shifts are required, couch
adjustments are made prior to treatment. After a
proper match, the patient is treated on the same couch
and gantry without any need for moving the patient.
A fair amount of head and neck SBRT experience
across various centers has been gained using the
CyberKnife system. The Accuray CyberKnifeÒ
Robotic Radiosurgery (Accuray Inc., Sunnyvale, CA)
system (Adler et al. 1997) consists of a compact
X-band linear accelerator mounted on an industrial
robotic manipulator arm. The manipulator arm is
configured to direct the radiation beams to the region
of beam intersection of two orthogonal X-ray imaging
systems integrated to provide image guidance for the
treatment process. The patient under treatment is
positioned on an automated robotic couch (RoboCouchTM) such that the lesion to be treated is located
within this radiation beam accessible region. The
movements of the robotic manipulator arm and the
robotic patient support assembly are under the direct
control of a computer system that is in turn controlled
by the radiation therapist or medical physicist. In
routine clinical use, the X-ray system is used for

257

patient alignment before the treatment and to
compensate for patient motion during treatment. The
X-ray image pairs taken during patient setup and
treatment are saved in the patients’ digital record.

4

Clinical Applications

The experience with using stereotactic techniques is
gradually expanding worldwide with many reports
coming from the United States and Japan (Table 1).
Most experience has been with the use of the CyberKnife system. However, the Novalis BrainLab and
Varian Trilogy systems have also been used. The
overwhelming majority of cases treated have been
patients with recurrent head and neck cancers in previously irradiated areas. The ability to deliver high
doses of radiation while minimizing dose to normal
tissues and structures has resulted in complete plus
partial response rates of approximately 65–75% across
various series and local control rates of 30–40% at
2 years post-treatment. The side effect profile of this
treatment has been encouraging with overall decrease
in grade 4 and 5 toxicities. However, much improvement is still needed to better select the potential candidates to minimize chances of fatal complications like
carotid blowout resulting in fatal hemorrhages.
There is little data on combining SBRT with chemotherapy. Some series have deliberately avoided
administration of concurrent chemotherapy to minimize chances of complications (Siddiqui et al. 2009).
Reports are now emerging on using SBRT with targeted agents. Heron et al. recently reported on their
retrospective experience in 70 patients, half of which
were treated using concurrent cetuximab (Heron et al.
2010). A 10-month improvement in median overall
survival was noted in patients receiving cetuximab.
The authors reported no grade 4 or 5 toxicities and
noted no significant differences in the incidence of
grade 1–3 toxicities between the groups. This is
indeed an exciting development and warrants further
study in a randomized controlled trial.
Experience with the use of SBRT as a primary
treatment for head and neck cancers is very limited.
The standard treatment for head and neck cancers
remains surgery followed by radiation therapy with or
without chemotherapy or an organ preserving
approach using concurrent radiation therapy and
chemotherapy. However, in special and unusual

34

70
[35-SBRT alone
35SBRT ? Cetuximab
(cet)]

22

96

46

65

44

36

22

Kodani et al.
(2011)

Heron et al.
(2011)

Kawaguchi
et al. (2010)

Rwigema
et al. (2010)

Cengiz et al.
(2010)

Unger et al.
(2010)

Siddiqui et al.
(2009)

Roh et al.
(2009 )

Voynov et al.
(2006)

LNs, Nox, Opx, PNS

Npx, PNS, LNs, Skull
base, nasal cav., orbit

Opx, eyelid, lip, orbit,
Hpx, mandible, LNs

Opx, Npx, Hpx, PNS,
LNs

Npx, Oral cav, Hpx,
Larynx

Tongue, mandible, PNS,
Opx, LNs

Larynx, Npx, Oral cav,
Opx

Orbit, LNs, Npx, Opx,
others

Sites

10–36 Gy
in 1–8 fr

18–40 Gy
in 3–5fr

13–18 Gy
in 1 fr;
36–48 Gy
in 5–8 fr

21–35 Gy
in 2–5 fr

18–35 Gy
in 1–5 fr

15–50 Gy
Dose
escalation

20–42 Gy/
2–5fr

20–44 Gy/
5 fr

19.542 Gy
in 3–8 fr

Dose

CyberKnife

CyberKnife

BrainLab

CyberKnife

CyberKnife

CyberKnife,
Varian Trilogy

CyberKnife

19

17.3

36

16

7

14

24

21.3

16

CyberKnife

CyberKnife,
Varian Trilogy

Med
FU
(m)

Technique

CR-42.9%
PR-37.1%
Stable-8.6%
PD-11.4%

CR-31%
PR-46%
Stable-16%
PD-3%

CR-54%
PR-27%
Stable-20%

CR-27%
PR-29.8%
Stable-10%

CR- 20% to 50%
depending on dose

CR-64.3%
PR-7.1%
Stable-7.1%
PD-21.4%

SBRT only
CR-34.3%
PR-28.6%
Stable-17.1%
PD-20%
SBRT+
cet
CR-45.7%
PR-31.4%
Stable-14.3%
PD-8.6%

CR–32.4%
PR-38.6%

Response

2 yr-26%

1 yr LRC-61%
2 yr LRC- 52.2%

1 yr- 83.3%- primary,
60.6%-recurrent,
75%-metastatic
groups,

2 yr- 30%

Med OS-12 m

1 and 2 yr OS52.1%
and 30.9%

1 year OSprimary- 70%;
1 yr OSrecurrent38.1%

No Gr 4/5

N = 3, bone and
soft tissue necrosis

N = 7, necrosis and
fistulae

N = 7 (11%); 1/7fatal

N = 8-carotid
blowout; 7/8-fatal
Med OS11.9 m
1 yr OS- 46%
Med OS- 12 m

No grade 4/5
toxicity

1 and 2 yr OS58.9%
and 28.4%

N = 3-Gr 3 osteoradionecrosis
2 yr OS12.5% (+LNs)
2 yr OS78.6% (-LNs)

2 yr LRC- 57.8%
(40–50 Gy)
2 yr LRC- 31.7%
(15–36 Gy)
2 yr LRC- 30.7%

No grade 4/5
toxicity

n = 6 in re-RT,
hemorrhage

Late
toxicity

Med OS
SBRT-14.8 m;
SBRT ? Cet24.5 m

1 and 2 yr OS70.6%
and 58.3%

Survival

SBRT only
1 yr-53.8%
2 yr-33.6%
SBRT+
cet
1 yr-78.6%
2 yr-49.2%

Local control

Abbreviations LN lymph node, Npx nasopharynx, Opx oropharynx, cav cavity, PNS paranasal sinus, Hpx hypopharynx, fr fraction, CR complete response, PR partial response, PD progressive disease, m months,
OS overall survival, Gr Grade, LRC locoregional control

n

Study

Table 1 Selected series of SBRT for head and neck cancer

258
F. Siddiqui et al.

Non-Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer

circumstances, SBRT may be employed as a primary
treatment. Two series have reported on 10 and 13
patients who had not received previous radiation
(Kodani et al. 2010; Siddiqui et al. 2009). The complete plus partial response rates in these patients were
82 and 84%, respectively as opposed to 69 and 62%
complete and partial response rates, respectively, in
the patients who were re-irradiated.
SBRT may also be a viable option for patients who
have metastatic disease to the head and neck region
from primaries in the thoracic or abdominal region.
Siddiqui et al reported on 15 patients who had primary
cancers in the lung, breast, renal cell carcinoma, gastric
adenocarcinoma, and brain. A response rate (complete
plus partial response) rate of 87% was achieved but due
to widely metastatic disease the median survival in
these patients was only 5 months. Good symptomatic
relief was, however, achieved in these patients. In this
situation with limited life expectancy a short course of
single fraction or fractionated SBRT may be able to
achieve the same goal as a multi-fractionated course of
conventional external beam RT.
Table 1 summarizes the treatment outcomes of
selected series.

5

Toxicities

The reported toxicities have varied widely in patients
who received re-irradiation using SBRT. Re-irradiation of recurrent or second primary cancers in a previously radiated field is a relatively new treatment
approach. Hence, there is very little data guiding
normal tissue dose limits in this situation. Publications
from the University of Pittsburgh reported no grade 4
or 5 toxicities in their experience (Heron 2009;
Rwigema et al. 2010; Voynov et al. 2006). Others have
reported bone and soft tissue necrosis and also more
serious complications like carotid blowouts resulting
in fatalities. A recent review of fractionated re-irradiation data from more than 1,500 patients revealed a
carotid blowout rate of 2.6% of which 76% were fatal
(McDonald et al. 2011). Cengiz et al.2010 analyzed
the dose to carotid arteries and reported that this fatal
syndrome was more likely to occur when the recurrent
or second primary tumor surrounds the artery and the
carotids receive the entire prescribed dose.

259

6

Case Examples

Case 1
A 70-year-old male patient previously treated for
nasopharyngeal carcinoma, presented 2 years after his
previous treatment with symptoms of severe headaches and pain on the right side of his face. He was
noted to have a recurrent nasopharyngeal/parapharyngeal mass. This lesion was PET avid (Fig. 1a) and
confirmed on the T1-weighted contrast-enhanced
MRI (Fig. 1b). Stereotactic body radiation therapy
was delivered to a total dose of 25 Gy in 5 fractions
prescribed to the 95% isodose line (Fig. 1c). A repeat
MRI done 4 months post treatment showed significant
reduction in the size of the mass with symptomatic
relief of his symptoms (d).
Case 2
A 42-year-old female with T3N2aM0 supraglottic
cancer treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy and
concurrent chemoradiotherapy (70 Gy in 35 fractions). Surgery was then performed for gross residual
disease. She developed recurrence in the left
oropharynx and retropharyngeal lymph node causing
pain not controllable by narcotic analgesic and was
treated with CyberKnife-based SBRT to a dose of
40 Gy in 5 fractions prescribed at 75% (Fig. 2).
Her pain improved significantly after SBRT but
repeat PET-CT 3 months after SBRT showed progressive disease outside the treated area.
Case 3
A 53-year-old male with floor of mouth cancer was
treated with surgery and postoperative radiotherapy to
66 Gy in 33 fractions. He was subsequently found to
have an esophageal cancer and a posterior pharyngeal
wall mass (PET-avid), seen on fiberoptic examination
and biopsy-confirmed to be squamous cell carcinoma,
3 months after completion of treatment (Fig. 3a).
He received CyberKnife-based SBRT to a dose of
35 Gy in 5 fractions (Fig. 3b). He was then treated
with chemoradiotherapy for his esophageal cancer.
The posterior pharyngeal wall mass showed good
response on repeat PET-CT 4 months after SBRT
(Fig. 3c). Repeat endoscopy showed complete
resolution of the posterior pharyngeal wall mass.
However, he had progressive disease outside the
treatment field and succumbed to his disease.

260

F. Siddiqui et al.

Fig. 1 PET-avid recurrent nasopharyngeal/parapharyngeal
mass (a), confirmed on the T1-weighted contrast-enhanced
MRI (b). Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) was
delivered to a total dose of 25 Gy in 5 fractions prescribed to

7

Future Directions

The use of SBRT in head and neck cancer located
outside of base of skull region is still in its infancy
compared to the well-established track record in
treating intracranial lesions and other relatively
immobile areas close to the base of skull like the
nasopharynx. There has been increased interest in
using this modality especially in patients who do not
have any other good options remaining for treatment
such as the group with recurrent head and neck cancer.

the 95% isodose line (c). Repeat MRI done 4 months postSBRT showed significant reduction in the size of the mass with
symptomatic relief of his symptoms (d)

The use of frameless stereotactic treatments has made
this a more acceptable option to patients. There is also
a greater confidence in tumor definition, target volume delineation, and treatment delivery on the part of
the physicians with the widespread availability of
image fusion software and image guided radiation
therapy using cone beam CT or implanted fiducial
markers.
This modality must be used with great care due to
the high doses per fraction delivered in a previously
irradiated region. Radiobiologically, this approach
may seem counterintuitive as the risks of late side

Non-Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer

261

Fig. 2 Recurrent supraglottic cancer in the left oropharynx and retropharyngeal lymph node treated with CyberKnife-based SBRT
to a dose of 40 Gy (orange line) in 5 fractions prescribed at 75%

effects are increased when giving high-dose per
fraction. However, the impact of this radiobiological
disadvantage is lessened by minimizing the volume of
normal tissue treated. SBRT must be used with
extreme caution in patients presenting with newly
diagnosed head and neck cancers. In general, this
technique cannot be recommended because of the
need to treat the primary tumor and involved lymph
nodes to a high dose and the need to cover elective
nodal areas. In rare circumstances however, when the
risk of nodal involvement is low, no surgery is possible, or the patient refuses the standard of care
treatment, stereotactic approach may be contemplated
in an upfront non-recurrent situation.

The toxicity profile also needs improvement as
some series have reported fatalities due to extensive
necrosis or carotid blowouts. With improvement in
technology and physical ability to deliver stereotactic
high-dose per fraction treatment, there is also a great
need for combining biological approaches to maximize the impact of radiation treatment. The use of
traditional platinum-based chemotherapy may not be
feasible due to the risk of increased toxicities,
however, and newer biologic targeted agents need to
be developed and tested.
The general trend in head and neck SBRT seems to
be showing an increase in its utilization and implementation across various institutes. As more and more

262

F. Siddiqui et al.

Non-Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer
Fig. 3 A posterior pharyngeal wall mass (PET-avid), confirmed
to be squamous cell carcinoma, developed 3 months after
completion of postoperative radiotherapy for floor of mouth
cancer (a). He received CyberKnife-based SBRT to a dose of
35 Gy (orange line) in 5 fractions (b). The mass showed good
response on repeat PET-CT 4 months after SBRT (c)

experience is gained in using different stereotactic
approaches with different treatment devices and as
image guided radiation therapy is becoming more
mainstream, the clinical experience in the head and
neck SBRT will rapidly increase. In addition, trials
are being conducted at the phase I and II levels to
assess the feasibility of using SBRT in locally
advanced or recurrent head and neck cancer. Patient
accrual is also ongoing in trials combining this
approach with cetuximab.
It may also be possible to use SBRT to boost
hypoxic regions of the tumor as part of the original
treatment course. These regions can be detected using
hypoxia or hypoxia-related PET tracers (18F-FMISO,
18F-fluoroazomycin arabinoside, 18F-fluoroerythronitroimidazole) (Troost et al. 2010).
Normal tissue tolerance and radiobiologic parameters need to be better defined and increased clinical
experience will help in better defining safe doses and
tolerance limits for tissues being re-irradiated at high
doses per fraction.
Conflict of Interest There are no potential conflicts of interest
among the authors and this manuscript. There are no financial
or non-financial competing interests. This manuscript has been
seen, read, and agreed upon in its content by all designated
authors. This manuscript has not been submitted or published
elsewhere.

References
Adelstein DJ, Li Y, Adams GL, Wagner H Jr, Kish JA,
Ensley JF, Schuller DE, Forastiere AA (2003) An intergroup phase III comparison of standard radiation therapy
and two schedules of concurrent chemoradiotherapy in
patients with unresectable squamous cell head and neck
cancer. J Clin Oncol 21(1):92–98
Adler JR, Jr., Chang SD, Murphy MJ, Doty J, Geis P, Hancock SL
(1997) The Cyberknife: a frameless robotic system for radiosurgery. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg 69(1–4 Pt 2):124–128
Ali I, Tubbs J, Hibbitts K, Algan O, Thompson S, Herman T,
Ahmad S (2010) Evaluation of the setup accuracy of a
stereotactic radiotherapy head immobilization mask system
using kV on-board imaging. J Appl Clin Med Phys
11(3):3192

263
Bernier J, Domenge C, Ozsahin M, Matuszewska K, Lefebvre
JL, Greiner RH, Giralt J, Maingon P, Rolland F, Bolla M,
Cognetti F, Bourhis J, Kirkpatrick Avan Glabbeke M (2004)
Postoperative irradiation with or without concomitant
chemotherapy for locally advanced head and neck cancer.
N Engl J Med 350(19):1945–1952
Berson AM, Stein NF, Riegel AC, Destian S, Ng T, Tena LB,
Mitnick RJ, Heiba S (2009) Variability of gross tumor
volume delineation in head-and-neck cancer using PET/CT
fusion, Part II: the impact of a contouring protocol. Med
Dosim 34(1):30–35
Bonner JA, Harari PM, Giralt J, Azarnia N, Shin DM,
Cohen RB, Jones CU, Sur R, Raben D, Jassem J, Ove R,
Kies MS, Baselga J, Youssoufian H, Amellal N,
Rowinsky EK, Ang KK (2006) Radiotherapy plus cetuximab for squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck.
N Engl J Med 354(6):567–578
Bradley JA, Paulson ES, Ahunbay E, Schultz C, Li XA,
Wang D (2011) Dynamic MRI analysis of tumor and organ
motion during rest and deglutition and margin assessment
for radiotherapy of head-and-neck cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys (in press)
Brenner DJ (2008) The linear-quadratic model is an appropriate
methodology for determining isoeffective doses at large
doses per fraction. Semin Radiat Oncol 18(4):234–239
Calais G, Alfonsi M, Bardet E, Sire C, Germain T, Bergerot P,
Rhein B, Tortochaux J, Oudinot P, Bertrand P (1999)
Randomized trial of radiation therapy versus concomitant
chemotherapy and radiation therapy for advanced-stage
oropharynx carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 91(24):2081–2086
Cengiz M, Ozyigit G, Yazici G, Dogan A, Yildiz F, Zorlu F,
Gurkaynak M, Gullu IH, Hosal SA, kyol F (2010) Salvage
reirradiaton with stereotactic body radiotherapy for locally
recurrent head-and-neck tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys
Cooper JS, Pajak TF, Forastiere AA, Jacobs J, Campbell BH,
Saxman SB, Kish JA, Kim HE, Cmelak AJ, Rotman M,
Machtay M, Ensley JF, Chao KS, Schultz CJ, Lee N, Fu KK
(2004) Postoperative concurrent radiotherapy and chemotherapy for high-risk squamous-cell carcinoma of the head
and neck. N Engl J Med 350(19):1937–1944
Daisne JF, Duprez T, Weynand B, Lonneux M, Hamoir M,
Reychler H, Gregoire V (2004) Tumor volume in pharyngolaryngeal squamous cell carcinoma: comparison at CT,
MR imaging, and FDG PET and validation with surgical
specimen. Radiology 233(1):93–100
Dandekar P, Partridge M, Kazi R, Nutting C, Harrington K,
Newbold K (2010) Challenges in integrating 18FDG PETCT into radiotherapy planning of head and neck cancer.
Indian J Cancer 47(3):260–266
De Crevoisier R, Bourhis J, Domenge C, Wibault P, Koscielny S,
Lusinchi A, Mamelle G, Janot F, Julieron M, Leridant AM,
Marandas P, Armand JP, Schwaab G, Luboinski BE,
Schwege F (1998) Full-dose reirradiation for unresectable
head and neck carcinoma: experience at the Gustave-Roussy
Institute in a series of 169 patients. J Clin Oncol 16(11):
3556–3562
De Crevoisier R, Domenge C, Wibault P, Koscielny S,
Lusinchi A, Janot F, Bobin S, Luboinski B, Eschwege F,
Bourhis J (2001) Full dose reirradiation combined with

c

264
chemotherapy after salvage surgery in head and neck
carcinoma. Cancer 91(11):2071–2076
Droege RT, Bjarngard BE (1979a) Metal screen-film detector
MTF at megavoltage X-ray energies. Med Phys 6(6):515–518
Droege RT, Bjarngard BE (1979b) Influence of metal screens
on contrast in megavoltage X-ray imaging. Med Phys 6(6):
487–493
Duprez F, Madani I, Bonte K, Boterberg T, Vakaet L, Derie C,
De Gersem W, De Neve W (2009) Intensity-modulated
radiotherapy for recurrent and second primary head and
neck cancer in previously irradiated territory. Radiother
Oncol 93(3):563–569
Feldkamp IA, Davis LC, Kress JW (1984) Practical cone-beam
algorithm. J Opt Soc Am A 1(6):612–619
Fu KK, Pajak TF, Trotti A, Jones CU, Spencer SA, Phillips TL,
Garden AS, Ridge JA, Cooper JS, Ang KK (2000) A
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) phase III
randomized study to compare hyperfractionation and two
variants of accelerated fractionation to standard fractionation radiotherapy for head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas: first report of RTOG 9003. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 48(1):7–16
Fuks Z, Kolesnick R (2005) Engaging the vascular component
of the tumor response. Cancer Cell 8(2):89–91
Garcia-Barros M, Paris F, Cordon-Cardo C, Lyden D, Rafii S,
Haimovitz-Friedman A, Fuks Z, Kolesnick R (2003) Tumor
response to radiotherapy regulated by endothelial cell
apoptosis. Science 300(5622):1155–1159
Heron DE (2009) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for
recurrent head & neck cancers: rethinking nonoperative
salvage strategies. Future Oncol 5(9):1321–1325
Heron DE, Rwigema JC, Gibson MK, Burton SA, Quinn AE,
Ferris RL (2010) Concurrent cetuximab with stereotactic
body radiotherapy for recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of
the head and neck: a single institution matched case-control
study. Am J Clin Oncol 34(2):165–172
Heron DE, Rwigema JC, Gibson MK, Burton SA, Quinn A,
Ferris RL (2011) Concurrent cetuximab with stereotactic
body radiotherapy for recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of
the head and neck: a single institution matched case-control
study. Am J Clin Oncol 34(2):165–172
Hong LX, Chen CC, Garg M, Yaparpalvi R, Mah D (2009)
Clinical experiences with onboard imager KV images for
linear accelerator-based stereotactic radiosurgery and
radiotherapy setup. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 73(2):
556–561
Jaffray DA, Siewerdsen JH, Wong Martinez JW, Martinez AA
(2002) Flat-panel cone-beam computed tomography for
image-guided radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 53(5):1337–1349
Janot F, de Raucourt D, Benhamou E, Ferron C, Dolivet G,
Bensadoun RJ, Hamoir M, Gery B, Julieron M, Castaing M,
Bardet E, Gregoire V, Bourhis J (2008) Randomized trial of
postoperative reirradiation combined with chemotherapy
after salvage surgery compared with salvage surgery alone
in head and neck carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 26(34):5518–5523
Jin JY, Ryu S, Faber K, Mikkelsen T, Chen Q, Li S, Movsas B
(2006) 2D/3D image fusion for accurate target localization
and evaluation of a mask based stereotactic system in
fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy of cranial lesions.
Med Phys 33(12):4557–4566

F. Siddiqui et al.
Kasperts N, Slotman B, Leemans CR, Langendijk JA (2005) A
review on re-irradiation for recurrent and second primary
head and neck cancer. Oral Oncol 41(3):225–243
Kawaguchi K, Sato K, Horie A, Iketani S, Yamada H,
Nakatani Y, Sato J, Hamada Y (2010) Stereotactic radiosurgery may contribute to overall survival for patients with
recurrent head and neck carcinoma. Radiat Oncol 5:51
Kirkpatrick JP, Meyer JJ, Marks LB (2008) The linearquadratic model is inappropriate to model high dose per
fraction effects in radiosurgery. Semin Radiat Oncol 18(4):
240–243
Kodani N, Yamazaki H, Tsubokura T, Shiomi H, Kobayashi K,
Nishimura T, Aibe N, Ikeno H (2010) Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for head and neck tumor: disease control
and morbidity outcomes. J Radiat Res (Tokyo)
Kodani N, Yamazaki H, Tsubokura T, Shiomi H, Kobayashi K,
Nishimura T, Aibe N, Ikeno H (2011) Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for head and neck tumor: disease control
and morbidity outcomes. J Radiat Res (Tokyo) 52(1):24–31
Kolotas C, Tselis N, Sommerlad M, Roddiger S, Schnabel T,
Baltas D, Kalogera-Fountzila A, Fountzilas G, Zamboglou N
(2007) Reirradiation for recurrent neck metastases of headand-neck tumors using CT-guided interstitial 192Ir HDR
brachytherapy. Strahlenther Onkol 183(2):69–75
Langendijk JA, Bourhis J (2007) Reirradiation in squamous cell
head and neck cancer: recent developments and future
directions. Curr Opin Oncol 19(3):202–209
Langer CJ, Harris J, Horwitz EM, Nicolaou N, Kies M,
Curran W, Wong S, Ang K (2007) Phase II study of
low-dose paclitaxel and cisplatin in combination with splitcourse concomitant twice-daily reirradiation in recurrent
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: results of
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group Protocol 9911. J Clin
Oncol 25(30):4800–4805
Lee N, Chan K, Bekelman JE, Zhung J, Mechalakos J,
Narayana A, Wolden S, Venkatraman ES, Pfister D,
Kraus D, Shah J, Zelefsky MJ (2007) Salvage re-irradiation
for recurrent head and neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 68(3):731–740
Leksell L (1951) The stereotaxic method and radiosurgery of
the brain. Acta Chir Scand 102(4):316–319
Leksell L, Lindquist C, Adler JR, Leksell D, Jernberg B,
Steiner L (1987) A new fixation device for the Leksell
stereotaxic system. Technical note. J Neurosurg 66(4):
626–629
Lo SS, Dawson LA, Kim EY, Mayr NA, Wang JZ, Huang Z,
Cardenes HR (2010a) Stereotactic body radiation therapy
for hepatocellular carcinoma. Discov Med 9(48):404–410
Lo SS, Fakiris AJ, Chang EL, Mayr NA, Wang JZ, Papiez L,
Teh BS, McGarry RC, Cardenes HR, Timmermann RD
(2010b) Stereotactic body radiation therapy: a novel treatment modality. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 7(1):44–54
Lo SS, Sahgal A, Wang JZ, Mayr NA, Sloan A, Mendel E,
Chang EL (2010c) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for
spinal metastases. Discov Med 9(47):289–296
Lo SS, Teh BS, Mayr NA, Olencki TE, Wang JZ, Grecula JC,
Lu JJ, Timmerman RD (2010d) Stereotactic body radiation
therapy for oligometastases. Discov Med 10(52):247–254
Lu TX, Mai WY, Teh BS, Zhao C, Han F, Huang Y, Deng XW,
Lu LX, Huang SM, Zeng ZF, Lin CG, Lu HH, Chiu JK,
Carpenter LS, Grant WH 3rd, Woo SY, Cui NJ, Butler EB

Non-Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer
(2004) Initial experience using intensity-modulated radiotherapy for recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 58(3):682–687
Mackie TR, Holmes T, Swerdloff S, Reckwerdt P, Deasy JO,
Yang J, Paliwal B, Kinsella T (1993) Tomotherapy: a new
concept for the delivery of dynamic conformal radiotherapy.
Med Phys 20(6):1709–1719
McDonald MW, Moore MG, Johnstone PA (2011) Risk of
carotid blowout after reirradiation of the head and neck: a
systematic review. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys (in press)
Moore CS, Liney GP, Beavis AW (2004) Quality assurance of
registration of CT and MRI data sets for treatment planning
of radiotherapy for head and neck cancers. J Appl Clin Med
Phys 5(1):25–35
Morin O, Gillis A, Chen J, Aubin M, Bucci MK, Roach M,
3rdPouliot J (2006) Megavoltage cone-beam CT: system
description and clinical applications. Med Dosim 31(1):51–61
Nakamoto Y, Tamai K, Saga T, Higashi T, Hara T, Suga T,
Koyama T, Togashi K (2009) Clinical value of image fusion
from MR and PET in patients with head and neck cancer.
Mol Imaging Biol 11(1):46–53
Park C, Papiez L, Zhang S, Story M, Timmerman RD (2008)
Universal survival curve and single fraction equivalent
dose: useful tools in understanding potency of ablative
radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 70(3):847–852
Pignon JP, le Maitre A, Maillard E, Bourhis J (2009) Meta-analysis
of chemotherapy in head and neck cancer (MACH-NC): an
update on 93 randomised trials and 17, 346 patients. Radiother
Oncol 92(1):4–14
Popovtzer A, Gluck I, Chepeha DB, Teknos TN, Moyer JS,
Prince ME, Bradford CR, Eisbruch A (2009) The pattern of
failure after reirradiation of recurrent squamous cell head
and neck cancer: implications for defining the targets. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 74(5):1342–1347
Prevost JB, de Boer H, Poll J, Voet P, Levendag P (2008)
Analysis of the motion of oropharyngeal tumors and
consequences in planning target volume determination.
Radiother Oncol 87(2):268–273
Riegel AC, Berson AM, Destian S, Ng T, Tena LB, Mitnick RJ,
Wong PS (2006) Variability of gross tumor volume
delineation in head-and-neck cancer using CT and PET/
CT fusion. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 65(3):726–732
Roh KW, Jang JS, Kim MS, Sun DI, Kim BS, Jung SL,
Kang JH, Yoo EJ, Yoon SC, Jang HS, Chung SM, Kim YS
(2009) Fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy as reirradiation for locally recurrent head and neck cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 74(5):1348–1355
Rwigema JC, Heron DE, Ferris RL, Andrade RS, Gibson MK,
Yang Y, Ozhasoglu C, Argiris AE, Grandis JR, Burton SA
(2010) The impact of tumor volume and radiotherapy dose
on outcome in previously irradiated recurrent squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck treated with stereotactic body radiation therapy. Am J Clin Oncol 34(4):
372–379
Schinagl DA, Vogel WV, Hoffmann AL, van Dalen JA,
Oyen WJ, Kaanders JH (2007) Comparison of five segmentation tools for 18F-fluoro-deoxy-glucose-positron emission

265
tomography-based target volume definition in head and
neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 69(4):1282–1289
Sher DJ, Haddad RI, Norris CM Jr, Posner MR, Wirth LJ,
Goguen LA, Annino D, Balboni T, Allen A, Tishler RB
(2010) Efficacy and toxicity of reirradiation using intensitymodulated radiotherapy for recurrent or second primary
head and neck cancer. Cancer 116(20):4761–4768
Siddiqui F, Patel M, Khan M, McLean S, Dragovic J, Jin JY,
Movsas B, Ryu S (2009) Stereotactic body radiation therapy
for primary, recurrent, and metastatic tumors in the head-andneck region. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 74(4):1047–1053
Siegel R, Ward E, Brawley O, Jemal A (2011) Cancer statistics,
2011: The impact of eliminating socioeconomic and racial
disparities on premature cancer deaths. CA Cancer J Clin
61(4):212–236
Simon E, Fox TH, Lee D, Waller AF, Pantalone P, Jani AB
(2009) PET lesion segmentation using automated isointensity contouring in head and neck cancer. Technol
Cancer Res Treat 8(4):249–255
Spencer SA, Harris J, Wheeler RH, Machtay M, Schultz C,
Spanos W, Rotman M, Meredith R (2001) RTOG 96–10:
reirradiation with concurrent hydroxyurea and 5-fluorouracil in patients with squamous cell cancer of the head and
neck. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 51(5):1299–1304
Taussky D, Dulguerov P, Allal AS (2005) Salvage surgery after
radical accelerated radiotherapy with concomitant boost technique for head and neck carcinomas. Head Neck 27(3):182–186
Temam S, Pape E, Janot F, Wibault P, Julieron M, Lusinchi A,
Mamelle G, Marandas P, Luboinski B, Bourhis J (2005)
Salvage surgery after failure of very accelerated radiotherapy in advanced head-and-neck squamous cell carcinoma.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 62(4):1078–1083
Troost EG, Schinagl DA, Bussink J, Boerman OC, van der
Kogel AJ, Oyen WJ, Kaanders JH (2010) Innovations in
radiotherapy planning of head and neck cancers: role of
PET. J Nucl Med 51(1):66–76
Unger KR, Lominska CE, Deeken JF, Davidson BJ,
Newkirk KA, Gagnon GJ, Hwang J, Slack RS, Noone
AM, Harter KW (2010) Fractionated stereotactic radiosurgery for reirradiation of head-and-neck cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 77(5):1411–1419
van Asselen B, Raaijmakers CP, Lagendijk JJ, Terhaard CH
(2003) Intrafraction motions of the larynx during radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 56(2):384–390
Voynov G, Heron DE, Burton S, Grandis J, Quinn A, Ferris R,
Ozhasoglu C, Vogel W, Johnson J (2006) Frameless
stereotactic radiosurgery for recurrent head and neck
carcinoma. Technol Cancer Res Treat 5(5):529–535
Wadsley JC, Bentzen SM (2004) Investigation of relationship
between change in locoregional control and change in
overall survival in randomized controlled trials of modified
radiotherapy in head-and-neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 60(5):1405–1409
Wang JZ, Huang Z, Lo SS, Yuh WT, Mayr NA (2010) A
generalized linear-quadratic model for radiosurgery, stereotactic body radiation therapy, and high-dose rate brachytherapy. Sci Transl Med 2(39):39–48

Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer
Sue S. Yom, David Raben, Farzan Siddiqui,
Jiade J. Lu, and Min Yao

Contents
1
Introduction.............................................................. 268
1.1 Head and Neck Cancer ............................................. 268
1.2 Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy for Head and Neck
Cancers at the Skull Base ......................................... 269

Authors’ Contributions SY, DB, FS, JL, and MY made
substantial contributions to the conception, design, drafting,
and writing of this book chapter. This book chapter has
been seen, read, and agreed upon in its content by all the
designated authors.

S. S. Yom (&)
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of California, San Francisco,
1600 Divisadero St. Suite H-1031,
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA
e-mail: yoms@radonc.ucsf.edu
D. Raben
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Colorado Denver,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA
F. Siddiqui
Department of Radiation Oncology,
Henry Ford Health System,
2799 W Grand Blvd,
Detroit, MI 48202, USA
J. J. Lu
Department of Radiation Oncology,
National University Cancer Institute of Singapore,
National University of Singapore,
Singapore

Technical Aspects ....................................................
Immobilization...........................................................
Target Delineation .....................................................
Treatment Planning ...................................................
On-Board Imaging.....................................................
Treatment Delivery and Intra-Fractional Motion
Control .......................................................................

269
269
271
272
272

Clinical Applications ...............................................
Eligibility Criteria......................................................
Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma.......................................
Other Aggressive Malignant Disease at the Skull
Base............................................................................
3.4 Clinical Trials in Reirradiation at the Skull Base....

273
273
274

4
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6

Toxicities ...................................................................
Optic Structures .........................................................
Brain Stem and Spinal Cord Tolerance....................
Brain Necrosis ...........................................................
Cranial Neuropathy ...................................................
Soft Tissue Necrosis..................................................
Endocrinologic Deficits.............................................

279
279
279
279
279
280
280

5

Case Examples ......................................................... 280

6

Future Directions..................................................... 282

2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
3
3.1
3.2
3.3

273

277
279

References.......................................................................... 282

Abstract

This chapter will discuss applications of stereotactic body radiotherapy for a variety of head and
neck tumors located at the skull base, describing
recent advances and emerging applications in the
use of SBRT in this complex anatomic region.

M. Yao
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center,
Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2011_440, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

267

268

S. S. Yom et al.

1

Introduction

1.1

Head and Neck Cancer

According to the American Cancer Society, 52,140
new cases and 11,460 deaths from head and neck
cancer (HNC) occur yearly in the United States
(Jemal et al. 2010). While head and neck cancers
comprise only approximately 6.5% of new cancer
diagnoses in the U.S., the category of oral and pharyngeal cancers nonetheless ranks as the eighth most
common cancer diagnosis among men (Cooper et al.
2009). Worldwide, HNC is ranked similarly but in
certain geographic regions, nasopharyngeal and oral
cancers occur in epidemic proportions (Wee et al.
2010; Bhurgri 2005).
The long-term survival rate for a patient after a
diagnosis of an advanced-stage head and neck cancer
varies widely. Depending on the subsite, histology,
stage, and patient and treatment factors, overall 5-year
estimated survival rates for a newly diagnosed
HNC may range between 50 and 75% (Ries 2007).
However, for the 60% of patients who present with
local–regionally advanced disease, 5-year survival
rates are estimated as low as 30% (Vokes et al. 1993).
Because organ preservation is often a paramount
quality of life issue in the treatment of HNC, many
patients are treated for local–regionally advanced disease with multimodality strategies oriented towards the
dual goals of treatment efficacy and functional outcome.
Over the past few decades, continuing improvements in
organ preservation protocols have resulted in the
development of complex organ-preserving surgical and
reconstructive strategies, and similarly, non-surgical
treatments have been intensified to maximize the possibilities for cure. Many non-surgical intensification
strategies have now become accepted to varying degrees
as part of the standard of care, including altered radiotherapy fractionation regimens, concurrent chemoradiation strategies, neoadjuvant chemotherapy approaches,
and biologically derived approaches for radiosensitization and radioprotection.
Technical developments in the radiation therapy
arena over the past few decades include increasingly
conformal radiotherapy techniques, which improve
targeting of tumors while increasing the sparing of
adjacent normal tissues. Since the late 1990s to the
early 2000s, a scientific revolution has occurred in

head and neck cancer treatment in the form of
intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT). IMRT
has rapidly become the treatment of choice for head
and neck and skull base tumors scheduled to receive
conventionally fractionated radiotherapy. HNC treatments now comprise a major proportion of IMRT
usage across the country (Mell et al. 2005). IMRT has
been shown to significantly reduce the severity of
chronic xerostomia and produces positive long-term
quality-of-life outcomes compared to conventional
planning approaches (Pow et al. 2006).
Nonetheless, despite these striking advances in
multimodality integration, technical sophistication,
and supportive care offered to HNC patients, a substantial proportion is still destined to experience
local–regional recurrence. Unlike some other types of
cancer, local and regional recurrence comprises a
substantial proportion of failures in HNC patients who
relapse. Despite improvements over the past two
decades with the development of intensive multimodality treatment including combinations of surgery,
radiation, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy, the
local recurrence rates may still run as high as 30 or
40% for advanced disease presentations (Marur and
Forastiere 2008). After a local–regional recurrence,
the prognosis is poor. In these situations, salvage
surgery is usually the treatment of choice. However,
even when salvage surgery is feasible, the rates of
overall survival at 5 years are typically no better than
25–35% in early locally recurrent tumors and 15–20%
in more advanced locally recurrent disease presentations (Lee and Escalamado 2005).
The standard non-surgical options for treatment of
recurrent disease are similarly unsatisfying. Prospective trials in salvage reirradiation with concurrent
chemotherapy have achieved 5-year survival rates
ranging from 13% in unselected series to 93% in highly
selected series, with local control rates of 12.5–42%
and severe or fatal complication rates of 9–32% (Creak
et al. 2005). Conventional conformal reirradiation
approaches can be associated with substantial acute
and late morbidities. In one series reporting concurrent
chemoradiotherapy for unresectable recurrence, the
risks of treatment-related death reached 17% (Salama
et al. 2006). In the absence of options for surgical
resection, decision-making is often conditioned by
concerns about treatment-related morbidity.
In summary, patients who have experienced
recurrence will be offered retreatment options that are

Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer

known to induce considerable suffering and functional
impairment and for which success rates are unsatisfying. Despite these results of relatively poor overall
survival results, retreatment can induce major acute
and chronic toxicities. Thus, the potential role of
stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) deserves to be
explored in addressing the continuing problem of
local disease persistence and recurrence. This chapter
will discuss applications of SBRT for a variety of
head and neck tumors located at the skull base,
describing recent advances and emerging applications
in the use of SBRT in this complex anatomic region.

1.2

Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy
for Head and Neck Cancers
at the Skull Base

The skull base is a complex anatomic region, which
represents a nexus for tumors arising in the central
nervous system and those arising from the head and
neck. From the early history of stereotactic techniques
developed by the neurosurgical community, it was
natural that initial explorations of extracranial stereotactic radiation would move first into the skull base
(Chin and Regine 2008). However, while the efficacy
of SBRT for many benign and malignant tumor types
of the central nervous system is well established,
applications for skull base tumors of head and neck
primary origin remain in a state of evolution. Explorations of SBRT in this region have been restricted by
the heterogeneity of tumor types, their infiltrative and
frequently metastatic nature, and uncertainty about
normal tissue tolerances and fractionation regimens.
Use of SBRT in the head and neck region has been
limited by concerns about potential long-term toxicities. However, for certain locally refractory tumors of
the skull base, the dose escalation achieved using
stereotactic techniques may be of substantial therapeutic benefit. The use of SBRT by head and neck
cancer specialists has recently expanded on several
specific fronts: for radiographically well-defined
small-volume tumors, for recurrent tumors refractory
to prior treatment, and as a boost used to increase
overall dosage to specific areas of gross tumor where
local control rates remain unsatisfactory with conventionally fractionated radiotherapy approaches or in
sensitive areas where greater conformality and realtime image guidance are desired. Improvements in

269

imaging, immobilization, and target localization may
provide opportunities to expand the use of SBRT in
this complex and delicate anatomic area.
The skull base may be a particularly apt area to
explore the use of SBRT for HNC. Intensification of
local therapy is a primary aim of treatment in this area,
due to the severe neurological consequences of loss of
disease control. SBRT may be uniquely positioned for
this purpose. From a practical standpoint, immobilization techniques at the skull base have been developed
and validated as an outgrowth of the experience of
treating intracranial disease. Organ tolerance guidelines and expectations for toxicities may also be
reasonably extrapolated from the experience of stereotactic radiosurgery in this anatomic region.
At present, SBRT is most frequently used for the
reirradiation of skull base HNC occurring in an area
that has previously received a high dose of radiation
therapy, and the majority of the reported experience
in this regard has been obtained in the retreatment of
nasopharyngeal cancers. Definitive or postoperative
SBRT has been used to enhance local control for
selected small volume skull base tumors arising in
areas of difficult surgical access, such as a few limited
experiences reported with esthesioneuroblastoma
or other sinonasal malignancies. Most recently,
stereotactic boost regimens have been explored in
conjunction with conventionally fractionated radiotherapy for anatomically challenging or refractory
skull base or sinonasal tumors. Stereotactic boosts
may also be given to areas of cranial nerve involvement arising from traditionally aggressive cancers
known for poor local control rates, such as cutaneous
malignancies of the head and neck or salivary gland
tumors with perineural infiltration. Finally, refractory
metastases to the skull base may be successfully
palliated with SBRT. Optimal dose and fractionation
regimens for all of these indications remain under
continuing investigation.

2

Technical Aspects

2.1

Immobilization

At the skull base, immobilization is less challenging
than in the lower regions of the head and neck but
nonetheless deserves careful consideration. Excessive
toxicity at the skull base, particularly if there is an

270

intracranial component of tumor extension, can be
extremely serious due to the precise anatomic confinement of these structures. In most cases, the degree
of toxicity will directly relate to the amount of normal
tissue which is treated circumferentially around the
target. Thus, for the purpose of reducing planning
margins to the least degree possible, immobilization
must be optimized to allow for the greatest possible
degree of conformality.
For fractionated radiotherapy, it is common practice to fashion a customized mask out of thermally
molded plastic to secure the head or head and
shoulders to a carbon-fiber board which is then
aligned to the treatment table surface. When properly
made, these thermoplastic masks typically provide
immobilization of the head and shoulders to within a
range of error of several millimeters, provided that the
mask is carefully constructed and the patient does not
lose weight or experience a very dramatic change in
external tumor bulk which would change the outer
contour. Because the entire process of SBRT, from
initial consultation to completion of therapy, is typically no longer than a few weeks in duration, most
patients would not be expected to demonstrate a
dramatic change in the external contour. However,
mask-based immobilization retains a degree of error
that may be unsatisfactory.
For stereotactic radiotherapy, the degree to which
immobilization must be improved over these conventional methods is dependent on the degree of precision
warranted. For instance, if single fraction radiosurgery
is planned, then the patient may be immobilized with a
rigid, invasive head frame (such as Leksell Stereotactic
System Coordinate Frame and Multipurpose Stereotactic Arc). If the planning CT is acquired at a slice
thickness of 1 mm, the Gamma Knife can produce a
localization accuracy of less than 2 mm (Maciunas
et al. 1994). The manufacturer’s device specifications
for delivery of treatment are 0.3 mm, summing to an
overall clinical error of less than 2 mm. Recently, a
non-invasive head frame has been made available for
the Gamma Knife (Elekta Extend Frame), allowing for
multiple fractionated treatments. As this is a relatively
novel technological development, there is little
experience in using this technique for HNC, although it
certainly opens up an exciting possibility for the future
for fractionated skull base SBRT.
For larger size tumors or those more suited to a
multiply
fractionated
approach,
CyberKnife,

S. S. Yom et al.

TomoTherapy, or specialized LINAC stereotactic systems may be used. As CyberKnife possesses the ability
to auto register a pre-programmed treatment plan
according to the tracked skull position, reinforced thermoplastic face masks are generally considered adequate
for initial immobilization. For tracking the position of
stationary tumors, CyberKnife achieves localization of
the tumor to within a degree of error of about half a
millimeter and certainly less than 1 mm (Yu et al.
2004).The robotic arm has an error margin at delivery of
about another 0.5 mm, meaning that the overall clinical
error is estimated at less than 1.5 mm, assuming that the
patient does not move during the intervals between
imaging.
For certain situations, CyberKnife has the advantage
of allowing much greater flexibility in deciding the
localization paradigm based on the characteristics of
the tumor location. Most commonly, fiducial gold seeds
are embedded within or around the tumor to provide
guidance. If there is a particular area of interest which
lies very superficially, fiducial gold seeds may be
implanted into the skin overlying the neck or skull as an
alternative means of real-time localization. For tumors
which reside within 5 cm of the spine, the spinal column may be used as a localization structure (Xsight
Spine Tracking System). For unusual situations when
the tumor lies in a region providing very high contrast,
such as when the edge of the mass is within an air space,
tracking may be attempted to the tumor itself (Xsight
Lung Tracking System). With either fiducials placed in
the skin or Xsight spine or lung tracking, the degree of
error could be larger than directly tracking to the fiducials embedded within or around the tumor (Synchrony
Respiratory Tracking System). Treatment planning
margins around the tumor should be based on a careful
assessment of the likelihood of intra- and inter-fractional motion of the fiducials or localization structure in
relation to the tumor.
Due to the potential for edematous change or
migration within the tissue, any externally introduced
fiducials should be placed at least 5 days ahead of the
anticipated treatment delivery date. Typically at least
three fiducials should be placed, to account for the
possibility of loss and the need for a three-dimensional orientation of the fiducials in relation to each
other. If possible, the fiducials should be spaced away
from each other by at least 1.5 cm and oriented in
planes separated by at least 15°, so that they are
clearly distinguishable on X-ray visualization. If the

Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer

fiducials are not distinguishable and cannot be recognized properly, there is potential for major error in
localization and failure of the treatment delivery. In
such a case, it would be actually preferable to have
one single fiducial and track to that.
For a linear accelerator-based stereotactic technique, it may be acceptable to use other means of
immobilization, such as reinforced thermoplastic
masks, bite blocks, or infrared tracking of external
contours, but the planning margins should be widened
by several millimeters due to an increased possibility
of miss. Other supplementary aids include form-fitting pillows which wrap around the back of the head
and neck, customized body cradles, and molded
intraoral devices to hold the maxilla or mandible in a
defined orientation.

2.2

Target Delineation

One of the challenges of implementing SBRT for head
and neck is the infiltrative nature of the tumors, which
can spread either mucosally or submucosally and can
grow quite quickly. In traditionally fractionated
radiotherapy, it is usually recommended to extend
GTV delineation by a uniform expansion of several
millimeters or more prior to planning, due to the
assumption that these tumors may manifest subclinical
spread that is not detectable on imaging. This creates a
Clinical Target Volume (CTV). For a patient being
treated with SBRT, the ideal tumor target would be of a
type that is well marginated and clearly visible as a
defined target on scans and any CTV expansion would
be minimal. If such is not the case, then the CTV
parameters should be designed to allow a larger margin
to account for undetectable disease extension. There
are also operator-dependent factors, in that the practitioner must understand the nature of the disease and
the typical patterns of relapse in order to judge how
best to design the CTV. If there is concern on any front
about the ability to delineate the subclinical spread
appropriately, then a treatment approach other than
SBRT should be seriously considered. Depending on
the anticipated accuracy of patient setup and overall
level of targeting error by the machine, additional
expansions may be added to derive the Planning
Treatment Volume (PTV).

271

In any case, a high-quality magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) study with gadolinium contrast is
nearly always mandatory for HNC tumors at the skull
base. Ideally, the target volume should be designed
using image fusion capability to merge the planning
computed tomography (CT) scan with the MRI.
A number of commercial programs exist for image
fusion, but in all cases, the fusion should be performed with very careful attention as minute errors
will greatly affect the accuracy of target delineation.
One approach is to contour a number of nearby
tumor-related and normal structures to be used as
landmarks to provide objective criteria to judge the
adequacy of the image fusion. We do not yet use
deformable registration as part of the image fusion
process, although there are many algorithms under
investigation which may make this a possibility in the
near future. At the skull base, we do not often find
position emission tomography (PET) scans useful due
to the high level of uptake of the metabolically active
brain parenchyma in near proximity. When a PET
scan is obtained, our policy is always to obtain it in
conjunction with a dedicated head and neck contrastenhanced CT to enable accurate anatomic correlation
for any hypermetabolic findings.
At University of California, San Francisco (UCSF),
for all stereotactic treatment, the planning CT scan is
obtained with a slice thickness of 1 mm for Gamma
Knife and 1.5 mm for CyberKnife. The GTV is defined
as any abnormal soft tissue mass or contrast-enhancing
area visualized on axial imaging. For the delineation of
SBRT target volumes, it is wise to engage the assistance
of a dedicated neuroradiologist with expertise in skull
base tumors. CTV expansions are determined based on
the judgment of the clinician and the tumor type to be
treated. For infiltrative tumors which are less welldelineated, expansions of up to 1 cm may be deemed
prudent. As a reference, with opposed lateral fields,
RTOG 96-10 used 2 cm margins around the GTV
(Spencer et al. 2008). An additional margin of 2–3 mm
is often added to create the PTV. For very well-delineated tumors at the skull base, the delineation and
planning procedures more closely resemble those of
intracranial stereotactic applications, with tighter
margins. For incurable or metastatic disease in which
temporary palliation is the goal, consideration can be
given to treating the GTV with minimal expansion.

272

2.3

S. S. Yom et al.

Treatment Planning

The goal of treatment planning is to create a conformal isodose configuration that completely covers the
tumor, with a minimal amount of radiation being
delivered to the surrounding structures. This is particularly important for skull base tumors because the
local–regional anatomy typically includes major cranial nerves, the neuraxis, small and large vessels
related to cranial supply, the optic apparatus, and the
vestibular apparatus and cochlea.
For most situations, avoidance of dose-limiting
organs at risk is the highest priority. Typically the
optic chiasm and optic nerves, brainstem, brain, and
spinal cord are of greatest concern, especially in a
situation in which there will be reirradiation. However, other ancillary structures may also be delineated, such as the cochlea, lenses, retinae, larynx,
esophagus, carotid arteries, mandible, and possibly
the major and minor salivary glands if they were
spared in prior treatments. The practitioner should
keep in mind that all organs at risk which are delineated will affect the treatment planning system’s
ability to achieve prioritization of other structures. If
there will be difficulty balancing multiple priorities
during planning, it is often helpful not to over-delineate normal anatomical structures judged to be at low
or low-moderate risk of complications. This process
may require a judgment made prior to treatment
planning about which anatomic structures are considered to be at lowest risk, either because they have
received no radiation or very low doses of radiation
previously, or because they are very distant from the
primary tumor site with little chance of exceeding
dose-tolerance limitations. These structures may be
omitted from being assigned a weighting factor or a
clinical priority in the planning optimization.
For single-fraction SBRT for HNC, one may follow the constraints known from the intracranial stereotactic experience. Optic structures, spinal cord, and
brainstem are restricted to B8 Gy with only point
doses allowed to 10 Gy. The amount of brain tissue
exposed to [12 Gy should be minimized.
For fractionated SBRT for HNC using 3–5
fractions, one can use extrapolated guidelines derived
both from the intracranial stereotactic experience and
tolerances estimated from conventional fractionation
schemas. It is important to keep in mind that these
extrapolations are only estimates and scant data is

available to judge their adequacy. It is usually
recommended to attempt to keep the dose per fraction
less than 2.5 Gy per fraction to as much tissue as
possible, with special attention to pharyngeal and
vascular structures such as the carotid artery which
may be prone to late complications. The amount of
tissue receiving above 4 Gy per fraction should be
strictly minimized.
Using CyberKnife-based SBRT for recurrent
HNC, investigators from the University of Pittsburgh
published a prospectively validated set of guidelines
used as part of a phase I trial. In this dose escalation
study, patients all had prior radiation therapy for HNC
and the recurrence was deemed to be unresectable.
Patients received a total dose from 25 Gy up to
44 Gy, given in a standard set of five fractions over a
2-week treatment course. The major preordained
constraints were: spinal cord B8 Gy, brainstem B8 Gy, larynx B20 Gy, and mandible B20 Gy.
The doses given to the oral cavity and parotid glands
were evaluated based on patient-specific factors using
the physician’s clinical judgment (Heron et al. 2009).

2.4

On-Board Imaging

As a general rule, head and neck structures do not
tend to manifest a dramatic degree of intra-fractional
variation if immobilization takes place over a short
treatment duration, and at the skull base, this is particularly true. Nonetheless, immobilization should be
well designed so as to minimize this factor to the
greatest degree possible. Real-time imaging at the
time of treatment is highly recommended just prior to
delivery.
Cone beam imaging is now popularized on many
commercial platforms, using either megavoltage or
kilovoltage acquisitions. Megavoltage cone beam CT
(Siemens) is obtained directly from the linear accelerator head while kilovoltage systems (Varian,
Novalis, Elekta) are oriented orthogonal to the linear
accelerator beamline. In either case, the cone beam
CT is obtained just before the patient is treated in
order to assure the position of the patient in all
dimensions. Commercial systems will allow visual
overlay of the cone beam CT onto the original planning CT in order to compare the patient’s alignment
and position. The practical limitation of most
approaches using cone beam CT is the difficulty in

Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer

completely correcting the positional errors of the
patient. Cone beam CT is usually a trial-and-errorbased process of re-imaging repeatedly, until a satisfactory position is achieved.
Investigators at Boston University described their
experience using the BrainLAB ExacTrac stereoscopic imaging system. Patients were immobilized
using a bite block and thermoplastic mask. A head
and neck localization box was placed around the
patient prior to each treatment and the position was
verified by kilovoltage images taken prior to each
treatment delivery (Siddiqui et al. 2009). The ExacTrac system consists of two orthogonally oriented Xray sources mounted on the floor and angled towards
the patient, which send imaging data to two silicon
flat-panel detectors in the ceiling. Orthogonal films
are obtained while the patient is in the treatment
position. These images are then digitally reconstructed for verification based on bony anatomy. The
surface anatomy of the patient is also optically
tracked using a separately mounted in-room infrared
camera. In the Novalis system, the radiation treatment
is delivered by a linear accelerator equipped with an
integrated mini-multileaf collimator. Treatments can
be delivered as conformal therapy, rotational arc
therapy, or intensity-modulated therapy with static or
dynamic multileaf collimation.
An alternative imaging approach is CT on rails
(Siemens, GE). While not strictly meeting the criteria
of being on-board imaging, nonetheless these in-room
systems provide high-quality three-dimensional
imaging assessment of inter-fractional positioning
accuracy. These systems comprise a diagnostic CT
scanner oriented in parallel to the treatment gantry.
The patient remains immobilized on the treatment
couch, which rotates between the CT scanner and the
linear accelerator. The same practical limitations of
any pretreatment imaging procedure apply, in that the
patient must be re-imaged repeatedly until a satisfactory position is visually achieved.

2.5

Treatment Delivery and
Intra-Fractional Motion Control

The CyberKnife system has the capability to monitor a
patient’s position at very frequent intervals during the
treatment delivery. In the CyberKnife system, a small
linear accelerator is mounted on a robotic arm that has

273

six degrees of freedom of movement. Similar to the
BrainLAB system, stereoscopic X-ray imaging is used
for verification. Two X-ray sources are directed
downward at 45° angles from the ceiling, such that the
beam paths cross at the treatment couch and point
towards two silicon flat-panel detectors in the floor. The
X-rays are oriented such that they obtain an orthogonal
pair of images able to locate a point in three-dimensional space. The robotic arm will correct its position
prior to delivery of the next node, based on a comparison of the imaging information to the pre-planned
treatment plan. The frequency of the orthogonal
imaging can be set at the time of treatment. Typically,
we will begin by imaging once or twice a minute and if
the patient’s position is seen to remain stable, the frequency may be reduced. A number of studies have
indicated that the majority of positioning variation
occurs in a subset of patients who can be identified as
initially problematic (Feygelman et al. 2008).
Using a more conventional linear acceleratorbased treatment approach, assessment of intra-fractional patient motion was shown to be feasible. This
study was conducted in a series of 13 head and neck
cancer patients who received SBRT using the Novalis
BrainLAB system. Stereoscopic imaging was taken
before and after the delivery of the radiation treatment. The intra-fractional motion was derived by the
difference in the degree of relative displacement from
to the reference planning CT (Linthout et al. 2006).

3

Clinical Applications

3.1

Eligibility Criteria

The first step in executing a successful SBRT course
of treatment is proper patient selection. The decision
to offer SBRT should incorporate an estimation of the
anticipated final dosing to the patient and the benefit
of SBRT in furthering the overall goals of treatment.
The size of the tumor should be considered in terms of
treatability by SBRT and safety. The anatomic location of the tumor will determine whether any special
adjustments or planning constraints need to be enacted. Prior surgery, systemic therapy, and radiotherapy
should be investigated thoroughly and the potential
additional or synergistic effects of these prior
treatments must be taken into consideration when
planning.

274

3.1.1 Patient Selection
The appropriateness of a given patient for SBRT may
be considered according to the following idealized
criteria:
(1) well-defined, localized disease that cannot be
treated effectively with conventionally fractionated radiotherapy, including recurrence or new
primary HNC within a previously irradiated field;
(2) lengthy disease-free interval following any previous course of head and neck radiotherapy
treatment, ideally more than 2 years;
(3) additional SBRT can delivered within a reasonable level of safety to nearby organs at risk,
taking into account all instances of prior radiation
therapy;
(4) absence of evidence of metastatic disease, unless
palliation is the primary goal;
(5) not a surgical candidate and/or refuses surgery;
(6) ability to tolerate the physical and medical rigors
of image-guided SBRT in a safe manner.
More precise technical considerations depend on
evaluation of the prior radiotherapy dose and the
anticipated effects of SBRT for an individual patient
in the future. In order to decide whether SBRT can be
delivered safely yet effectively, the following should
be considered:
(1) previous radiotherapy doses received by normal
tissues;
(2) tumor proximity to normal radiation-sensitive
structures, including the spinal cord, brainstem,
optic chiasm and nerves, cranial nerves, larynx,
carotid arteries, and mandible;
(3) functional sequelae anticipated from additional
treatment, including visual impairment, central or
cranial neuropathy, or speech and swallowing
impairment.
An SBRT boost may be considered in advance for
patients who have a risk of persistent local disease
after a course of conventionally fractionated radiotherapy for whom there will not be superior surgical
options, or who require a higher level of image
guidance and margin reduction to avoid toxicity to
nearby organs at risk. The boost dose could be planned at the outset, taking into account the designated
course of conventional radiotherapy. If such is the
case, a composite plan should be reviewed in advance
taking into account the biological effect of both the
conventional treatment course and the boost.

S. S. Yom et al.

3.2
3.2.1

Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma

Nasopharyngeal Boost After
Conventionally Fractionated
Radiotherapy
Before the era of IMRT, local control rates for
nasopharyngeal cancer were suboptimal. In an effort
to improve these local control rates, stereotactic
radiotherapy was explored by a number of groups.
The largest series have been reported by Stanford
University and universities in Hong Kong and mainland China (Table 1).
Investigators from Stanford University have issued
several reports describing their approach in detail.
Usually 66 Gy was delivered using conventionally
fractionated external beam radiation, and 2–3 weeks
afterward, before the first cycle of adjuvant chemotherapy, a stereotactic radiosurgery boost was given to
a dose of 8–12 Gy. The boost was given using either a
linear accelerator-based technique or CyberKnife.
In the report by Le et al., 45 patients received a median
dose of 12 Gy given as a single fraction, to a median
prescribed isodose line of 79%. At a follow-up time of
31 months, there were no local recurrences. Toxicities
included three cases of cranial nerve zoster, three cases
of transient V2 or V3 numbness, one case of cranial
nerve III paresis and asymptomatic temporal lobe
necrosis, and two cases of asymptomatic temporal lobe
necrosis alone. In addition, one diabetic patient had
radiation-related retinopathy (Le et al. 2003).
In a follow-up report from Stanford University, 33
patients were treated using a frame-based isocentric
approach with a conventional linear accelerator and
49 patients received a CyberKnife boost. At a median
follow-up of 40.7 months, there was only one local
failure in a patient who had presented with a stage T4
tumor. Four patients experienced transient facial
numbness, three patients developed radiation retinopathy (one of whom was diabetic), one patient had
carotid aneurysm, and ten patients, nine of whom had
intracranial tumor involvement, developed radiographically detected temporal lobe necrosis (Hara
et al. 2008). A recent summary of the Stanford
experience noted that in order to reduce the rate of
temporal lobe necrosis, the boost dose has been
reduced to 8 Gy (Le 2007).
Investigators from Pamela Youde Nethersole
Eastern Hospital in Hong Kong reported their results

Institution

University of
Florida

Stanford
University

University of
Turin

Stanford
University

Samsung Medical
Center

Peking Union
Medical College

Chang Gung
Memorial
Hospital

Queen Mary
Hospital

Stanford
University

Author

Buatti
(Buatti
et al. 1995)

Cmelak
(Cmelak
et al. 1997)

Orecchia
(Orecchia
et al. 1999)

Tate (Tate
et al. 1999)

Ahn (Ahn
et al. 2000)

Xiao (Xiao
et al. 2001)

Pai (Pai
et al. 2002)

Chua
(Chua
et al. 2003)

Le (Le
et al. 2003)

2003

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1999

1997

1995

Year

45

18

36

Boost

Recurrence,
persistence

Recurrence

Boost,
recurrence

Recurrence

12
50

Boost

Boost

19

23

Recurrence

Recurrence

8
13

Boost

Recurrence

Indication

11

3

Patients
(#)

Median 12 Gy
91F

Median 12.5 Gy
91F

100% at
3 years

72% at
2 years

56% at
3 years

54.1%
disease free
survival at
3 years

6–8 Gy 9 3–4
F, 4–15 Gy 9
1–7 F
8–20 Gy 9 1 F

92% at
2 years

89% at
4 years

100% at 21
mo

3 of 13
controlled

7 of 12
controlled

100% at 18
mo

1 of 3
controlled

Local control

Median 54 Gy
at 2.5–3 Gy/F

Median 2 Gy 9
8F

Median 12 Gy
91F

12 Gy 9 2 F,
6 Gy 9 4 F

Median 20 Gy
91F

Median 12 Gy
91F

NA

Dose 9
fraction(s)

Table 1 SBRT series including mostly or only nasopharyngeal cancer patients

75% at
3 years

86% at
2 years

49% at
5 years

59.6% at
3 years

60% at
2 years

75% at
4 years

NA

31% at
3 years

NA

100% at
2 years

NA

Overall
survival

(continued)

4 acute cranial neuropathies, 1 retinopathy, 3
temporal lobe necrosis

1 temporal lobe necrosis

3 bleeding, 4 mucosal necrosis, 1 bone necrosis

3 cellulitis, 6 otitis, 8 (16%) grade 5 hemorrhage

1 grade 5 myelopathy

1 grade 5 sepsis, 1 necrosis

All had ‘‘usual side effects of EBRT’’

23% headache, mucositis

1 (12.5%)facial nerve palsy

None

1 late neurologic deterioration

Acute/late toxicities

Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer
275

2009

National Cancer
Centre

Sun Yat- Sen
University

Stanford
University

Queen Mary
Hospital

Korea Institute of
Radiological and
Medical Sciences

Low (Low
et al. 2006)

Wu (Wu
et al. 2007)

Hara (Hara
et al. 2008)

Leung
(Leung
et al. 2009)

Seo (Seo
et al. 2009)

NA not available, F fraction

2008

Tokyo Medical
Univ.

Yokouchi
(Yokouchi
et al. 2004)

2009

2007

2005

2004

2004

Pamela
YoudeNethersole
Eastern Hospital

Yau (Yau
et al. 2004)

Year

Institution

Author

Table 1 (continued)

35

30

82

90

36

2

21

Patients
(#)

Recurrence

Recurrence

Boost

Recurrence,
persistence

Recurrence

Boost

Boost

Indication

Median 33 Gy
in 3–5 F

Median 3 Gy 9
18 F

7–15 Gy 9 1 F

Median 8 Gy 9
6 F, Median
6 Gy 9 3 F

18 Gy 9 1
F ? intracavity
6 Gy 9 2

16–20 Gy 9 1 F

6–8 Gy 9 2–3
F, 2.5 Gy 9 8 F

Dose 9
fraction(s)

79% at
5 years

Local failure
free survival
56.8% at
5 years

98% at 5
years

Local failurefree survival
75.1–89.4%
at 3 years

65% at
5 years

100% at
4 years

82% at
3 years

Local control

60% at
5 years

40% at 5
years

69% at
5 years

57.5diseasespecific
survival at
3 years

62% at
5 years

100% at
4 years

83% at 3
years

Overall
survival

5 (16%) had grade 4 or 5 late toxicity: 2 mucosal
necrosis, 3 hemorrhage

21.4% complication-free rate at 5 years: 1
mucosal necrosis, 3 epistaxis, 4 trismus, 7 cranial
neuropathy, 9 endocrine dysfunction, 6 temporal
lobe necrosis; among 11 disease-free survivors, 2
temporal lobe necrosis, 4 cranial neuropathy, and
2 had both

4 acute facial numbness, 3 retinopathy, 1 carotid
aneurysm, 10 temporal lobe necrosis

17 (19%) late complications: 6 mucosal necrosis,
3 brain stem necrosis, 2 grade 5 hemorrhage, 6
temporal lobe necrosis

44% late toxicity: 6 palatal fibrosis, 7 trismus, 7
cranial nerve palsy, 2 temporal lobe necrosis, 6
osteoradionecrosis

None

2 acute soft tissue necrosis, 27% grade 3 late
toxicities

Acute/late toxicities

276
S. S. Yom et al.

Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer

for patients who were offered either 20 Gy intracavitary brachytherapy boost or a fractionated stereotactic boost following conventional radiotherapy.
Patients were selected for this approach due to suspicion for persistent localized disease at several
weeks after completion of 66 Gy of external beam
radiation therapy. Stereotactic localization was
achieved with a modified relocatable Gill-ThomasCosman head frame adapted for more inferior nasopharyngeal coverage. Treatment was given with
6 MV photons from a linear accelerator using the
X-knife III or X-plan system. The PTV contained the
entire nasopharyngeal mucosa and any gross residual
tumor with 3–5 mm margins. The boost treatment
was delivered to a median dose of 15 Gy, at 6–8 Gy
per fraction for 2–3 weekly fractions versus 2.5 Gy
for 8 daily fractions. On the whole, the patients who
had SBRT achieved better local control than those
who had a brachytherapy boost. At 3 years of followup, the local failure-free control rates in the ‘‘no
boost,’’ brachytherapy, and SRT subgroups were 43,
71, and 82% (Yau et al. 2004).

3.2.2

Stereotactic Radiation Therapy
for Nasopharyngeal Cancer
Recurrence
Because the nasopharynx is a complex operative site
and few recurrent nasopharynx cancers lend themselves readily to a surgical salvage, stereotactic radiation therapy may also be considered for treatment of
recurrent nasopharyngeal cancers. Series from several
institutions have reported control rates with stereotactic radiosurgery comparable to those achieved by
brachytherapy or surgery (Tables 1, 2).
The largest stereotactic treatment series in the literature on recurrent nasopharyngeal cancer was
issued by investigators at Sun Yat-Sen University in
Guangzhou, China. Ninety patients were selected who
had either persistent or recurrent disease. A large
variety of fractionation schedules were used, but for
persistent disease, the median dose was 18 Gy in
three fractions, while for recurrent disease, the median was 48 Gy in six fractions. Three-year local
failure-free survival and disease-specific survival
rates were 89.4 and 80.7% for patients with persistent
disease, and 75.1 and 45.9% for those with recurrent
disease. Seventeen (19%) patients developed severe
late complications, including six with nasopharyngeal

277

mucosal necrosis, three with brain stem necrosis, six
with temporal lobe necrosis, and two with fatal
hemorrhage (Wu et al. 2007).
Previously treated nasopharyngeal cancer patients
have received high doses of radiation to the brainstem
and spinal cord. Thus short- and long-term neurologic
toxicities in this population remain a particular concern. For a previously irradiated patient, single-fraction stereotactic radiosurgery should be approached
with great caution due to the potential for serious
neurologic and ophthalmologic sequelae. Optimally
fractionated schedules for this complex population
remain an area of ongoing investigation.

3.3

Other Aggressive Malignant Disease
at the Skull Base

A rationale for SBRT to treat recurrent non-nasopharyngeal skull base malignancies is based on the poor
local control rates obtained for certain histologic types
such as adenoid cystic carcinoma or anatomic locations
which are challenging to treat. The largest experience
in reirradiation using SBRT in this fashion is from
investigators at the Georgetown University (Table 2).
This group has specifically focused on their experience
using CyberKnife in patients with a variety of malignant lesions at the skull base. In one report of 31 such
patients, most of the tumors were characterized as
highly malignant and aggressive in nature. All of the
tumors in the study completely encircled, partially
circumscribed, or directly contacted the brainstem,
optic chiasm, or cranial nerves with meaningful
remaining function. The most common histologic
types were squamous cell carcinoma or adenoid cystic
carcinoma. Patients with extracranial primary cancers,
such as melanoma or renal cell carcinoma that had
metastasized to the skull base, were included. A median dose of 25 Gy (range 12.6–35 Gy) was given over a
median of 5 (range 2–7) sessions. The median prescription isodose line at the tumor margins was 75%.
The local control rate was 74% at a median follow-up
of 37 weeks. Twenty-one (68%) of the patients died
during the follow-up period, and the median time to
death was 25 weeks. In the absence of tumor progression, there were no new cranial nerve, brain stem,
or vascular complications referable specifically to
CyberKnife (Coppa et al. 2009).

University of
Pittsburgh

Kangnam St.
Mary’s
Hospital

Chiba
University

Tsurumi
University

University of
Pittsburgh

Georgetown
University

Hacettepe
University

Kyoto
Prefectural
University of
Medicine

University of
Pittsburgh

Tsurumi
University

Voynov
(Voynov
et al. 2006)

Roh (Roh
et al. 2009)

Uno (Uno
et al. 2010)

Kawaguchi
(Kawaguchi
et al. 2010)

Rwigema
(Rwigema
et al. 2010)

Unger
(Unger et al.
2010)

Cengiz
(Cengiz
et al. 2011)

Kodani
(Kodani
et al. 2011)

Heron
(Heron et al.
2011)

Kawaguchi
(Kawaguchi
et al. 2011)

NA not available, F fraction

Institution

Author

2011

2011

2011

2011

2010

2010

2010

2010

2009

2006

Year

14 (all had S-1
adjuvant oral
chemotherapy)

63 SBRT vs 35
SBRT plus
concurrentcetuximab
(CC)

34

46

65

85

22

10

36

22

Patients (#)

SBRT as
primary
treatment

Recurrence

Reirradiation,
SBRT as
primary
treatment

Recurrence

Reirradiation

Recurrence

Recurrence

Boost

Recurrence

Recurrence

Indication

Table 2 SBRT series including any skull base head and neck cancer patients

35–42 Gy
in 3–5 F

20–44 Gy
in 5 F

Median
30 Gy in
5F

Median
30 Gy in
5F

30 Gy in
2–5 F

15–44 Gy
in 1–5 F

20–42 Gy
in 2–5 F

9–16 Gy
in 3–4 F

Median
dose
30 Gy in
3–5 F

NA

Dose 9
fraction(s)

71.4% at
3 years

SBRT 33.6%
vs CC 49.2%
at 2 years

32.4%
complete
response rate

10 (27%) had
‘‘complete
tumor
regression’’

30% at 2
years

30.7% at
2 years

45.5% at
2 years

7 of 10
controlled

52.2% at 2
years

26% at 2
years

Local control

78.6% at
3 years

SBRT
21.1%, vs
CC 53.3%
at 2 years

58.3% at
2 years

47% at
1 year

41% at 2
years

16.1% at
2 years

NA

NA

30.9% at 2
years

22% at
2 years

Overall
survival

100% grade 1–2 acute, 1 grade 3
osteoradionecrosis

Acute grade 1–2: SBRT 54.3% vs CC
57.1%, late grade 1–2:20% SBRT, vs
17.1%CC; 3 grade 3 late toxicities:
xerostomia and dysphagia

6 (17.6%) late grade 3–5 including 2 grade
5 hemorrhage

22.2%/13.3% late necrosis, dysphagia; 8
(17.8%) had carotid blowout, resulting in 7
deaths

19 (29%) acute grade 1–3 and 1 death, 6
(9%) late grade 4 toxicity: bleeding,
necrosis, fistula, dysphagia

55%/31% grade 1–3

100% grade 1–2/63.6% grade 1–2

6 grade 1–2: esophagitis, mucositis, otitis

67% grade 1–3/8.3%

9% grade2–3/0

Acute/late toxicities

278
S. S. Yom et al.

Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer

279

Table 3 SBRT prospective trials including skull base cancer patients
Author

Institution

Year

Patients
(#)

Indication

Dose 9
fraction(s)

Local
control
(%)

Overall
survival
(%)

Acute/late
toxicities
(%)

Truong, phase I SBRT
(Truong et al. 2009)

Boston
University

2009

4

Recurrence

6 Gy 9 5 F

NA

NA

NA

Heron, phase I SBRT
dose escalation (Heron
et al. 2009)

University
of
Pittsburgh

2009

25

Recurrence

25, 32, 36,
40, 44 Gy
in 5 F

NA

NA

16% grade
1–2 acute
toxicity

NA not available, F fraction

3.4

Clinical Trials in Reirradiation
at the Skull Base

A phase I protocol was initiated at Boston Medical
Center. Patients were eligible if they had a diagnosis
of a recurrent HNC or a second HNC within the
radiotherapy field. The four patients who were treated
had prior diagnoses of nasopharyngeal cancer, tonsillar cancer, laryngeal cancer, and base of tongue
cancer. The median time since the previous radiation
therapy course was 12.4 years (range, 1.9–30.1). At
early posttreatment evaluation, two patients achieved
a complete clinical response, and two patients
achieved a partial response (Truong et al. 2009).
The University of Pittsburgh has explored reirradiation for a variety of head and neck malignancies,
including some located at the skull base. These
numerous retrospective studies led to the development
of a prospective initiative examining the feasibility and
toxicity of CyberKnife-based reirradiation for recurrent HNC (Tables 2, 3). A recent phase I study was
designed to determine the maximally tolerated radiotherapy dose, and a retrospective case–control study
published from this institution found a survival
advantage deriving from the concomitant administration of cetuximab, with no significant increase in grade
3 or 4 toxicities (Heron et al. 2009, 2011).

4

Toxicities

4.1

Optic Structures

For single-fraction radiosurgery in a treatment-naïve
patient, the optic nerve and chiasm tolerance is
8–10 Gy, depending on the volume of nerve that is
treated. It is unknown what tolerance doses are safe

for retreatment using stereotactic approaches but
extreme caution should be used. Retinopathy has been
the most frequently reported toxicity related to skull
base SBRT.

4.2

Brain Stem and Spinal Cord
Tolerance

In a previously untreated patient, at the edge of the
brain stem, a marginal dose of 15 Gy is reasonable for
a single fraction but no substantial amount of brain
stem or spinal cord should receive over 9 Gy in a
single fraction. Careful attention should be paid to
areas of cranial nerve exits. Cranial neuropathies are
commonly reported in many skull base SBRT studies.
In a patient who has had previous maximal irradiation to the brain stem or spinal cord, careful
attention should be paid to the dose distribution to
minimize overlap with hotspots from the previous
treatment. The maximum point dose in a previously
treated patient should not exceed 8 Gy.

4.3

Brain Necrosis

Small areas of the brain may be allowed to receive up
to 24 Gy over five fractions. The location and functional topography should be considered. Temporal
lobe necrosis is a particular and major concern in the
reirradiation of nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

4.4

Cranial Neuropathy

For the facial nerve, glossopharyngeal, vagal, and
hypoglossal nerves, 12–13 Gy in a single fraction or

280

S. S. Yom et al.

Fig. 1 Isodose distribution of
SBRT is shown in axial (a),
and coronal (b) views

24 Gy over five fractions appears to be safe for previously untreated patients, with a relatively low
incidence of subsequent deficit. Likewise, deficits to
the oculomotor, trochlear, or abducent nerves seem to
be rare using similar constraints. In the reirradiation
setting, there are no specific constraints that can be
recommended. Cranial neuropathies are commonly
reported in skull base SBRT series.

4.5

Soft Tissue Necrosis

Radiation-naïve patients should usually not be
expected to develop soft tissue necrosis. However,
patients who undergo reirradiation are at substantial
risk and based on toxicity reports from skull base
SBRT series, some soft tissue necrosis can be
expected. In planning the patient’s treatments, attention should be paid to the radiation doses delivered to
the skin or to any mucosal surfaces which have
received previous irradiation.
While small volumes of soft tissues can usually
tolerate very high cumulative doses, as larger swathes
of tissue are irradiated, the likelihood of dosimetric
heterogeneity within the volume will increase the
dose to some areas of the tissue to unacceptable levels. The dose per fraction should be minimized and
only extremely small volumes should be treated
to [4 Gy per fraction.
The carotid arteries and other vascular structures
which have been maximally irradiated should not
receive more than 20 Gy over five fractions. Carotid
artery blowout and hemorrhage constitute some of the
most worrisome late toxicities seen after skull base
SBRT.

Similar constraints may be applied to the pharyngeal and laryngeal structures. Severe late dysphagis
and trismus have been reported.

4.6

Endocrinologic Deficits

Endocrinopathies are known to occur after both conventional and stereotactic radiation therapy to the
skull base. Patients who have received high doses of
conventionally fractionated radiotherapy at the skull
base are already at some risk, although precise dosetolerance data do not exist. Radiation dose should be
minimized to the pituitary stalk and pituitary gland if
possible.

5

Case Examples

Case 1: Nasopharyngeal Cancer
A 50-year-old Vietnamese man had decreased hearing
and tinnitus and was diagnosed in 1992 with rightsided nasopharyngeal carcinoma, lymphoepithelial
type, stage T2N2cM0 (Fig. 1). The patient underwent
cisplatin and 5-FU for two cycles, followed by radiation therapy given at another facility for a maximum
GTV dose of 7,385 cGy in 41 fractions on a 4 MeV
linear accelerator with opposed lateral fields covering
the nasopharynx and upper neck and a single anterior
field for treatment of the supraclavicular regions. He
developed a right ear infection and biopsy of the right
nasopharyngeal area in April 2003, showed new rightsided thickening in the pharyngeal mucosal space
with obliteration of the fat plane between the mucosal

Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer

281

Fig. 2 Isodose distribution of
SBRT is shown in axial (a),
and sagittal (b) views

Fig. 3 Isodose distribution of
SBRT is shown in axial (a),
and sagittal (b) views

space and the pterygoid muscle. CyberKnife-based
SBRT was given at UCSF at a prescription dose of
30 Gy in five fractions prescribed to the 80% isodose
line with a maximum dose of 3,750 cGy (Fig. 1). The
five-fraction course of CyberKnife was given over
seven calendar days. The area treated was 4.3 9 3.6 9
5.6 cm in size. The chiasm maximum point dose was
1060 cGy, and other treated areas included maximum
point doses to the brainstem at 1,462 cGy, right carotid at 2,985 cGy, spinal cord at 1,329 cGy, and right
temporal lobe at 2,743 cGy. Subsequent to the week
of cisplatin and CyberKnife, the patient had additional cisplatin and 5-FU chemotherapy. In 2007, the
patient developed new nasal drainage symptoms and
biopsies were equivocal. Finally, in July 2010, the
patient had a biopsy showing recurrence and in
October 2010, he underwent nasopharyngectomy with
resection of the tumor in the sphenoid, clivus, left
pterygoid and infratemporal fossa, and right pterygoid
plane. He remains under observation.

Case 2: Perineural Skin
A 70-year-old man with a history of multiple skin
cancers developed a 2 cm cutaneous squamous cell
carcinoma on the right forehead (Fig. 2). He underwent two operations with findings of perineural
invasion and clearance of gross disease but persistence of atypical cells in the orbital fat. He was
treated with intensity-modulated radiation therapy
using dose-painting technique along the path of the
right forehead and supraorbital nerve. The maximum
prescribed dose was 6,996 cGy over 33 fractions, but
the majority of the cranial nerve V1 pathway received
approximately 5,600–6,000 cGy due to concerns
about proximity to the optic canal and optic nerve.
A Cyberknife stereotactic radiation therapy boost of
10 Gy in five fractions, prescribed at the 62% isodose
line, was given along the path of the nerve with
localization to the base of skull to achieve imageguided avoidance of the optic nerve. The patient

282

S. S. Yom et al.

suffered no major sequelae and on a short-term follow-up MRI, had no evidence of disease.

has been seen, read, and agreed upon in its content by all
designated authors. This manuscript has not been submitted or
published elsewhere.

Case 3: Melanoma
A 70-year-old man with no significant medical
history developed a malignant melanoma of the left
nasal ala and cheek. PET/CT and MRI scans demonstrated extensive disease infiltrating through the
infraorbital foramen and along the left pterygopalatine fossa, with invasion into Meckel’s cave (Fig. 3).
Because of the known refractory nature of melanoma, it was decided to offer a combined approach.
He underwent a maximal surgical resection of the
soft tissue cheek mass and the infraorbital nerve
performed via sublabial incision and transnasal
endoscopic resection. He then was treated with
postoperative CyberKnife therapy to a dose of
3,500 cGy over five fractions, at the 76% isodose
line, delivered along the cranial nerve V2 pathway.
A separate target volume was included in the planning to deliver 3,000 cGy over five fractions to fully
resected areas of the postoperative bed. The patient
suffered from acute left conjunctivitis which
resolved by 2 weeks after finishing radiation. He was
started on adjuvant ipilimumab therapy and has no
signs of obvious clinical progression thus far.

6

Future Directions

SBRT at the skull base is a natural outgrowth of
advances in intracranial stereotactic radiosurgery and
its use continues to expand. At present, SBRT is being
explored across a wide range of scenarios, with the
majority of reported experiences still focused on
recurrent or secondary malignancies arising within a
previously irradiated field. However, as clinical
experiences with SBRT for head and neck cancers at
the skull base develop further, it is not unreasonable
to predict that the range of indications will increase
and also become better defined, and that the ability to
avoid toxicities will improve with a more sophisticated understanding of this rapidly emerging modality
of radiotherapy treatment.
Competing Interests There are no potential conflicts of
interest among the authors and this manuscript. There are no
financial or non-financial competing interests. This manuscript

References
Ahn YC, Lee KC, Kim DY, Huh SJ, Yeo IH, Lim DH,
Kim MK, Shin KH, Shin KH, Park S, Chang SH (2000)
Fractionated stereotactic radiation therapy for extracranial
head and neck tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
48(2):501–505
Bhurgri Y (2005) Cancer of the oral cavity—trends in Karachi
South (1995–2002). Asian Pac J Cancer Prevent APJCP
6(1):22–26
Buatti JM, Friedman WA, Bova FJ, Mendenhall WM (1995)
Treatment selection factors for stereotactic radiosurgery of
intracranial metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
32(4):1161–1166
Cengiz M, Ozyigit G, Yazici G, Dogan A, Yildiz F, Zorlu F,
Gurkaynak M, Gullu IH, Hosal S, Akyol F (2011) Salvage
reirradiaton with stereotactic body radiotherapy for locally
recurrent head-and-neck tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 81(1):104–109. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.04.027
Chin LS, Regine WF (2008) Principles and practice of
stereotactic radiosurgery. Springer, New York
Chua DT, Sham JS, Kwong PW, Hung KN, Leung LH (2003)
Linear accelerator-based stereotactic radiosurgery for limited, locally persistent, and recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma: efficacy and complications. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 56(1):177–183
Cmelak AJ, Cox RS, Adler JR, Fee WE Jr, Goffinet DR (1997)
Radiosurgery for skull base malignancies and nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 37(5):997–1003
Cooper JS, Porter K, Mallin K, Hoffman HT, Weber RS,
Ang KK, Gay EG, Langer CJ (2009) National cancer
database report on cancer of the head and neck: 10-year
update. Head Neck 31(6):748–758. doi:10.1002/hed.21022
Coppa ND, Raper DM, Zhang Y, Collins BT, Harter KW,
Gagnon GJ, Collins SP, Jean WC (2009) Treatment of
malignant tumors of the skull base with multi-session
radiosurgery. J Hematol Oncol 2:16. doi:10.1186/
1756-8722-2-16
Creak AL, Harrington K, Nutting C (2005) Treatment of
recurrent head and neck cancer: re-irradiation or chemotherapy? Clin Oncol 17(3):138–147
Feygelman V, Walker L, Chinnaiyan P, Forster K (2008)
Simulation of intrafraction motion and overall geometrical
accuracy of a frameless intracranial radiosurgery process.
J Appl Clin Med Phy/Am Coll Med Phys 9(4):2828
Hara W, Loo BW Jr, Goffinet DR, Chang SD, Adler JR, Pinto HA,
Fee WE, Kaplan MJ, Fischbein NJ, Le QT (2008) Excellent
local control with stereotactic radiotherapy boost after
external beam radiotherapy in patients with nasopharyngeal
carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 71(2):393–400. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.10.027
Heron DE, Ferris RL, Karamouzis M, Andrade RS, Deeb EL,
Burton S, Gooding WE, Branstetter BF, Mountz JM,

Skull Base Head and Neck Cancer
Johnson JT, Argiris A, Grandis JR, Lai SY (2009)
Stereotactic body radiotherapy for recurrent squamous cell
carcinoma of the head and neck: results of a phase I doseescalation trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
75(5):1493–1500. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.12.075
Heron DE, Rwigema JC, Gibson MK, Burton SA, Quinn AE,
Ferris RL (2011) Concurrent cetuximab with stereotactic
body radiotherapy for recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of
the head and neck: a single institution matched case-control
study. Am J Clin Oncol 34(2):165–172. doi:10.1097/COC.
0b013e3181dbb73e
Jemal A, Siegel R, Xu J, Ward E (2010) Cancer statistics, 2010.
CA: Cancer J Clin 60(5):277–300. doi:10.3322/caac.20073
Kawaguchi K, Sato K, Horie A, Iketani S, Yamada H,
Nakatani Y, Sato J, Hamada Y (2010) Stereotactic radiosurgery may contribute to overall survival for patients with
recurrent head and neck carcinoma. Radiat Oncol 5:51. doi:
10.1186/1748-717X-5-51
Kawaguchi K, Sato K, Yamada H, Horie A, Nomura T, Iketani S,
Kanai I, Suzuki S, Nakatani Y, Hamada Y (2011) Stereotactic
radiosurgery in combination with chemotherapy as primary
treatment for head and neck cancer. J oral Maxillofac Surg:
Off J Am Assoc Oral Maxillofac Surg. doi:
10.1016/j.joms.2011.02.063
Kodani N, Yamazaki H, Tsubokura T, Shiomi H, Kobayashi K,
Nishimura T, Aibe N, Ikeno H (2011) Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for head and neck tumor: disease control
and morbidity outcomes. J Radiat Res 52(1):24–31
Le QT (2007) Nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal carcinomas:
target delineation, therapy delivery and stereotactic boost
procedures with intensity-modulated/image-guided radiation therapy. Front Radiat Ther Oncol 40:208–231. doi:
10.1159/0000106037
Le QT, Tate D, Koong A, Gibbs IC, Chang SD, Adler JR,
Pinto HA, Terris DJ, Fee WE, Goffinet DR (2003) Improved
local control with stereotactic radiosurgical boost in patients
with nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 56(4):1046–1054
Lee WT, Escalamado RM (2005) Salvage surgery after
chemoradiation therapy. In: Squamous cell head and neck
cancer: recent clinical progress and prospects for the future.
Humana Press, Totowa, pp 69–78
Leung TW, Wong VY, Tung SY (2009) Stereotactic radiotherapy for locally recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 75(3):734–741. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2008.11.036
Linthout N, Verellen D, Tournel K, Storme G (2006) Six
dimensional analysis with daily stereoscopic x-ray imaging
of intrafraction patient motion in head and neck treatments
using five points fixation masks. Med Phys 33(2):504–513
Low JS, Chua ET, Gao F, Wee JT (2006) Stereotactic
radiosurgery plus intracavitary irradiation in the salvage of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Head Neck 28(4):321–329. doi:
10.1002/hed.20338
Maciunas RJ, Galloway RL Jr, Latimer JW (1994) The
application accuracy of stereotactic frames. Neurosurgery
35(4):682–694, discussion, 694–685
Marur S, Forastiere AA (2008) Head and neck cancer: changing
epidemiology, diagnosis, and treatment. Mayo Clin Proc
Mayo Clin 83(4):489–501

283
Mell LK, Mehrotra AK, Mundt AJ (2005) Intensity-modulated
radiation therapy use in the U.S., 2004. Cancer
104(6):1296–1303. doi:10.1002/cncr.21284
Orecchia R, Redda MG, Ragona R, Nassisi D, Jereczek-Fossa B,
Zurrida S, Bussi M, Succo G, Sannazzari G (1999) Results of
hypofractionated stereotactic re-irradiation on 13 locally
recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinomas. Radiother Oncol J Eur
Soc Ther Radiol Oncol 53(1):23–28
Pai PC, Chuang CC, Wei KC, Tsang NM, Tseng CK, Chang CN
(2002) Stereotactic radiosurgery for locally recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Head Neck 24(8):748–753. doi:
10.1002/hed.10116
Pow EH, Kwong DL, McMillan AS, Wong MC, Sham JS,
Leung LH, Leung WK (2006) Xerostomia and quality of
life after intensity-modulated radiotherapy vs. conventional
radiotherapy for early-stage nasopharyngeal carcinoma:
initial report on a randomized controlled clinical trial. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 66(4):981–991. doi:10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2006.06.013
Ries LAG (2007) Cancer survival among adults: U.S. SEER
program, 1988–2001, patient and tumor characteristics.
SEER survival monograph. U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, National Institutes of Health, National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda
Roh KW, Jang JS, Kim, Sun DI, Kim BS, Jung SL, Kang JH,
Yoo EJ, Yoon SC, Jang HS, Chung SM, Kim YS (2009)
Fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy as reirradiation for
locally recurrent head and neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 74(5):1348–1355. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.10.013
Rwigema JC, Heron DE, Ferris RL, Gibson M, Quinn A, Yang Y,
Ozhasoglu C, Burton S (2010) Fractionated stereotactic body
radiation therapy in the treatment of previously-irradiated
recurrent head and neck carcinoma: updated report of the
University of Pittsburgh experience. Am J Clin Oncol
33(3):286–293. doi:10.1097/COC.0b013e3181aacba5
Salama JK, Vokes EE, Chmura SJ, Milano MT, Kao J,
Stenson KM, Witt ME, Haraf DJ (2006) Long-term
outcome of concurrent chemotherapy and reirradiation for
recurrent and second primary head-and-neck squamous cell
carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 64(2):382–391.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2005.07.005
Seo Y, Yoo H, Yoo S, Cho C, Yang K, Kim MS, Choi C, Shin Y,
Lee D, Lee G (2009) Robotic system-based fractionated
stereotactic radiotherapy in locally recurrent nasopharyngeal
carcinoma. Radiother Oncol J Eur Soc Ther Radiol Oncol
93(3):570–574. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2009.10.018
Siddiqui F, Patel M, Khan M, McLean S, Dragovic J, Jin JY,
Movsas B, Ryu S (2009) Stereotactic body radiation therapy
for primary, recurrent, and metastatic tumors in the headand-neck region. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
74(4):1047–1053. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.09.022
Spencer SA, Harris J, Wheeler RH, Machtay M, Schultz C,
Spanos W, Rotman M, Meredith R, Ang KK (2008) Final
report of RTOG 9610, a multi-institutional trial of reirradiation and chemotherapy for unresectable recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Head Neck
30(3):281–288. doi:10.1002/hed.20697
Tate DJ, Adler JR Jr, Chang SD, Marquez S, Eulau SM, Fee WE,
Pinto H, Goffinet (1999) Stereotactic radiosurgical boost
following radiotherapy in primary nasopharyngeal

284
carcinoma: impact on local control. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 45(4):915–921
Truong MT, Grillone G, Tschoe C, Chin L, Kachnic LA, Jalisi S
(2009) Emerging applications of stereotactic radiotherapy in
head and neck cancer. Neurosurg Focus 27(6):E11. doi:
10.3171/2009.9.FOCUS09199
Unger KR, Lominska CE, Deeken JF, Davidson BJ, Newkirk KA,
Gagnon GJ, Hwang J, Slack RS, Noone AM, Harter KW
(2010) Fractionated stereotactic radiosurgery for reirradiation of head-and-neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
77(5):1411–1419. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.06.070
Uno T, Isobe K, Ueno N, Fukuda A, Sudo S, Shirotori H,
Kitahara I, Fukushima T, Ito H (2010) Fractionated
stereotactic radiotherapy as a boost treatment for tumors
in the head and neck region. J Radiat Res 51(4):449–454
Vokes EE, Weichselbaum RR, Lippman SM, Hong WK (1993)
Head and neck cancer. N Engl J Med 328(3):184–194. doi:
10.1056/NEJM199301213280306
Voynov G, Heron DE, Burton S, Grandis J, Quinn A, Ferris R,
Ozhasoglu C, Vogel W, Johnson J (2006) Frameless
stereotactic radiosurgery for recurrent head and neck
carcinoma. Technol Cancer Res Treat 5(5):529–535
Wee JT, Ha TC, Loong SL, Qian CN (2010) Is nasopharyngeal
cancer really a ‘‘Cantonese cancer’’? Chin J Cancer
29(5):517–526

S. S. Yom et al.
Wu SX, Chua DT, Deng ML, Zhao C, Li FY, Sham JS,
Wang HY, Bao Y, Gao YH, Zeng ZF (2007) Outcome of
fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy for 90 patients with
locally persistent and recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 69(3):761–769. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.03.037
Xiao J, Xu G, Miao Y (2001) Fractionated stereotactic
radiosurgery for 50 patients with recurrent or residual
nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
51(1):164–170
Yau TK, Sze WM, Lee WM, Yeung MW, Leung KC,
Hung WM, Chan WI (2004) Effectiveness of brachytherapy
and fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy boost for persistent
nasopharyngeal
carcinoma.
Head
Neck
26(12):1024–1030. doi:10.1002/hed.20093
Yokouchi J, Satani K, Kanesaka N, Abe K, Hasegawa T (2004)
Two cases of stereotactic radiosurgical boost as an initial
treatment for young nasopharyngeal cancer patients. Jpn J
Clin Oncol 34(11):692–695. doi:10.1093/jjco/hyh126
Yu C, Main W, Taylor D, Kuduvalli G, Apuzzo ML, Adler JR
Jr (2004) An anthropomorphic phantom study of the
accuracy of Cyberknife spinal radiosurgery. Neurosurgery
55(5):1138–1149

Lung Metastasis
Neha Amin, Tracey E. Schefter, Paul Okunieff, Brian Kavanagh,
and Michael T. Milano

Contents
1

Introduction.............................................................. 286

2
2.1
2.2
2.3

Technical Aspects ....................................................
Immobilization...........................................................
Treatment Planning ...................................................
Treatment Delivery....................................................

287
287
289
292

3
3.1
3.2
3.3

Clinical Applications ...............................................
Oligometastatic Disease ............................................
Patient Selection ........................................................
Experiences with Single-Fraction and Fractionated
SBRT..........................................................................

293
293
294

Toxicity......................................................................
Pulmonary Toxicity/Radiation Pneumonitis .............
Central Lung Lesions ................................................
Chest Wall .................................................................
Skin ............................................................................
Esophageal Toxicity ..................................................
Brachial Plexopathy...................................................

295
295
295
295
296
296
296

4
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6

Author’s Contribution NA, TS, PO, BK, and MM made
substantial contributions to the conception, design,
drafting, and writing of this book chapter. This book
chapter has been seen, read, and agreed upon in its content
by all designated authors.
N. Amin  T. E. Schefter  B. Kavanagh
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Colorado Denver,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA
P. Okunieff
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA
M. T. Milano (&)
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Rochester, Rochester,
NY 14462, USA
e-mail: michael_milano@urmc.rochester.edu

294

5

Case Example ........................................................... 296

6

Future Directions..................................................... 298

References.......................................................................... 298

Abstract

Lung metastases are a common source of morbidity
and mortality. Despite significant improvements in
outcome with systemic therapy in recent years, it is
infrequent that lung metastases or sites of macrometastatic disease are controlled permanently.
Furthermore, most lung metastases are not amenable
to what is considered the gold standard locally
ablative therapy, surgical resection and consequently
there has been a surge in interest in non-surgical
ablative therapies such as stereotactic body radiation
therapy (SBRT). Much of the support for SBRT for
lung metastases has been extrapolated from the nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) experience, where
SBRT has been shown to be safe and effective. In
contrast to lung cancer, most patients with lung
metastases have favorable lung function making
treatment of multiple synchronous or metachronous
metastases potentially safer and better tolerated. This
chapter will provide an overview of the technical and
clinical aspects of SBRT for lung metastases.
Readers should also refer to the NSCLC chapter as
there is considerable overlap with SBRT for lung
metastases.
Abbreviations

SBRT
NSCLC

Stereotactic body radiation therapy
Non-small cell lung cancer

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2011_502, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

285

286

N. Amin et al.

OAR
RTOG
JCOG
PTV
ACP
SI
ABC
DIBH
4D-CT
ITV
MIP
GTV
CTV
MC
PB
CC
BED
LQ
USC
CB
IGRT
OBI
MVCT
DDR
EPID
BSD
RTRT
RPM
MLD
MSKCC
MDACC
QUANTEC

1

Organ at risk
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group
Japan Clinical Oncology Group
Planning target volume
Abdominal compression plates
Superior-inferior
Active breathing control
Deep inspiration breath-hold
Four-dimensional computed
tomography
Internal target volume
Maximal intensity projection
Gross tumor volume
Clinical tumor volume
Monte Carlo
Pencil beam
Collapsed cone
Biological equivalent dose
Linear quadratic
Universal survival curve
Cone-beam
Image-guided radiation therapy
On-board imager
Megavoltage computed tomography
Digitally reconstructed radiograph
Electronic portal imaging device
Breathing synchronized delivery
Real-time tumor tracking
Real-time position management
Mean lung dose
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center
Quantitative analysis of normal tissue
effect in the clinic

Introduction

Tumor metastasis is defined as growth of a tumor in a
distant organ from the initial primary site. Hellman
et al. speculated that there was an intermediary
‘‘oligometastatic’’ state between localized and widely
metastatic that was potentially curable (Hellman and
Weichselbaum 1995). Oligometastases are defined as
minimal burden metastatic disease with limited
organs of involvement and overall number of metastases. There is no absolute burden of disease that

defines the oligometastatic state but 5–6 metastases
are generally accepted. Increased awareness combined with advancements in imaging in the last decade have resulted in improved detection of
oligometastases. Parenthetically, Hellman recognized
the potential role of radiation therapy to cure metastatic disease more than 20 years ago. It is only in the
last 5 years that radiation oncologists are fully
appreciating this prediction. For example, in a 2011
United States SBRT use survey, 63.9% of radiation
oncologists were using stereotactic body radiation
therapy (SBRT) and the majority of treatments were
for metastases (Pan et al. 2011). Patients with lung
oligometastases have been considered candidates for
locally ablative treatment because long-term survival
is possible (Norihisa et al. 2008). It is hypothesized
that the improved median survival time and progression-free survival after local curative-intent therapy
for oligometastatic disease (\5 sites) may translate to
better overall survival (Okunieff et al. 2006; Siva
et al. 2010).
The lung is a common site of metastatic disease
from solid tumors. Metastatic disease to the lung can
cause symptoms including cough, hemoptysis, chest
and back pain, and shortness of breath. There is also a
negative impact of lung metastases on survival, and
therefore some form of treatment addressing lung
metastases could reduce symptoms and may even
prolong survival (Milano et al. 2008). The treatment
for lung metastases is often determined by the type of
primary cancer, the patient’s performance status,
prognosis, and if the metastases are symptomatic.
Palliative chemotherapy has the potential to decrease
the amount of micrometastatic disease, reduce
symptoms, delay tumor growth, and possibly prolong
survival time. Rarely however does systemic therapy
eradicate sites of macrometastatic disease permanently. Locally ablative therapeutic options include
surgery, radiofrequency ablation, and SBRT.
Surgery is considered the standard local therapy
for surgical candidates with oligometastatic (1–3
pulmonary nodules) disease. Long-term results of
metastasectomy from the International Registry of
Lung Metastases, that has over 5000 cases, show an
overall survival (OS) rate of 70% at 2 years and 36%
at 5 years (Pastorino et al. 1997). This retrospective
study supports the notion that locally ablative therapy
for lung metastases is associated with favorable
overall outcome for appropriately selected patients.

Lung Metastasis

Radiofrequency ablation is a successful minimally
invasive approach to lung metastases (Chua et al.
2010). SBRT is more attractive as one avoids the risks
of an invasive procedure.
As technological advances have allowed for better
target delineation, more conformal and accurate
treatment delivery, SBRT has become more readily
available and safely delivered. SBRT is a form of
external beam radiation therapy that uses multiple
highly focused radiation beams to deliver large doses
of radiation in 1–5 treatments to extracranial tumors
(Timmerman et al. 2007). Practice guidelines have
been published pertaining to the conduct and technical requirements of SBRT (Potters et al. 2009). While
techniques for SBRT in the liver and lungs were
pioneered in the early 1990s (Lax et al. 1994), the
biggest surge in adopting SBRT techniques in the
U.S. began around 2008, with lung being the most
common disease site treated with SBRT (Pan et al.
2011). In medically inoperable early stage non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, SBRT has been
shown to provide high local control rates, moderate
toxicity, and OS rates of approximately 56% at
3 years (Timmerman et al. 2010). SBRT for lung
metastases has also been found to provide excellent
local control rates (Rusthoven et al. 2009a, b)
although the data for lung metastases are not as
mature.

2

Technical Aspects

The following components are important for SBRT
for lung metastases: immobilization, accurate delineation of clinical target volume and organs-at-risks
(OARs), sophisticated treatment planning, on-board
imaging, intra-fractional motion management from
normal respiration, and accurate treatment delivery.
These topics are covered in depth in other chapters so
only a brief account is covered here.
Advancements in technology have allowed for
sophisticated image-guidance and treatment delivery
that have been able to account for tumor motion with
respiration and can efficiently deliver high daily dose.
An accepted standard dose for medically inoperable
patients with peripheral lung cancers is 54 or 60 Gy in
three fractions (Timmerman et al. 2010), although
other fractionation schemes have been described as
well (summarized in Table 1). Table 1 includes

287

studies of both NSCLC and lung metastases, some of
the earlier reports include both. The optimal dosefractionation scheme is under investigation by the
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG), Japan
Clinical Oncology Group (JCOG), and other groups
or institutions and is further described in the chapter
on lung cancer. Doses to centrally located tumors and
in patients who are medically operable are also still
being investigated.

2.1

Immobilization

It is important to limit a patient’s voluntary and
involuntary movements during SBRT since there are
tight planning treatment volume (PTV) margins for
SBRT, and the variations in position could have a
larger impact on target coverage and normal tissue
dose exposure. There are many variations of devices to
help immobilize the patient in the treatment position
including wing boards, T-bar, alpha-cradles, or body
fix. It is more difficult to limit the involuntary lung
motion during treatment delivery. Abdominal compression and active breath-holding techniques have
been shown to help immobilize the tumor during
treatment. In addition, image guidance, tumor tracking,
and respiratory gating are techniques that have been
used to try to overcome the issue of lung motion during
treatment delivery and that are discussed in a later
section. Ideally all of these techniques could be used in
combination; however, this becomes logistically
challenging at times (Guckenberger et al. 2009a, b).

2.1.1 Abdominal Compression
Applying external pressure near the diaphragm
decreases the diaphragm’s motion and in turn reduces
breathing-induced motion of the tumor. The use of
abdominal compression plates (ACP) has been
described in many previous accounts of SBRT techniques in the lung (Blomgren et al. 1995). The
abdominal compression plate is often placed 3–4 cm
below the costal margin of the ribs and inferior to the
xiphoid process. The force of the ACP can usually be
measured and adjusted, making it more reproducible
day to day.
The movement of lung parenchymal lesions is
largely due to diaphragmatic contraction and relaxation during breathing. Tumors have the greatest displacement in the superior-inferior (SI) direction,

Single institution/
T1N0M0 NSCLC and 1-2 lung metastases

Single institution/T1-2N0M0 NSCLC, recurrent nodule,
or 1-3 lung metastases

Single institution/
1-2 lung metastases

Phase I/II multicenter/1-3 lung metastases

Phase II multicenter/T1-2N0M0 medically inoperable
NSCLC

Nagata et al.
(2002)

Yoon et al. (2006)

Norihisa et al.
(2008)

Rusthoven et al.
(2009a, b)

Timmerman et al.
(2010)
(RTOG 0236)

Abbreviations: fx fraction, PTV planning target volume

Description/Patient eligibility

Study

Table 1 Reports of lung SBRT

55

38/63

34

91/101

16 T1N0M0

# Patients/
Lesions

Peripheral only

Central and
peripheral

Central and
peripheral

Central and
peripheral

Central and
peripheral

Lesion location

54 Gy in 3 fx to
PTV

60 Gy in 3 fx to
PTV

60 Gy/5 fx (16pts)
48 Gy/4 fx (17pts)
*Prescribed to
isocenter

48 Gy/4 fx (27pts)
40 Gy/4 fx (44pts)
30 Gy/3fx (20 pts)
*Prescribed to
PTV

48 Gy in 4 fx to
isocenter

Fractionation

97.6% (3 yr)

100% (1 yr) and 96% (2 yr)

100% (2 yr)
82% (2 yr)

100% (10 mn)
77% (13 mn)
70% (8 mn)

T1N0M0: 100% (2 yr);
Metastatic: 67% (2 yr)

Local control at primary tumor
site

288
N. Amin et al.

Lung Metastasis

with tumors in the upper thorax moving less than
those in the lower thorax, and the maximum movement occurring near the diaphragm (Donnelly et al.
2007; Weiss et al. 2007). The mean SI movement in
the upper lung of 3.7 mm (range 0.5–6.5 mm) is
much less than the mean 10.4 mm (range 4.9–23 mm)
SI movement of the lower lung. It can be extrapolated
that tumors adjacent to the diaphragm would move
the most since SI displacements of the left and right
diaphragm have been reported to be 20 mm
(8.8–47.4 mm) and 16.9 mm (2.9–47.5 mm), respectively. Centrally located tumors near the carina and
hilum that are often thought not to have much
movement have actually been shown to have a mean
SI movement of 5–7 mm (range 2–19 mm) (Maxim
et al. 2007).
Heinzerling reported on 10 patients treated with
SBRT, of which 4 patients had lung lower lobe
tumors and 6 had liver tumors. The maximum tumor
movement from peak inspiratory and expiratory
phases was first measured without compression and
then compared with two different levels of abdominal compression. The mean SI movement without
abdominal compression of 12 mm was reduced to
7.5 and 6.1 mm with medium and high levels of
compression, respectively (Heinzerling et al. 2008).
This study did not observe the extent of tumor
movement that has been previously reported (Maxim
et al. 2007), however it did show the reduction in
movement with abdominal compression. Ideally, an
individualized examination of the effects of abdominal compression should be performed since the
amount of pressure placed at the diaphragm and the
proximity of the tumor to the diaphragm both
influence the overall tumor movement with normal
respiration. Furthermore, some patients do not tolerate abdominal compression well and the resulting
target displacement can actually be greater than the
uncompressed state. Customization for the individual
patient is essential.
Other variations of commercial immobilization
devices that apply abdominal compression include the
Elekta Bodyfix system and Stereotactic Body Frame
System (Elekta, Norcross, GA) or the Couch Integrated Immobilization System (Indiana University,
Department of Radiation Oncology, Indianapolis, IN).
Some potential disadvantages of abdominal compression include patient discomfort and difficulty
reproducing the setup.

289

2.1.2 Active Breathing Control
Active breathing control (ABC) or other breath-hold
techniques have been used during both definitive
conventional chemoradiation therapy as well as
SBRT for NSCLC to try to minimize the effects of
breathing motion by trying to achieve the same
breath-hold position during treatment delivery (Wong
et al. 1999; O’Dell et al. 2002; Berson et al. 2004;
McNair et al. 2009). These breath-hold techniques
have been shown to improve the therapeutic ratio by
allowing decreased radiation to the volume of normal
lung surrounding the tumor (Burnett et al. 2008;
Panakis et al. 2008).
These controlled breathing methods necessitate
patient coaching prior to its use. Most methods use a
spirometer to measure airflow. A breath-hold can
either be voluntary or assisted with an occlusion
valve. A reproducible baseline, usually at end exhalation, is established after monitoring several cycles
of normal breathing. This baseline is established so
that one can monitor whether reproducible breathholds are achieved.
Another variation of breath-hold includes deep
inspiration breath-hold (DIBH) (Hanley et al. 1999;
Rosenzweig et al. 2000; Duggan et al. 2007). Patients
who can hold their breath for at least 35 s with the
tumor moving less than 3 mm during the breath-hold
are most successful with this technique. Patients are
first coached to take a deep breath, then exhale, and
then during their next deep breath they are instructed
to hold their breath. Studies are ongoing on using noninvasive external marker tracking for DIBH monitoring (Stock et al. 2006). In any technique, the provider must consider patient comfort, cooperation, and
the ability to reproduce the breath-hold, especially in
patients with compromised respiratory status.

2.2

Treatment Planning

2.2.1 4D-CT
Four-dimensional computed tomography (4D-CT)
machines became commercially available in the mid2000s and they have been increasingly used to
incorporate tumor and lymph node movement into
treatment volumes for radiation planning for lung
cancer (Haasbeek et al. 2009). 4D-CT scans allow for
the quantitative measurement of tumor movement
during respiration, a feature that conventional 3D-CT

290

scans, with the exception of the older ultra-slow CT
scanners, did not. Therefore, 4D-CT scans can further
decrease the chance of geographic misses compared
to conventional 3D-CT scans since the internal target
volume (ITV) and PTV created using the tumor
motion information ensure daily target coverage
(Wang et al. 2009). However, sometimes the resulting
PTV can be enlarged which increases chances of
normal tissue complications, including radiation
pneumonitis, esophagitis, or chest wall pain or rib
fracture (Wolthaus et al. 2008). As mentioned above,
abdominal compression has been used to try to minimize the movement of the diaphragm to decrease the
movement of the tumor within the lung. With
appropriate immobilization and image guidance, 4D
CT-based treatment planning can further reduce the
amount of normal lung being irradiated while still
providing good target coverage.
4D-CT scans are even more relevant when planning lung SBRT since variations in the location of the
tumor when using fewer fractions at higher doses per
fraction can have more of an impact on either geographic miss of the tumor or increasing normal tissue
toxicity. One single 4D-CT study has been shown to
be representative of the breathing cycle over the
duration of 30 min, approximately the time required
for one treatment fraction in SBRT (Guckenberger
et al. 2007a, b). 4DCT requires the patient to be able
to comply with a regular, reproducible pattern of
breathing in order to best correlate the CT with a
given phase of the respiratory cycle.
When using the 4D-CT, one full respiratory cycle
is captured and the respiratory waveform is recorded.
The patient’s anatomy at each specific phase of the
respiratory cycle can be used to create multiple 3D
sets that can be displayed in a movie loop to visualize
motion of the tumor, lymph nodes, and normal organs
during a breathing (Keall 2004). Maximal intensity
projections (MIPs) are a reliable clinical tool that can
be used to contour the ITV. Target delineation is
discussed in detail below.

2.2.2 Target Delineation and Margins
Accurate delineation of the tumor and appropriate
margins for treatment planning is important for
treatment outcomes and for minimizing normal tissue
complications. For peripheral tumors, a CT scan of
the chest without IV contrast is sufficient to delineate
the target. However, central lesions abutting the

N. Amin et al.

mediastium, or tumors associated with atelectasis or
pleural effusions may be better visualized with IV
contrast and/or PET scans. The current recommendations from the ongoing RTOG 0813 trial, that is
treating early stage, centrally located, NSCLC in
medically inoperable patients, instruct physicians to
use IV contrast and contour the gross tumor volume
(GTV) on lung windows.
The clinical target volume (CTV) represents the
margin needed to cover microscopic disease and the
PTV accounts for setup error or patient movement
during treatment. When planning for SBRT to lung
metastases, generally the CTV is identical to the
GTV; and the presumed microscopic infiltration of
cancerous cells is arguably well covered by the surrounding penumbra dose. The PTV margins should
reflect the estimated tumor motion and setup error
depending on the devices used to limit tumor and
patient motion during treatment. For example, if
helical scanning with abdominal compression is used,
at least 0.5 cm axial and 1.0 cm craniocaudal margin
should be added to the GTV to create the PTV.
If a 4D-CT scan with compression is used, an ITV
can be contoured on the MIP (ICRU 62). ITV is
defined as the volume incorporating both the GTV/
CTV and the internal margin (IM), which are internal
variations due to physiological movement most significantly due to respiration. The MIP is a reliable
clinical tool that can be used to contour the ITV
because it represents the voxels with the maximum
intensity in all phases of the normal breathing cycle.
Since lung tumors often have the maximum intensity
when surrounded by normal lung, the MIP is successfully able to capture the motion of the tumor
throughout the breathing cycle. MIP is less useful
when trying to distinguish a target volume near a
normal structure of equal or greater density; for
example, a tumor that is adherent to the diaphragm.
MIP has been shown to be superior to averaged
intensity (AI) 4D-CT and to 3D helical images when
delineating the extent of tumor motion from breathing
during SBRT (Bradley et al. 2006). Contouring on the
MIP scan also decreases the time for planning since
the tumor volume on every individual breathing phase
bin does not have to be contoured. The ratio between
ITVs generated from all 10 breathing phases and the
ITV from MIP scans is about 1.04 (Underberg et al.
2005a, b). The ITV created from the MIP scan needs
to be copied to the free-breathing scan for treatment

Lung Metastasis

planning since MIP scans do not have the correct lung
density needed for planning. Since the ITV reflects
tumor motion, it can be expanded 5 mm uniformly for
setup uncertainty to create the PTV (Guckenberger
et al. 2009a, b); Wang et al. 2009).

2.2.3 Dosimetry
Commercial treatment planning systems that are used
for conventional RT planning are also used for SBRT
planning. Planning and treatment machines are discussed in detail in other chapters. While there is more
experience with photons, protons have also been used
and are undergoing extensive study (Georg et al.2008;
Macdonald et al. 2009; Hoppe et al. 2010; Kadoya
et al. 2010). SBRT treatment should be planned to
deliver the treatment in less than 30 min to reduce
intrafraction tumor deviation and patient motion
during the lengthy time on the treatment table (Purdie
et al. 2007). SBRT plans generally should use about
10–12 non-opposing highly collimated beams or
rotational arcs to produce a plan that has rapid dose
fall off in all directions from the target (Cardinale
et al. 1999; Papiez et al. 2003; Liu et al. 2004). The
beam angles may be limited by potential collisions
between the accelerator head and the patient or couch.
Either IMRT or 3D-conformal planning can be used
to achieve these plans. Accurate beam modeling,
including profiles and depth doses, is important for
the smaller field sizes used in SBRT. Multileaf collimators help to shape the beams and are preferred
over customized blocks.
SBRT planning to the lung requires tissue heterogeneity corrections for accurate dose computation
(Herman Tde et al. 2010). During SBRT to a lung
lesion, the photon beam must transverse multiple
tissues with varying densities, including fat, bone,
muscle, and lung. These different densities lead to
inhomogeneities due to altered absorption of the primary beam, scatter of the photons, and the secondary
electron fluence, which all contribute to the amount of
radiation delivered to the target volume and normal
tissues. In particular, the lower density of lung causes
higher dose within and beyond the lung (Khan 2010).
The calculated differences in tumor dose with and
without heterogeneity corrections range between 5
and 10% (Chang et al. 2007; Ding et al. 2007; Xiao
et al. 2009; Herman Tde et al. 2010; Mizuno
et al. 2011). Many past lung protocols did not require
lung corrections in the dose prescription, however the

291

current ongoing RTOG 0617 and 0813 lung protocols
do require inhomogeneity corrections. The use of
heterogeneity corrections and 6MV photons within
the lung will reduce the errors in dose calculations to
tumors within the lung.
Accurate dose calculations are necessary to prevent large discrepancies between planned and actual
delivered doses to individual patients. The extent of
the deviation of calculated dose during SBRT
depends on the algorithms used to calculate dose.
Monte Carlo (MC) simulations are considered to be
the gold standard in the presence of inhomogeneities
(Vanderstraeten et al. 2006; Schuring and Hurkmans
2008). Point kernel-based superposition/convolution
algorithms are a reasonable alternative and give more
accurate estimates of the dose to the tumor and surrounding lung tissue than pencil beam (PB) calculations. The collapsed cone (CC) algorithm, a type of
convolution/superposition-based algorithm, has an
accuracy of 2–5% and can be considered as a reasonably accurate representation of the actual dose
given to the patient (Vanderstraeten et al. 2006;
Fogliata et al. 2008). The PB algorithm may lead to
insufficient dose to the target volume, especially in
smaller targets and when 10-MV photons are used
(Haedinger et al. 2005; Krieger and Sauer 2005),
as the doses delivered are considerably lower than the
prescribed dose in lung.
Tumor motion must also be accounted during
calculations. Despite the decreased margins used on
the GTV when using 4D-CT, the dose distributions
within the GTV are still found to be acceptably
homogeneous (Guckenberger et al. 2007a, b). Both
the MC and CC algorithms have been validated when
incorporating tumor movement from respiratory
motions (Lax et al. 2006).

2.2.4 Prescription Doses
The optimal dose-fractionation scheme for peripheral
and central lung tumors in medially operable and
inoperable patients is under investigation by the
RTOG and other groups. Doses used for early stage
NSCLC can also be used for lung metastases. Table 1
highlights the more commonly used dose-fractionation schemes (B5 fractions) and their local control
rates. It is important to understand that early SBRT
studies were using various algorithms to calculate
dose and different methods to identify the target
volume. 4D-CT was not as readily available and it

292

N. Amin et al.

was not known at that time that pencil beam algorithm overestimated the actual delivered dose.
The correct estimation of biologic effective dose
(BED) is also not certain when using doses [8–10 Gy
per fraction. When using the linear quadratic (LQ)
model to estimate BED, local control of lung metastases is improved when a BED [100 Gy is delivered
to the target (Onishi et al. 2004; Guckenberger et al.
2009a, b). The universal survival curve (USC) is an
alternative method to analyze SBRT effects that
incorporates both the LQ model and the multitarget
method. (Park et al. 2008) The BED calculated in this
method is often less than that calculated with the LQ
equation alone. For example, a 60 Gy/3 fractions dose
schema provides a BED of 180 using the LQ equation
and a BED of 132 when USC method. Similarly, a
48 Gy/4 fractions dose schema provides a BED of
106 and 99 using the LQ and USC method, respectively. Local control was excellent with both of these
fractionations and the BED was very close to, or
greater than, 100 using either calculation.

2.3

Treatment Delivery

2.3.1 Image-Guided Radiation Therapy
Image guidance allows for more accurate positioning
of the real-time target volume prior to each SBRT
treatment, and it also allows for decreased setup margins. Using the bony anatomy as a surrogate of the soft
tissue lung target may result in errors of up to 7 mm
(range 2–30 mm) in both localization and verification
(Purdie et al. 2007; Guckenberger et al. 2009a, b).
When using the tumor itself, additional setup margins
could be reduced to \3–5 mm (Guckenberger et al.
2009a, b). While some patients will have close correlation (within 1 mm) between the ITV created from
4D-CT simulation and the composite target volume
seen in free-breathing on-board cone-beam (CB) CT
(Wang et al. 2007), others have tumors that move differently from the time of planning to treatment. In these
cases where the tumor position and movement during
the time of treatment does not correlate to that of the
planning 4D-CT scan, online corrections can be made
prior to treatment (Purdie et al. 2006). In general, 4D
image guidance prior to each SBRT treatment may
result in less chance of target miss, smaller setup
margins, and less normal tissue exposed to high radiation doses (Hong et al. 2007).

With internal fiducial placement, image-guided
radiation therapy (IGRT) can be accomplished with
orthogonal kilovoltage X-ray imaging, integrated into
the LINAC. Alternatively, an integrated CT scanner
can be used for daily image guidance, providing
complete volumetric and anatomic information relative to the treatment isocenter. This scan can then
reconstruct dose distributions based on the planning
CT scan and allow for the treating physician to
modify treatment parameters according to changes in
the patient’s anatomy before each treatment or at
specific time points during the course of radiotherapy
(Ma and Paskalev 2006).
The preferred method for image guidance is onboard CT in the treatment position prior to each treatment, like a cone-beam CT scan. Examples of machines
that use this form of image guidance include Tomotherapy (TomoTherapy Inc., Madison, WI), Elekta
Synergy, Siemens Somatom sliding-gantry CT scanner
(CT-on-Rails), and Varians On-Board Imager (OBI).
Tomotherapy combines a helical megavoltage CT
(MVCT) with a linear accelerator that allows for daily
low-dose (typically 1–2 cGy) pretreatment MVCT
images that can be reconstructed from the same MV Xray beam used for treatment. The treating physician can
verify that the target is positioned correctly with respect
to the planning CT dataset. The image quality from
MVCT is sufficient for delineating lung tumors
(Schubert et al. 2009; Zhou et al. 2010). Other less
favorable options include portal films compared with
the digitally reconstructed radiograph (DRR) or electronic portal imaging devices (EPID).

2.3.2 Respiratory Gated RT
Respiratory gating refers to the delivery of radiation
occurring only during certain time intervals, or ‘‘duty
cycles’’, that are synchronous with the patient’s
respiratory cycle. This duty cycle, or ‘‘gated-treatment’’, is often near end expiration. End expiration is
a passive action resulting from the relaxation of
inspiratory muscles that allows for a more reproducible anatomic position than end inspiration. Since the
beam delivery time is inversely proportional to the
duty cycle, the choice of gate width is usually
between 20 and 40% of the tidal volume (with 0%
defined as end expiration) (Mageras and Yorke 2004).
This allows for a balance between reduced tumor
motion and treatments that can be completed in a
reasonable amount of time.

Lung Metastasis

Respiratory gating during SBRT has been shown
to reduce the PTV needed to cover the target volume.
(Underberg et al. 2005a, b) studied the differences in
PTV when planning for SBRT in Stage I lung cancer
patients and observed that the PTV was reduced by
approximately 70% when gating was used to create a
PTV with a duty cycle of 20–40% of respiration.
Respiratory gating does allow for reduced volume of
PTV needed for tumor coverage, however treatments
can be prolonged and patients may not tolerate the
gating. The provider must be able to individualize
patient therapy and weigh the pros and cons of
respiratory gating in each case.
Respiratory gating systems incorporate some form
of image guidance and include both internal gating
and external gating systems based on the location of
the surrogates used to generate the gating signals
(Wurm et al. 2006). Internal gating utilizes implanted
fiducial markers in the tumor as the surrogates for
real-time tumor tracking (RTRT) or for tracking using
the breathing synchronized delivery (BSD). During
BSD, the patient is guided when to breath to synchronize with the tumor motion recorded during the
time of 4DCT simulation (Tewatia et al. 2006).
External gating uses markers on the surface of the
patient’s abdomen so that the abdominal surface
motion is the surrogate signal for the lung movement.
This is the system used by most gated therapy
treatments like Varian Medical Systems’, Inc (Palo
Alto, CA) real-time position management (RPM)
respiratory gating system. Since the relationship
between the tumor motion and the surrogate external
signal from abdominal movement may be inconsistent
both inter- and intrafractionally, it is important that
the appropriate quality assurance checks are performed to ensure a clinically acceptable accuracy
(Jiang et al. 2008).
During respiratory gating, it has been found that
breath-hold technique may be more difficult than a
free-breathing technique for some patients. Some
studies have found that respiratory gating is more
reproducible than free-breathing, there is less movement of the lungs, and it is more efficient during CT
simulation and treatment delivery (Berson et al.
2004). However, others have concluded that for the
majority of patients with tumor motion within 15 mm,
the use of free-breathing could reduce the total
treatment time and complexity associated with gated
radiotherapy (Guckenberger et al. 2009a, b).

293

3

Clinical Applications

Lung metastases are common. Surgical resection has
been the standard for patients with up to 3 metastases,
but SBRT has emerged as an option for medically
inoperable patients or when lesions are located in a
difficult area for surgery. SBRT offers a non-invasive,
effective and well-tolerated option. Currently there is
no consensus about the optimal dose and fractionation. Reports in the literature have used a wide
variety of dose-fractionation schemes that offer
good local control, and it was concluded that a
BED [100 Gy at the isocenter improved local control
over a dose fractionation that provided a
BED \100 Gy (Onishi et al. 2004; Guckenberger
et al. 2009a, b). SBRT for lung metastases has mostly
been reported retrospectively. Future prospective
studies may help determine the impact of eradication
of lung metastases on overall survival when it is
studied in a homogeneous population, controlling for
systemic therapy.

3.1

Oligometastatic Disease

Patients with oligometastatic disease may have
improved prognosis if the macroscopic deposits of
distant disease can be controlled. A pilot study from
Rochester University evaluated 121 patients, mostly
with primary breast (32%) and colorectal cancer
(26%), who were treated with curative-intent to fewer
than five sites of metastatic disease. The dose fractionation of 50 Gy in 10 fractions (5 Gy per fraction)
daily was used in over 60% of the cases. The lung
(41%) and liver (45%) were the most common sites of
oligometastatic disease. On multivariate analysis less
tumor burden and breast primaries were independently predictive of better overall outcome Milano
et al. 2008a, b).
It is still unknown whether SBRT to lung metastases in the setting of oligometastatic disease offers
similar OS rates to surgery. Extrapolating from the
experience in NSCLC, it seems likely. For early stage
NSCLC, SBRT has similar OS rates as surgery with
5-year OS rates of 60–75% for Stage IA and 40–60%
for Stage IB (Onishi et al. 2010). In a large surgical
series of patients who had metastectomy of lung
metastases, the median survival was 35 months, and 5

294

N. Amin et al.

and 15-year OS rates were 36 and 22%, respectively
(Pastorino et al. 1997). Selection factors could clearly
explain any differences in outcome observed. De novo
oligometastatic disease has a much better prognosis
compared to systemic therapy-induced oligometastases. The University of Rochester study mentioned
above used SBRT to treat oligometastatic disease
involving any organ or tissue, not just lung, but represents the largest experience published to date on
curative-intent radiation treatments for oligometastatic disease (Milano et al. 2008a, b). They reported
4-year OS rates of 28%. This suggests that SBRT to
lung metastases may provide the same level of OS
compared to metastectomy, however this needs to be
studied further.
As many patients receive systemic therapy prior to
and/or after SBRT for lung metastases and most
studies to date included a heterogeneous assortment
of primary sites, the true benefit of SBRT for lung
oligometastases in terms of overall outcome is
impossible to discern. Future studies will clarify this
issue.

3.2

Patient Selection

Patients with either single or multiple lung metastases
may be appropriate for SBRT, whether medically
operable or inoperable. Pateints with significant burden of extra-pulmonary metastatic disease are not good
candidates for SBRT, unless enrolled on a clinical trial.
Some have speculated that locally ablative therapies
might have a role in patients with disease greater than
oligometastases, even if one cannot safely treat all sites
of macroscopic disease (Norton and Simon 1986). This
concept is best described as attempts to keep disease
burden below the lethal threshold for the patient
(Rusthoven et al. 2009a, b). Regardless of the clinical
scenerio, dose parameters like lung V20 or mean lung
dose may help identify patients whose lung metastases
are too extensive to safely receive SBRT. In general,
chemotherapy concurrent with radiation increases
toxicity risks, though the impact of chemotherapy
with SBRT is unknown, given the presumed different
radiobiologic mechanism of SBRT (‘‘Radiobiology
of Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy’’). Outside of
a clinical trial, patients should not receive concurrent
chemotherapy with SBRT.

3.3

Experiences with Single-Fraction
and Fractionated SBRT

Lung metastases have been treated with single-fraction
SBRT, as has been reported from 6 institutions; these 6
studies included a total of 148 patients with 175 targets
(Nakagawa et al. 2000; Hara et al. 2002; Wulf et al.
2005; Fritz et al. 2006; Le et al. 2006; Hof et al. 2007).
The prescriptions ranged from 24 to 30 Gy to the isocenter and from 15 to 26 Gy to a specified isodose line
resulting in a BED to the periphery and isocenter of the
tumor that ranged from 60 to 100 Gy and 100 to 138 Gy,
respectively. Median follow-up ranged from 10 to
22 months, and the mean weighted crude 2-year local
control and overall survival rates were 78.6% (range
48–91%) and 50.3% (range 33–73%), respectively.
Development of grade 3 radiation pneumonitis was only
reported in 5 patients and there were no grade 4 or 5
toxicities among the institutions. Central lesions were
treated to a lower dose in a few studies (Siva et al. 2010).
Compared to the literature on single-fraction SBRT,
there is vastly more published experience with 3–5
fraction regimens. There are several institutional
reports of fractionated SBRT for up to 3 synchronous
lung metastases; among 13 of these studies, 334
patients with 564 targets were treated (Lax et al. 1998;
Uematsu et al. 1998; Nagata et al. 2002; Onimaru et al.
2003; Wulf et al. 2004; Song et al. 2005; Yoon et al.
2006; Aoki et al. 2007; Brown et al. 2008; Milano et al.
2008a, b; Norihisa et al. 2008; Salazar et al. 2008;
Rusthoven et al. 2009a, b). The most robust prospectively collected data are from a multi-institutional
phase I/II trial that analyzed 38 patients with 63 lesions
treated with 60 Gy in 3 fractions (Rusthoven et al.
2009a, b). The median follow-up was 15 months with
actuarial local control rates of 100 and 96% at 1 and
2 years, respectively. When combining the data from
the 13 institutions, lung metastases were prescribed in
various dose fractionations ranging from 33 Gy in 6
fractions up to 60 Gy/3 fractions. The corresponding
BED to the isocenter ranged from 86.4 Gy (54 Gy/9
fractions) to a max BED of 188 Gy. The median
follow-up was 18.2 months (range 8.2–44 months).
Toxicity was also very low with fractionated SBRT
with a weighted rate of only 2.6% Grade 3 or higher
toxicity. The weighted 2-year local control and overall
survival rates were 77.9% (range 67–96%) and 53.7%
(range 33–89%), respectively (Siva et al. 2010). While

Lung Metastasis

high local control rates have been achieved, it is unclear
if this significantly improves overall survival. There
are no phase III randomized trials of SBRT lung
oligometastases.

4

Toxicity

Toxicities resulting from lung SBRT depend on the dose
and volume of normal tissue irradiated. SBRT volumes
are much smaller than conventional lung fields for definitive treatment. However, the multiple non-coplanar fields
or arcs used to achieve higher conformal dose to the PTV
in turn deliver low radiation dose to large portions of the
lung. If normal structures are near the PTV or even within
the lower dose distribution, they are at risk for toxicity,
especially considering the very steep dose gradients
characteristic of SBRT. Generally, the normal tissue dose
constraints used for SBRT for lung metastases are the
same as those used for early stage NSCLC. As such,
toxicity is further discussed in (‘‘Primary LungCancer’’,
‘‘Reported Toxicities Associated With Stereotactic
Body Radiation Therapy’’ and ‘‘Normal Tissue
Constraints’’). The acceptable dose limits to the spinal
cord have been well characterized from the studies of
SBRT for spinal metastases (described in ‘‘Spinal
Metastasis’’ and ‘‘Normal Tissue Constraints’’)

4.1

Pulmonary Toxicity/Radiation
Pneumonitis

The data regarding pulmonary toxicity after SBRT for
lung metastases are largerly derived from SBRT for
primary Stage I NSCLC. SBRT for oligometastases
differs in a couple of aspects: (1) while most patients
with Stage I NSCLC are current or former smokers,
many of those with lung metastases from malignancies outside of the upper aerodigestive tract are not;
(2) those with lung metastases may have more than
one lesion treated with SBRT, as opposed to only one
lesion treated in patients with Stage I NSCLC. While
SBRT is generally well tolerated and causes minimal
changes to pulmonary function, SBRT can still cause
radiation pneumonitis. RP can be a dose- and treatment-limiting toxicity with large treatment volumes.
Despite dosimetric studies trying to correlate mean
lung dose (MLD) and dose-volume histograms to
estimate risk of RP, there is not yet a consensus

295

regarding pulmonary dose constraints (Guckenberger
et al. 2010). There is also not a consensus on the
correct modeling tool to use when trying to predict
normal tissue complication probability (Song et al.
2005; Wennberg et al. 2011). Severe pneumonitis (Grade 4–5) has not been common so far in the
SBRT experience worldwide, however radiological
changes are common (Takeda et al. 2010).

4.2

Central Lung Lesions

Central lung lesions are defined as located within the
‘‘zone of the proximal bronchial tree’’, which is a 2 cm
radius around the main tracheo-bronchial tree (see
‘‘Primary Lung Cancer’’). In a single-institution phase
II lung SBRT trial that included patients with centrally
located primary NSCLC treated with either 60 Gy in 3
fractions for T1 lesions and 66 Gy in 3 fractions for
T2 lesions, patients with hilar or pericentral tumors
experienced a 11-fold increased risk in grade 3–5
adverse events when compared to more peripheral
tumors (p = 0.004). The 2-year freedom from severe
adverse events was also significantly lower in central
tumors compared to peripheral tumors: 54 versus 83%
(Timmerman et al. 2006). The ongoing RTOG 0813
will help establish safe SBRT dose fractionation for
centrally located tumors, which would apply to primary
NSCLC as well as thoracic oligometastases. The University of Colorado phase I/II trial for lung metastases
did include central lesions and there was no observed
increased toxicity associated with metastases located in
the central zone (Schefter et al. 2006; Rusthoven et al.
2009a, b). However, the study was small and not
powered to detect a difference in toxicity based on
location. It is possible that centrally located metastases
in a patient with good baseline lung function could be
treated safely but that would have to be proven in an
appropriately sized prospective trial.

4.3

Chest Wall

Peripheral tumors that are in close proximity to the
chest wall are at increased risk of causing long-term
chest wall toxicity including pain and/or rib fractures.
Chest wall pain can negatively affect quality of life
and should be used as an organ at risk during SBRT
planning. The proposed mechanism for pain includes

296

N. Amin et al.

muscle, nerve, and/or bone injury. It is possible that
fibrosis of the soft tissue adjacent to the intercostal
nerves can compress these nerves causing long-term
pain. Bones are also subject to spontaneous fracture
when a large volume is included in the treatment field
during SBRT (Dunlap et al. 2010). Restricting the
volume of the chest that receives C30 Gy (V30)
to B30 cc and the V60 to B3 cc results in about a
10–15% risk of late chest wall toxicity (Dunlap et al.
2010; Stephans et al. 2011). Another study reported
that Grade C 2 chest wall pain was correlated to
patients who received 30 Gy to greater than 70 cc of
their chest wall (Mutter et al. 2011). If these constraints cannot be met, it is not unreasonable to
increase fractionation, prescribe to a lower total dose,
or alter beam arrangements to try to meet chest wall
constraints. However, tumor control is an important
objective and chest wall morbidity has been observed
to be transient for the majority of cases. Informing the
patient and referring physicians about the risk and
management of toxicity with aggressive supportive
care minimizes the impact on quality of life.

4.4

Skin

The skin is also at risk for radiation dermatitis and must
be taken into consideration when planning SBRT.
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC)
evaluated 50 patients treated with SBRT for early stage
NSCLC for acute skin toxicities. Grade 1, 2, 3, and 4 acute
skin toxicity after 3-month follow-up was observed in 19
(38%), 4 (8%), 2 (4%), and 1 patient(s), respectively. The
factors associated with C Grade 2 acute skin toxicity
included \ 5 cm distance from the tumor to chest wall
skin (p = 0.006), using only 3 beams instead of more
beams to spread out the dose to normal tissue
(p = 0.0007), and the maximum skin dose of C 50% of
the prescribed dose (p = 0.02) (Hoppe et al. 2008).
Immobilization devices may also cause a bolus effect on
the skin. While most patients only experienced Grade 1
skin toxicity, being mindful of skin tolerance and
expected risks is necessary to fully inform the patient.

4.5

Esophageal Toxicity

The esophagus may be at risk if treating centralized
lesions with SBRT. While SBRT reduces the volume

of esophagus in the treatment field compared to
conventional fields and treatments for lung cancer, the
high dose per fraction could cause significant esophageal toxicity. Xia et al. report that out of the 43 lung
SBRT patients in their analysis, 12% experienced
Grade 1 and 4% experienced Grade 2 esophagitis
(Xia et al. 2006). All patients who experienced esophagitis had central tumors.

4.6

Brachial Plexopathy

SBRT treatments to apical lung lesions, defined as
tumors with epicenters superior to the aortic arch, could
increase chances of brachial plexopathy. Patients with
brachial plexopathy can experience ipsilateral shoulder
or arm neuropathic pain, motor weakness, or sensory
alteration. Indiana University reported on 7 cases of
grade 2–4 brachial plexopathy out of 37 apical lesions
treated with a median dose of 57 Gy. This study found
that the 2-year risk of brachial plexopathy was 46 versus
8% when the maximum brachial plexus dose was C26
versus \26 Gy, respectively (p = 0.04) (Forquer et al.
2009). The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center (MDACC) also reported on 27 patients with
central or superior tumors and described that one
patient developed brachial plexus neuropathy leading
to partial arm paralysis after 20% of the brachial plexus received C40 Gy during a 4-fraction SBRT regimen
(Chang et al. 2008). When planning SBRT in 3 or 4
fractions for apical tumors, the brachial plexus maximum dose should be kept \ 26 Gy and V40 \ 20% to
minimize chances of brachial plexopathy.

5

Case Example

Case 1
The patient is a 66-year-old lady with metastatic
adenoid cystic carcinoma arising from the right
maxillary sinus, presenting with a primary maxillary
antrum lesion as well as biopsy-proven lung metastases. She received adriomycin, cytoxin, and cisplatin
chemotherapy, followed by a transoral resection of
her primary lesion and adjuvant radiation. On serial
CT imaging her lung metastases had increased in size
but no new metastases developed. A total of 10 lesions
were apparent; 5 of the larger lesions were treated with

Lung Metastasis

297

Fig. 1 Lung metastases
shown with isodose lines
overlaid onto the planning CT
scan and reconstructed
coronal and sagittal images
(upper panel). Diagnostic CT
scans showing lung lesions
prior to SBRT (lower left
pane) and SBRT (lower right
pane). Treated lesions are
marked with orange arrows
and untreated lesions are
marked with green arrows

SBRT (Fig. 1), each with a dose of 8 Gy 9 5 (80%
isodose line) prescribed to the PTV. Dynamic conformal beams were used. The ExacTracÒ positioning
system was used to verify patient setup on a daily basis
and monitor her position in real time. To minimize
respiratory motion, an end expiratory breath-hold
technique was used. The total lung V20 was 25%. She

developed a self-limiting cough in the months after
radiation, but no symptoms of dyspnea or low grade
fever. Six months after radiation, all 5 treated lesions
(3 indicated with orange arrows) have regressed significantly, while the untreated lesions (3 indicated with
green arrows) have increased slightly in size. The plan
is to treat the remaining 3 metastases if no new

298

N. Amin et al.

pulmonary or extrapulmonary metastases develop in
the ensuing 3–4 months. This case was selected for the
unique challenges of treating multiple metastatic
lesions together and sequentially as distinguishable
from the typical NSCLC case.
A second case example, describing SBRT for a
lung metastasis, is provided in ‘‘Histology-Specific
Metastasis’’ (second case).

6

Future Directions

SBRT is an exciting aspect of radiation oncology that
can offer therapy in patients who previously would
have had no other treatment options. Within this past
decade, there has been a growing experience with
SBRT for lung and other metastases. We need continued effort and investigation of the long-term toxicities of hypofractionation and SBRT. As more
patients are treated using hypofractionated radiotherapy, more meaningful normal tissue constraints will
emerge. While quantitative analysis of normal tissue
effect in the clinic (QUANTEC) is a useful resource,
it is largely based on lower dose per fraction characteristic of conventional fractionation.
As future trials are done in more homogeneous
patient populations with metastatic disease, large
enough to control for the type and magnitude of systemic
therapy, we need to explore the effect of local ablation of
macroscopic metastatic deposits on overall outcome
such as progression-free survival, overall survival, and
quality of life. Extrapolating from the surgical literature
where favorable 5-year overall survival rates are
achieved following resection of lung and/or liver
metastases, it makes sense that a locally ablative therapy
like SBRT which achieves comparable local control
will have similar effect on overall outcome measures.
The reason why contemporary SBRT series have less
favorable overall survival is likely due solely to selection. The vast majority of reports of patients with metastatic disease treated with SBRT are less favorable.
They have usually undergone at least one course of
systemic therapy. In contrast, surgical series primarily
include patients with very limited burden de novo oligometastases (Christodouleas and Marks 2009). The
latter patients have a much better baseline prognosis.
There are currently many cooperative group
(RTOG, JCOG, and other groups) lung SBRT trials that
are either open or results pending. Presently, these trials

are mostly for early stage NSCLC cancer, however
future SBRT trials for oligometastatic disease are in the
works. RTOG 0813 is a phase I/II trial that is currently
accruing patients and aims to better define safe and
effective doses for patients with central lung cancer
lesions. We are awaiting the findings from RTOG 0618
that was a phase I/II trial that treated 33 medically
operable patients NSCLC patients. JCOG 0403 is a
phase II study for T1N0M0 NSCLC patient, 65 operable and 100 inoperable, treated with 48 Gy/4 fractions. The primary endpoint was overall survival at
3 years and the results for the operable patients should
be coming out shortly since accrual was finished in
2008. RTOG 0915 is a phase II trial that accrued 88
medically inoperable patients, with peripheral T1-2N0
tumors, who were randomized to 34 Gy in 1 fraction
versus 48 Gy in 4 fractions. This trial closed in March
2011 and the primary objective was to evaluate grade 3
or higher toxicities at 1 year and secondary objectives
of local control and overall survival. The better arm
from this study will likely be compared to the standard
54 Gy/3 fractions regimen established by RTOG 0236.
The RTOG and SWOG are developing protocols of
SBRT in conjunction with systemic therapy for oligometastatic breast cancer. The University of Colorado
currently has a phase II study of early versus late
radical-dose consolidative SBRT to oligometastatic
disease persisting during first-line pemetrexed-based
treatment for advanced NSCLC (Kavanagh et al. 2010).
In conclusion, SBRT for lung oligometastic disease is safe and effective with expected local control
rates of approximately 90%. Further studies are
underway to determine the effect on overall outcome
and the patients most likely to benefit.
Conflict of Interest There are no potential conflicts of interest
among the authors and this manuscript. There are no financial or
non-financial competing interests. This manuscript has been seen,
read, and agreed upon in its content by all designated authors. This
manuscript has not been submitted or published elsewhere.

References
Aoki M, Abe Y, Kondo H, Hatayama Y, Kawaguchi H,
Fujimori A, Suzaki K, Seino M, Morita T, Souma M,
Tsushima T, Takanashi S (2007) Clinical outcome of
stereotactic body radiotherapy of 54 Gy in nine fractions for
patients with localized lung tumor using a custom-made
immobilization system. Radiat Med 25(6):289–294. doi:
10.1007/s11604-007-0141-7

Lung Metastasis
Berson AM, Emery R, Rodriguez L, Richards GM, Ng T,
Sanghavi S, Barsa J (2004) Clinical experience using
respiratory gated radiation therapy: comparison of freebreathing and breath-hold techniques. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 60(2):419–426. doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2004.03.037
S0360301604005188[pii]
Blomgren H, Lax I, Naslund I, Svanstrom R (1995) Stereotactic
high dose fraction radiation therapy of extracranial tumors
using an accelerator. Clinical experience of the first thirtyone patients. Acta Oncol 34(6):861–870
Bradley JD, Nofal AN, El Naqa IM, Lu W, Liu J, Hubenschmidt J, Low DA, Drzymala RE, Khullar D (2006)
Comparison of helical, maximum intensity projection
(MIP), and averaged intensity (AI) 4D CT imaging for
stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) planning in lung
cancer.
Radiother
Oncol
81(3):264–268.
doi:
S0167-8140(06)00534-2[pii]10.1016/j.radonc.2006.10.009
Brown WT, Wu X, Fowler JF, Garcia S, Fayad F, Amendola
BE, de la Zerda A, Schwade JG (2008) Lung metastases
treated by CyberKnife image-guided robotic stereotactic
radiosurgery at 41 months. South Med J 101(4):376–382.
doi: 10.1097/SMJ.0b013e318167ad8d
Burnett SS, Sixel KE, Cheung PC, Hoisak JD (2008) A study of
tumor motion management in the conformal radiotherapy of
lung cancer. Radiother Oncol 86(1):77–85. doi:
S0167-8140(07)00565-8[pii]10.1016/j.radonc.2007.11.017
Cardinale RM, Wu Q, Benedict SH, Kavanagh BD, Bump E,
Mohan R (1999) Determining the optimal block margin on
the planning target volume for extracranial stereotactic
radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 45(2):515–520.
doi: S0360-3016(99)00203-5[pii]
Chang D, Liu C, Dempsey JF, Palta JR, Kopea J, Louis D,
Morris C, Chopra R, Olivier KR (2007) Predicting changes
in dose distribution to tumor and normal tissue when
correcting for heterogeneity in radiotherapy for lung cancer.
Am J Clin Oncol 30(1):57–62. doi: 10.1097/01.coc.000025
1222.36417.3b00000421-200702000-00011[pii]
Chang JY, Balter PA, Dong L, Yang Q, Liao Z, Jeter M, Bucci
MK, McAleer MF, Mehran RJ, Roth JA, Komaki R (2008)
Stereotactic body radiation therapy in centrally and superiorly
located stage I or isolated recurrent non-small-cell lung
cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 72(4):967–971. doi:
S0360-3016(08)03265-3[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.08.001
Christodouleas JP, Marks LB (2009) Analysis of patients with
oligometastases undergoing two or more curative-intent
stereotactic radiotherapy courses: in regard to Milano et al.
(Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2009;73:832–837). Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 74(5):1628. doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2009.03.064
Chua TC, Sarkar A, Saxena A, Glenn D, Zhao J, Morris DL
(2010) Long-term outcome of image-guided percutaneous
radiofrequency ablation of lung metastases: an open-labeled
prospective trial of 148 patients. Ann Oncol 21(10):
2017–2022. doi: mdq098[pii]10.1093/annonc/mdq098
Ding GX, Duggan DM, Lu B, Hallahan DE, Cmelak A,
Malcolm A, Newton J, Deeley M, Coffey CW (2007)
Impact of inhomogeneity corrections on dose coverage in
the treatment of lung cancer using stereotactic body
radiation therapy. Med Phys 34(7):2985–2994
Donnelly ED, Parikh PJ, Lu W, Zhao T, Lechleiter K, Nystrom
M, Hubenschmidt JP, Low DA, Bradley JD (2007)

299
Assessment of intrafraction mediastinal and hilar lymph
node movement and comparison to lung tumor motion using
four-dimensional CT. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 69(2):
580–588. doi: S0360-3016(07)01029-2[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2007.05.083
Duggan DM, Ding GX, Coffey CW 2nd, Kirby W, Hallahan
DE, Malcolm A, Lu B (2007) Deep-inspiration breath-hold
kilovoltage cone-beam CT for setup of stereotactic body
radiation therapy for lung tumors: initial experience. Lung
Cancer 56(1):77–88. doi: S0169-5002(06)00612-X[pii]
10.1016/j.lungcan.2006.11.012
Dunlap NE, Cai J, Biedermann GB, Yang W, Benedict SH,
Sheng K, Schefter TE, Kavanagh BD, Larner JM (2010)
Chest wall volume receiving [ 30 Gy predicts risk of severe
pain and/or rib fracture after lung stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 76(3):796–801. doi:
S0360-3016(09)00252-1[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.02.027
Fogliata A, Nicolini G, Vanetti E, Clivio A, Winkler P, Cozzi L
(2008) The impact of photon dose calculation algorithms on
expected dose distributions in lungs under different respiratory phases. Phys Med Biol 53(9):2375–2390. doi:
S0031-9155(08)68672-8[pii]10.1088/0031-9155/53/9/011
Forquer JA, Fakiris AJ, Timmerman RD, Lo SS, Perkins SM,
McGarry RC, Johnstone PA (2009) Brachial plexopathy
from stereotactic body radiotherapy in early-stage NSCLC:
dose-limiting toxicity in apical tumor sites. Radiother Oncol
93(3):408–413. doi: S0167-8140(09)00193-5[pii]10.1016/
j.radonc.2009.04.018
Fritz P, Kraus HJ, Muhlnickel W, Hammer U, Dolken W,
Engel-Riedel W, Chemaissani A, Stoelben E (2006)
Stereotactic, single-dose irradiation of stage I non-small
cell lung cancer and lung metastases. Radiat Oncol 1:30.
doi: 1748-717X-1-30[pii]10.1186/1748-717X-1-30
Georg D, Hillbrand M, Stock M, Dieckmann K, Potter R (2008)
Can protons improve SBRT for lung lesions? Dosimetric
considerations. Radiother Oncol 88(3):368–375. doi:
S0167-8140(08)00151-5[pii]10.1016/j.radonc.2008.03.007
Guckenberger M, Baier K, Polat B, Richter A, Krieger T,
Wilbert J, Mueller G, Flentje M (2010) Dose–response
relationship for radiation-induced pneumonitis after pulmonary stereotactic body radiotherapy. Radiother Oncol
97(1):65–70. doi: S0167-8140(10)00283-5[pii]10.1016/
j.radonc.2010.04.02710.1016/j.radonc.2008.08.010
Guckenberger M, Wilbert J, Krieger T, Richter A, Baier K,
Meyer J, Flentje M (2007a) Four-dimensional treatment
planning for stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 69(1):276–285. doi: S0360-3016(07)
00826-7[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.04.074
Guckenberger M, Wilbert J, Meyer J, Baier K, Richter A,
Flentje M (2007b) Is a single respiratory correlated 4D-CT
study sufficient for evaluation of breathing motion? Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 67(5):1352–1359. doi:
S0360-3016(06)03519-X[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2006.11.025
Guckenberger M, Wulf J, Mueller G, Krieger T, Baier K,
Gabor M, Richter A, Wilbert J, Flentje M (2009a) Dose–
response relationship for image-guided stereotactic body
radiotherapy of pulmonary tumors: relevance of 4D dose
calculation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 74(1):47–54.
doi: S0360-3016(08)03053-8[pii]
Guckenberger M, Krieger T, Richter A, Baier K, Wilbert J,
Sweeney RA, Flentje M (2009b) Potential of image-

300
guidance, gating and real-time tracking to improve accuracy
in pulmonary stereotactic body radiotherapy. Radiother
Oncol 91(3):288–295. doi: S0167-8140(08)00437-4[pii]
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.06.1939
Haasbeek CJ, Slotman BJ, Senan S (2009) Radiotherapy for
lung cancer: clinical impact of recent technical advances.
Lung Cancer 64(1):1–8. doi: S0169-5002(08)00408-X[pii]
10.1016/j.lungcan.2008.07.008
Haedinger U, Krieger T, Flentje M, Wulf J (2005) Influence of
calculation model on dose distribution in stereotactic
radiotherapy for pulmonary targets. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 61(1):239–249. doi: S0360301604005097[pii]10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2004.03.028
Hanley J, Debois MM, Mah D, Mageras GS, Raben A,
Rosenzweig K, Mychalczak B, Schwartz LH, Gloeggler PJ,
Lutz W, Ling CC, Leibel SA, Fuks Z, Kutcher GJ (1999)
Deep inspiration breath-hold technique for lung tumors: the
potential value of target immobilization and reduced lung
density in dose escalation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
45(3):603–611. doi: S0360-3016(99)00154-6[pii]
Hara R, Itami J, Kondo T, Aruga T, Abe Y, Ito M, Fuse M,
Shinohara D, Nagaoka T, Kobiki T (2002) Stereotactic
single high dose irradiation of lung tumors under respiratory
gating. Radiother Oncol 63(2):159–163. doi: S0167814002
000634[pii]
Heinzerling JH, Anderson JF, Papiez L, Boike T, Chien S,
Zhang G, Abdulrahman R, Timmerman R (2008) Fourdimensional computed tomography scan analysis of tumor
and organ motion at varying levels of abdominal compression during stereotactic treatment of lung and liver. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 70(5):1571–1578. doi: S03603016(07)04763-3[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.12.023
Hellman S, Weichselbaum RR (1995) Oligometastases. J Clin
Oncol 13(1):8–10
Herman Tde L, Gabrish H, Herman TS, Vlachaki MT, Ahmad S
(2010) Impact of tissue heterogeneity corrections in stereotactic body radiation therapy treatment plans for lung
cancer. J Med Phys 35(3):170–173. doi: 10.4103/09716203.62133
Hof H, Hoess A, Oetzel D, Debus J, Herfarth K (2007)
Stereotactic single-dose radiotherapy of lung metastases.
Strahlenther Onkol 183(12):673–678. doi: 10.1007/s00066007-1724-z
Hong TS, Welsh JS, Ritter MA, Harari PM, Jaradat H, Mackie
TR, Mehta MP (2007) Megavoltage computed tomography:
an emerging tool for image-guided radiotherapy. Am J Clin
Oncol 30(6):617–623. doi: 10.1097/COC.0b013e318054677
000000421-200712000-00010[pii]
Hoppe BS, Huh S, Flampouri S, Nichols RC, Oliver KR,
Morris CG, Mendenhall NP, Li Z (2010) Double-scattered
proton-based stereotactic body radiotherapy for stage I
lung cancer: a dosimetric comparison with photon-based
stereotactic body radiotherapy. Radiother Oncol 97(3):
425–430. doi: S0167-8140(10)00532-3[pii]10.1016/j.radonc.
2010.09.006
Hoppe BS, Laser B, Kowalski AV, Fontenla SC, PenaGreenberg E, Yorke ED, Lovelock DM, Hunt MA, Rosenzweig KE (2008) Acute skin toxicity following stereotactic
body radiation therapy for stage I non-small-cell lung
cancer: who’s at risk? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys

N. Amin et al.
72(5):1283–1286.
doi:
S0360-3016(08)03395-6[pii]
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.08.036
Jiang SB, Wolfgang J, Mageras GS (2008) Quality assurance
challenges for motion-adaptive radiation therapy: gating,
breath holding, and four-dimensional computed tomography.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 71(1 Suppl):S103–S107. doi:
S0360-3016(07)04263-0[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.07.2386
Kadoya N, Obata Y, Kato T, Kagiya M, Nakamura T, Tomoda
T, Takada A, Takayama K, Fuwa N (2010) Dose-volume
comparison of proton radiotherapy and stereotactic body
radiotherapy for non-small-cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 79(4):1225–1231. doi: S0360-3016(10)
00692-9[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.05.016
Kavanagh BD, Abdulrahman R, Camidge DR, Gerber DE,
Bunn PA, Schiller J, Choy H, Gaspar L, Doebele R,
Timmerman RD (2010) A phase II trial of stereotactic body
radiation therapy (SBRT) combined with Erlotinib for
patients with recurrent non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 78(3):S15. doi: 10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2010.07.077
Keall P (2004) 4-dimensional computed tomography imaging and
treatment planning. Semin Radiat Oncol 14(1):81–90.
doi: S1053-4296(03)00087-0[pii]10.1053/j.semradonc.2003.
10.006
Khan FM (2010) The physics of radiation therapy, 4th edn.
Lippincott Williams and Wilkens, New York
Krieger T, Sauer OA (2005) Monte Carlo—versus pencilbeam-/collapsed-cone-dose calculation in a heterogeneous
multi-layer phantom. Phys Med Biol 50(5):859–868. doi:
S0031-9155(05)90859-2[pii]
Lax I, Blomgren H, Naslund I, Svanstrom R (1994) Stereotactic
radiotherapy of malignancies in the abdomen. Methodological aspects. Acta Oncol 33(6):677–683. doi: 10.1088/
0031-9155/50/5/010
Lax I, Blomgren H, Larson D, Naslund I (1998) Extracranial
stereotactic radiosurgery of localized targets. J Radiosurg
1(2):135–148. doi: 10.1023/B:JORA.0000010898.87146.2e
Lax I, Panettieri V, Wennberg B, Amor Duch M, Naslund I,
Baumann P, Gagliardi G (2006) Dose distributions in SBRT
of lung tumors: comparison between two different treatment
planning algorithms and Monte-Carlo simulation including
breathing motions. Acta Oncol 45(7):978–988. doi:
J4507215Q1045126[pii]10.1080/02841860600900050
Le QT, Loo BW, Ho A, Cotrutz C, Koong AC, Wakelee H,
Kee ST, Constantinescu D, Whyte RI, Donington J (2006)
Results of a phase I dose-escalation study using
single-fraction stereotactic radiotherapy for lung tumors.
J Thorac Oncol 1(8):802–809. doi: 01243894-20061000000008[pii]
Liu R, Wagner TH, Buatti JM, Modrick J, Dill J, Meeks SL
(2004) Geometrically based optimization for extracranial
radiosurgery. Phys Med Biol 49(6):987–996
Ma CM, Paskalev K (2006) In-room CT techniques for imageguided radiation therapy. Med Dosim 31(1):30–39. doi:
S0958-3947(05)00197-4[pii]10.1016/j.meddos.2005.12.010
Macdonald OK, Kruse JJ, Miller JM, Garces YI, Brown PD,
Miller RC, Foote RL (2009) Proton beam radiotherapy
versus three-dimensional conformal stereotactic body radiotherapy in primary peripheral, early-stage non-small-cell
lung carcinoma: a comparative dosimetric analysis. Int J

Lung Metastasis
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 75(3):950–958. doi: S0360-3016
(09)00591-4[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.04.023
Mageras GS, Yorke E (2004) Deep inspiration breath hold
and respiratory gating strategies for reducing organ motion in
radiation treatment. Semin Radiat Oncol 14(1):65–75. doi:
S1053-4296(03)00090-0[pii]10.1053/j.semradonc.2003.
10.009
Maxim PG, Loo BW Jr, Shirazi H, Thorndyke B, Luxton G, Le
QT (2007) Quantification of motion of different thoracic
locations using four-dimensional computed tomography:
implications for radiotherapy planning. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 69(5):1395–1401. doi: S0360-3016(07)00844-9
[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.05.016
McNair HA, Brock J, Symonds-Tayler JR, Ashley S, Eagle S,
Evans PM, Kavanagh A, Panakis N, Brada M (2009)
Feasibility of the use of the active breathing co ordinator
(ABC) in patients receiving radical radiotherapy for
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Radiother Oncol
93(3):424–429. doi: S0167-8140(09)00560-X[pii]10.1016/
j.radonc.2009.09.012
Milano MT, Katz AW, Muhs AG, Philip A, Buchholz DJ,
Schell MC, Okunieff P (2008a) A prospective pilot study of
curative-intent stereotactic body radiation therapy in
patients with 5 or fewer oligometastatic lesions. Cancer
112(3):650–658. doi: 10.1002/cncr.23209
Milano MT, Katz AW, Schell MC, Philip A, Okunieff P
(2008b) Descriptive analysis of oligometastatic lesions
treated with curative-intent stereotactic body radiotherapy.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 72(5):1516–1522. doi:
S0360-3016(08)00543-9[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.03.044
Mizuno H, Okamoto H, Fukuoka M, Hanyu Y, Kurooka M,
Kohno R, Nishio T, Kumazaki Y, Tachibana H, Takahashi
Y, Mori S, Masai N, Sasaki K (2011) Multi-institutional
retrospective analysis of the inhomogeneity correction for
radiation therapy of lung cancer. J Radiat Res (Tokyo)
52(1):69–74. doi: JST.JSTAGE/jrr/10066[pii]
Mutter RW, Liu F, Abreu A, Yorke E, Jackson A, Rosenzweig
KE (2011) Dose-volume parameters predict for the development of chest wall pain after stereotactic body radiation
for lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. doi:
S0360-3016(11)00519-0[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.03.053
Nagata Y, Negoro Y, Aoki T, Mizowaki T, Takayama K,
Kokubo M, Araki N, Mitsumori M, Sasai K, Shibamoto Y,
Koga S, Yano S, Hiraoka M (2002) Clinical outcomes of 3D
conformal hypofractionated single high-dose radiotherapy
for one or two lung tumors using a stereotactic body frame.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 52(4):1041–1046. doi:
S0360301601027316[pii]
Nakagawa K, Aoki Y, Tago M, Terahara A, Ohtomo K (2000)
Megavoltage CT-assisted stereotactic radiosurgery for thoracic tumors: original research in the treatment of thoracic
neoplasms. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 48(2):449–457.
doi: S0360-3016(00)00617-9[pii]
Norihisa Y, Nagata Y, Takayama K, Matsuo Y, Sakamoto T,
Sakamoto M, Mizowaki T, Yano S, Hiraoka M (2008)
Stereotactic body radiotherapy for oligometastatic lung
tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 72(2):398–403. doi:
S0360-3016(08)00027-8[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.01.002
Norton L, Simon R (1986) The norton-simon hypothesis
revisited. Cancer Treat Rep 70:163–169

301
O’Dell WG, Schell MC, Reynolds D, Okunieff R (2002)
Dose broadening due to target position variability during
fractionated breath-held radiation therapy. Med Phys 29(7):
1430–1437
Okunieff P, Petersen AL, Philip A, Milano MT, Katz AW,
Boros L, Schell MC (2006) Stereotactic body radiation
therapy (SBRT) for lung metastases. Acta Oncol 45(7):
808–817. doi: Q211N478QT611M72[pii]10.1080/028418
60600908954
Onimaru R, Shirato H, Shimizu S, Kitamura K, Xu B,
Fukumoto S, Chang TC, Fujita K, Oita M, Miyasaka K,
Nishimura M, Dosaka-Akita H (2003) Tolerance of organs
at risk in small-volume, hypofractionated, image-guided
radiotherapy for primary and metastatic lung cancers. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 56(1):126–135. doi: S0360301603
000956[pii]
Onishi H, Araki T, Shirato H, Nagata Y, Hiraoka M, Gomi K,
Yamashita T, Niibe Y, Karasawa K, Hayakawa K, Takai Y,
Kimura T, Hirokawa Y, Takeda A, Ouchi A, Hareyama M,
Kokubo M, Hara R, Itami J, Yamada K (2004) Stereotactic
hypofractionated high-dose irradiation for stage I nonsmall
cell lung carcinoma: clinical outcomes in 245 subjects in a
Japanese multiinstitutional study. Cancer 101(7):1623–1631.
doi: 10.1002/cncr.20539
Onishi H, Shirato H, Nagata Y, Hiraoka M, Fujino M, Gomi K,
Karasawa K, Hayakawa K, Niibe Y, Takai Y, Kimura T,
Takeda A, Ouchi A, Hareyama M, Kokubo M, Kozuka T,
Arimoto T, Hara R, Itami J, Araki T (2010) Stereotactic
Body Radiotherapy (SBRT) for operable stage I non-smallcell lung cancer: can sbrt be comparable to surgery? Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. doi: S0360-3016(09)02787-4[pii]
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.07.1751
Pan H, Simpson DR, Mell LK, Mundt AJ, Lawson JD (2011)
A survey of stereotactic body radiotherapy use in the United
States. Cancer. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26067
Panakis N, McNair HA, Christian JA, Mendes R, SymondsTayler JR, Knowles C, Evans PM, Bedford J, Brada M
(2008) Defining the margins in the radical radiotherapy of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with active breathing
control (ABC) and the effect on physical lung parameters.
Radiother Oncol 87(1):65–73. doi: S0167-8140(07)00664-0
[pii]10.1016/j.radonc.2007.12.012
Papiez L, Timmerman R, DesRosiers C, Randall M (2003)
Extracranial stereotactic radioablation: physical principles.
Acta Oncol 42(8):882–894
Park C, Papiez L, Zhang S, Story M, Timmerman RD (2008)
Universal survival curve and single fraction equivalent dose:
useful tools in understanding potency of ablative
radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 70(3):847–852.
doi: S0360-3016(07)04460-4[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.10.059
Pastorino U, Buyse M, Friedel G, Ginsberg R, Girard P,
Goldstraw P, Johnston M, McCormack P, Pass H, Putnam J
(1997) Long-term results of lung metastasectomy: prognostic analyses based on 5206 cases. The international registry
of lung metastases. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 113(1):37–49.
doi: S0022522397000305[pii]
Potters L, Kavanagh B, Galvin JM, Hevezi JM, Janjan NA,
Larson DA, Mehta MP, Ryu S, Steinberg M, Timmerman R,
Welsh JS, Rosenthal SA (2009) American society for
therapeutic radiology and oncology (ASTRO) and American

302
college of radiology (ACR) practice guideline for the
performance of stereotactic body radiation therapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 76(2):326–332. doi: S0360-3016
(09)03304-5[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.09.042
Purdie TG, Bissonnette JP, Franks K, Bezjak A, Payne D, Sie F,
Sharpe MB, Jaffray DA (2007) Cone-beam computed
tomography for on-line image guidance of lung stereotactic
radiotherapy: localization, verification, and intrafraction
tumor position. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 68(1):
243–252. doi: S0360-3016(06)03657-1[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2006.12.022
Purdie TG, Moseley DJ, Bissonnette JP, Sharpe MB, Franks K,
Bezjak A, Jaffray DA (2006) Respiration correlated conebeam computed tomography and 4DCT for evaluating
target motion in stereotactic lung radiation therapy. Acta
Oncol 45(7):915–922. doi: W158212612X7X6J3[pii]10.
1080/02841860600907345
Rosenzweig KE, Hanley J, Mah D, Mageras G, Hunt M, Toner
S, Burman C, Ling CC, Mychalczak B, Fuks Z, Leibel SA
(2000) The deep inspiration breath-hold technique in the
treatment of inoperable non-small-cell lung cancer. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 48(1):81–87. doi: S0360-3016(00)
00583-6[pii]
Rusthoven KE, Kavanagh BD, Burri SH, Chen C, Cardenes H,
Chidel MA, Pugh TJ, Kane M, Gaspar LE, Schefter TE
(2009a) Multi-institutional phase I/II trial of stereotactic
body radiation therapy for lung metastases. J Clin Oncol
27(10):1579–1584. doi: JCO.2008.19.6386[pii]10.1200/JCO.
2008.19.6386
Rusthoven KE, Hammerman SF, Kavanagh BD, Birtwhistle MJ,
Stares M, Camidge DR (2009b) Is there a role for consolidative stereotactic body radiation therapy following firstline systemic therapy for metastatic lung cancer? A
patterns-of-failure analysis. Acta Oncologica 48(4):578–583.
doi: 10.1080/02841860802662722
Salazar OM, Sandhu TS, Lattin PB, Chang JH, Lee CK,
Groshko GA, Lattin CJ (2008) Once-weekly, high-dose
stereotactic body radiotherapy for lung cancer: 6-year
analysis of 60 early-stage, 42 locally advanced, and 7
metastatic lung cancers. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
72(3):707–715. doi: S0360-3016(08)00284-8[pii]10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2008.01.054
Schefter TE, Kavanagh BD, Kane M, Chen C, Stuhr K, Kelly
K, Mitchell JD, Bunn PA, Gaspar LE (2006) A phase I/II
trial of stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) for lung
metastases: initial report of dose escalation and early
toxicity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 66(4):S120–S127
Schubert LK, Westerly DC, Tome WA, Mehta MP, Soisson ET,
Mackie TR, Ritter MA, Khuntia D, Harari PM, Paliwal BR
(2009) A comprehensive assessment by tumor site of patient
setup using daily MVCT imaging from more than 3,800
helical tomotherapy treatments. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 73(4):1260–1269. doi: S0360-3016(08)03832-7[pii]
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.11.054
Schuring D, Hurkmans CW (2008) Developing and evaluating
stereotactic lung RT trials: what we should know about the
influence of inhomogeneity corrections on dose. Radiat Oncol
3:21. doi: 1748-717X-3-21[pii]10.1186/1748-717X-3-21
Siva S, MacManus M, Ball D (2010) Stereotactic radiotherapy for
pulmonary oligometastases: a systematic review. J Thorac
Oncol 5(7):1091–1099. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3181de7143

N. Amin et al.
Song DY, Benedict SH, Cardinale RM, Chung TD, Chang MG,
Schmidt-Ullrich RK (2005) Stereotactic body radiation
therapy of lung tumors: preliminary experience using
normal tissue complication probability-based dose limits.
Am J Clin Oncol 28(6):591–596. doi: 00000421-200512000
-00011[pii]
Stephans KL, Djemil T, Tendulkar RD, Robinson CG, Reddy
CA, Videtic GM (2011) Prediction of chest wall toxicity
from lung stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT). Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. doi: S0360-3016(10)03634-5[pii]
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.12.002
Stock M, Kontrisova K, Dieckmann K, Bogner J, Poetter R,
Georg D (2006) Development and application of a real-time
monitoring and feedback system for deep inspiration breath
hold based on external marker tracking. Med Phys
33(8):2868–2877
Takeda A, Ohashi T, Kunieda E, Enomoto T, Sanuki N, Takeda
T, Shigematsu N (2010) Early graphical appearance of
radiation pneumonitis correlates with the severity of radiation pneumonitis after stereotactic body radiotherapy
(SBRT) in patients with lung tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 77(3):685–690. doi: S0360-3016(09)00836-0[pii]
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.06.001
Tewatia D, Zhang T, Tome W, Paliwal B, Metha M (2006)
Clinical implementation of target tracking by breathing
synchronized delivery. Med Phys 33(11):4330–4336
Timmerman R, McGarry R, Yiannoutsos C, Papiez L, Tudor K,
DeLuca J, Ewing M, Abdulrahman R, DesRosiers C,
Williams M, Fletcher J (2006) Excessive toxicity when
treating central tumors in a phase II study of stereotactic
body radiation therapy for medically inoperable early-stage
lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 24(30):4833–4839. doi: 24/30/
4833[pii]10.1200/JCO.2006.07.5937
Timmerman R, Paulus R, Galvin J, Michalski J, Straube W,
Bradley J, Fakiris A, Bezjak A, Videtic G, Johnstone D,
Fowler J, Gore E, Choy H (2010) Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for inoperable early stage lung cancer.
JAMA 303(11):1070–1076. doi: 303/11/1070[pii]10.1001/
jama.2010.261
Timmerman RD, Kavanagh BD, Cho LC, Papiez L, Xing L
(2007) Stereotactic body radiation therapy in multiple organ
sites. J Clin Oncol 25(8):947–952. doi: 25/8/947[pii]
10.1200/JCO.2006.09.7469
Uematsu M, Shioda A, Tahara K, Fukui T, Yamamoto F, Tsumatori
G, Ozeki Y, Aoki T, Watanabe M, Kusano S (1998) Focal, high
dose, and fractionated modified stereotactic radiation therapy
for lung carcinoma patients: a preliminary experience. Cancer
82(6):1062–1070. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0142(19980315)
82:6\1062:AID-CNCR8[3.0.CO;2-G[pii]
Underberg RW, Lagerwaard FJ, Slotman BJ, Cuijpers JP,
Senan S (2005a) Benefit of respiration-gated stereotactic
radiotherapy for stage I lung cancer: an analysis of 4DCT
datasets. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 62(2):554–560. doi:
S0360-3016(05)00138-0[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2005.01.032
Underberg RW, Lagerwaard FJ, Slotman BJ, Cuijpers JP,
Senan S (2005b) Use of maximum intensity projections
(MIP) for target volume generation in 4DCT scans for lung
cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 63(1):253–260. doi:
S0360-3016(05)00955-7[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2005.05.045
Vanderstraeten B, Reynaert N, Paelinck L, Madani I, De
Wagter C, De Gersem W, De Neve W, Thierens H (2006)

Lung Metastasis
Accuracy of patient dose calculation for lung IMRT: A
comparison of Monte Carlo, convolution/superposition, and
pencil beam computations. Med Phys 33(9):3149–3158
Wang L, Hayes S, Paskalev K, Jin L, Buyyounouski MK,
Ma CC, Feigenberg S (2009) Dosimetric comparison of
stereotactic body radiotherapy using 4D CT and multiphase
CT images for treatment planning of lung cancer: evaluation
of the impact on daily dose coverage. Radiother Oncol
91(3):314–324. doi: S0167-8140(08)00654-3[pii]10.1016/
j.radonc.2008.11.018
Wang Z, Wu QJ, Marks LB, Larrier N, Yin FF (2007) Conebeam CT localization of internal target volumes for
stereotactic body radiotherapy of lung lesions. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 69(5):1618–1624. doi: S0360-3016(07)
03869-2[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.08.030
Weiss E, Wijesooriya K, Dill SV, Keall PJ (2007) Tumor and
normal tissue motion in the thorax during respiration:
analysis of volumetric and positional variations using 4D
CT. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 67(1):296–307. doi:
S0360-3016(06)02967-1[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2006.09.009
Wennberg BM, Baumann P, Gagliardi G, Nyman J, Drugge N,
Hoyer M, Traberg A, Nilsson K, Morhed E, Ekberg L,
Wittgren L, Lund JA, Levin N, Sederholm C, Lewensohn R,
Lax I (2011) NTCP modelling of lung toxicity after SBRT
comparing the universal survival curve and the linear
quadratic model for fractionation correction. Acta Oncol
50(4):518–527. doi: 10.3109/0284186X.2010.543695
Wolthaus JW, Sonke JJ, van Herk M, Belderbos JS, Rossi MM,
Lebesque JV, Damen EM (2008) Comparison of different
strategies to use four-dimensional computed tomography in
treatment planning for lung cancer patients. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 70(4):1229–1238. doi: S0360-3016(07)
04592-0[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.11.042
Wong JW, Sharpe MB, Jaffray DA, Kini VR, Robertson JM,
Stromberg JS, Martinez AA (1999) The use of active
breathing control (ABC) to reduce margin for breathing
motion. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 44(4):911–919. doi:
S0360-3016(99)00056-5[pii]
Wulf J, Baier K, Mueller G, Flentje MP (2005) Dose–response
in stereotactic irradiation of lung tumors. Radiother Oncol

303
77(1):83–87. doi: S0167-8140(05)00389-0[pii]10.1016/j.radonc.
2005.09.003
Wulf J, Haedinger U, Oppitz U, Thiele W, Mueller G, Flentje
M (2004) Stereotactic radiotherapy for primary lung cancer
and pulmonary metastases: a noninvasive treatment
approach in medically inoperable patients. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 60(1):186–196. doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2004.02.060S0360301604003797[pii]
Wurm RE, Gum F, Erbel S, Schlenger L, Scheffler D, Agaoglu
D, Schild R, Gebauer B, Rogalla P, Plotkin M, Ocran K,
Budach V (2006) Image guided respiratory gated hypofractionated stereotactic body radiation therapy (H-SBRT) for
liver and lung tumors: initial experience. Acta Oncol
45(7):881–889. doi: V03T65067TMX1160[pii]10.1080/
02841860600919233
Xia T, Li H, Sun Q, Wang Y, Fan N, Yu Y, Li P, Chang JY
(2006) Promising clinical outcome of stereotactic body
radiation therapy for patients with inoperable Stage I/II nonsmall-cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
66(1):117–125. doi: S0360-3016(06)00635-3[pii]10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2006.04.013
Xiao Y, Papiez L, Paulus R, Timmerman R, Straube WL,
Bosch WR, Michalski J, Galvin JM (2009) Dosimetric
evaluation of heterogeneity corrections for RTOG 0236:
stereotactic body radiotherapy of inoperable stage I-II nonsmall-cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
73(4):1235–1242. doi: S0360-3016(08)03800-5[pii]10.
1016/j.ijrobp.2008.11.019
Yoon SM, Choi EK, Lee SW, Yi BY, Ahn SD, Shin SS, Park
HJ, Kim SS, Park JH, Song SY, Park CI, Kim JH (2006)
Clinical results of stereotactic body frame based fractionated radiation therapy for primary or metastatic thoracic
tumors. Acta Oncol 45(8):1108–1114. doi: X7U89476652Q
3363[pii]10.1080/02841860600812685
Zhou J, Uhl B, Dewit K, Young M, Taylor B, Fei DY, Lo YC
(2010) Analysis of daily setup variation with tomotherapy
megavoltage computed tomography. Med Dosim 35(1):
31–37. doi: S0958-3947(09)00004-1[pii]10.1016/j.meddos.
2009.01.005

Liver Metastasis
Michelle Stinauer, Rachelle Lanciano, Tracey E. Schefter,
Brian Kavanagh, Julie A. Carlson, and Alan W. Katz

7

Contents

Future Directions..................................................... 317

References.......................................................................... 318
1

Introduction.............................................................. 306

2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4

Technical Aspects ....................................................
Immobilization...........................................................
Target Delineation .....................................................
On Board Imaging/Re-Localization..........................
Treatment Delivery and Intrafractional Motion
Control .......................................................................

306
306
307
308
308

3
Clinical Applications ............................................... 309
3.1 Eligibility Criteria...................................................... 309
3.2 Studies of SBRT for Liver Metastases..................... 309
310
311
311
312

4
4.1
4.2
4.3

Toxicities ...................................................................
Radiation-Induced Liver Disease..............................
Bowel Toxicity ..........................................................
Abdominal and Chest Wall Injury............................

5

Follow-Up Imaging .................................................. 312

6

Case Examples ......................................................... 313

Author’s Contribution This book chapter has been seen, read,
and agreed upon in its content by all designated authors.
M. Stinauer  T. E. Schefter  B. Kavanagh  J. A. Carlson
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Colorado Denver,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA
R. Lanciano
Department of Radiation Oncology,
Delaware County Memorial Hospital,
Philadelphia CyberKnife,
Drexel Hill, PA 19026, USA
A. W. Katz (&)
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Rochester Medical Center,
601 Elmwood Avenue, Box 647,
Rochester, NY 14642, USA
e-mail: Alan_Katz@URMC.Rochester.edu

Abstract

With its dual portal and arterial blood supply, the
liver is a common site for metastatic disease.
Traditionally the liver has been viewed as a difficult
organ to irradiate due to both normal tissue
constraints as well as organ motion. New devices
for patient immobilization, better imaging techniques, and advanced treatment delivery methods
such as stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT),
have made radiation therapy a viable therapeutic
option for liver metastases. Oligometastatic disease
from several solid primary cancers is now considered a potentially curable state. As such, ablative
therapies such as SBRT offer a non-invasive alternative to surgery and radiofrequency ablation
(RFA). This chapter will review the technical and
clinical aspects of SBRT for liver metastases.

Definitions of Abbreviations Used

SBRT
RFA
PTV
GTV
CT
PET
CTV
ITV
MRI
DDR

Stereotactic body radiation therapy
Radiofrequency ablation
Planning target volume
Gross tumor volume
Computed tomography
Positron emission tomography
Clinical tumor volume
Internal target volume
Magnetic resonance imaging
Digitally reconstructed radiograph

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2011_503, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

305

306

M. Stinauer et al.

BED
TACE
RILD
HCC
VOD
QUANTEC

1

Biological equivalent dose
Transarterial chemo-embolization
Radiation induced liver disease
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Veno-occlusive disease
Quantitative analysis of normal tissue
effect in the clinic

Introduction

The standard of care for localized liver metastases is
surgical resection (Robertson et al. 2009). However,
due to extent of disease within the liver, patient
co-morbid illnesses, advanced age and/or patient
wishes, only 10–20% of patients undergo surgical
resection. Alternative liver directed therapies include
radiofrequency ablation, cryotherapy, and chemoembolization. However, these techniques are also
not applicable to all liver metastases; each technique
has specific limitations on size, location and number
of liver metastases that can be treated (Kemeny
2006). As a result, stereotactic body radiation therapy
(SBRT) is an increasingly utilized treatment option
for liver metastases and carries the additional
advantage of being non-invasive. Indeed, over the
past few years, clinical outcomes with SBRT demonstrate excellent local control rates with minimal
adverse effects for the treatment of liver metastases
(Hoyer et al. 2006; Wulf et al. 2006; Ambrosino
et al. 2009; Lee et al. 2009; Rusthoven et al. 2009;
Goodman et al. 2010; Rule et al. 2011; Stintzing et al.
2010; van der Pool et al. 2010; Chang et al. 2011;
Vautravers-Dewas et al. 2011; Lanciano et al. 2011).
SBRT has been delivered with various doses, equipment, and approaches for controlling respiratory
movement of the target lesion during treatment. This
chapter provides an overview of the technical and
clinical aspects of SBRT for liver metastases.

2

Technical Aspects

Liver SBRT presents a distinct set of technical challenges. This section will review issues related to
patient immobilization, target volume delineation,
treatment planning, re-localization image guidance,
intra-fractional motion management, and overall treat-

ment delivery. Details of various treatment machines
are covered in earlier chapters.

2.1

Immobilization

Multiple techniques have been developed to ensure
reproducible treatment set-up and patient positioning
for SBRT of liver metastases. As with SBRT for
tumors in other locations, such as lung or spine, body
frames, vacuum pillows, and thermoplastic devices
are used to ensure complete patient immobilization
throughout the course of treatment. These immobilization devices, discussed previously in relation to
other treatment sites, provide for accurate and reproducible daily set-up and enable the use of minimal
planning treatment volume (PTV) margins to account
for patient/target motion. As SBRT for liver metastases becomes more widely used, newer integrated
immobilization systems are being developed, such as
that used in Indiana, which is wider and can accommodate obese patients while still requiring only a
5 mm margin for the PTV (Heinzerling et al. 2008).
One of the unique challenges in treating liver
metastases with SBRT is controlling internal organ
motion through both patient and equipment regulated
mechanisms. Studies have found respiratory associated
movement of the liver ranges from 5 to 30 mm in the
superior-inferior direction, which can significantly
impact treatment planning and delivery (Balter et al.
2001). Multiple techniques are used to minimize this
motion. Initial attempts to control internal movement
relied heavily on the patient, who was given instructions regarding shallow or deep breathing and breathhold during treatment delivery. Studies showed that
these techniques result in 2–3 mm of intrafractional
diaphragm movement and up to 5 mm in interfractional
movement; however, these results were seen in a small
group of patients selected for their ability to participate
in voluntary breathing control, giving these results
a somewhat limited application (Kim et al. 2001).
The inconsistencies with patient-directed techniques
led to the development of the Active Breathing
CoordinatorTM (Elekta, Stockholm, Sweden) during
which the operator instigates the temporary suspension
of breathing at a predetermined phase in the respiratory
cycle. This modification in technique resulted in
reduced intrafraction movement, with no change in
the craniocaudal interfractional movement and the

Liver Metastasis

need for daily imaging (Dawson et al. 2001).
External abdominal compression is often used to
further minimize diaphragmatic and thus liver
movement by forcing patients to breathe more
shallowly. More complex methods have been
developed that are less dependent on the regulation
of organ motion. Among these are respiratory-gated
systems, where the coordinates of tumor-implanted
fiducials are tracked over the course of each fraction
of radiation, delivering the dose to within 1 mm
when the tumor is between preset coordinates (Shirato et al. 2000). Newer techniques combine external
abdominal compression with imaging, such as 4Dcomputed tomography, which can be applied broadly
to the majority of patients. An analysis of amplitude
changes using this technique found that mean liver
motion in the craniocaudal direction was 8 mm, with
less than 2 mm change during subsequent respiratory
cycles (Case et al. 2010). Additionally, interfraction
variation in liver shape and gross tumor volume
(GTV) displacement with abdominal compression
was found to be minimal, with mean displacement of
GTV less than 0.2 mm (Eccles et al. 2011). Sites that
use CyberKnife do not require rigid immobilization
or compression devices due to real-time portal
imaging with adjustments of the beam position and
orientation to account for changes in the target
[fiducial(s)] position with respiration (target-tracking
Synchrony). CyberKnife with Synchrony technology
requires fiducial placement in the liver tumor to
achieve \2 mm tracking precision as a surrogate for
target tracking. In a series of 34 patients with 4 fiducials placed per liver tumor, there was no migration
of fiducials, no major complications and only one
minor complication of a small hemorrhagic pleural
effusion requiring overnight observation. Rarely does
fiducial migration occur in the liver, however one
case report noted migration of fiducial to the
heart requiring catherization and removal without
sequela. (Kothary et al. 2009; Hennessey et al. 2009)
In order to control for possible fiducial marker
migration and before each CyberKnife treatment,
Xsight spine set-up is used for body alignment and a
predetermined couch shift is made to the fiducial to
verify no migration. If the coordinate shift does
not agree with the plan, repeat confirmatory computed tomography (CT) is done. In addition, CT for
treatment planning is scheduled 10 days following
fiducial placement to minimize migration errors.

307

See ‘‘CyberKnife System’’ for additional details
regarding CyberKnife technology.

2.2

Target Delineation

Target delineation for liver metastases presents a
unique challenge due to similar density of the tumor
and normal liver on a non-contrast CT scan. Triple
phase CT scanning with contrast helps aid this differentiation, with venous phase imaging most commonly used to visualize liver metastases, although
some liver metastases demonstrate solely arterial
phase enhancement or are better seen without
enhancement. Additionally, various imaging modalities can be fused with the planning CT scan to
improve target delineation. For example, positron
emission tomography (PET) scans can be helpful in
determining metabolically active sites of disease in
the liver. A limitation of this process is the inherent
liver motion not controlled for in a normal PET scan;
however, if one has not been done previously, a
treatment planning PET scan can be obtained with
similar immobilization and breathing techniques used
during CT simulation. The registration of fused images can be optimized by focusing primarily on the
liver and even the particular length of liver involved.
Regardless, the fused image should be used only as a
guide for treatment planning with the definitive target
volume determined by a contrast CT done during
simulation.
As mentioned in the toxicity section, the liver is an
inherently radiosensitive organ; a feature which
increases the importance of limiting the PTV as much
as possible to spare normal liver tissue while still
providing adequate coverage of the tumor. The GTV
is usually defined as the tumor demonstrated on
contrast CT, usually but not always, best delineated
during the portovenous phase of imaging. This
delineation can be aided by PET or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), as mentioned previously. The
clinical tumor volume (CTV), defined as any areas
that may harbor microscopic disease, varies among
treatment centers but is usually no more than GTV
+10 mm of margin. Daily set-up variations are
accounted for by placing a margin around the CTV to
generate a PTV. PTVs vary based on the type of
immobilization device(s) and the technique used to

308

M. Stinauer et al.

account for respiratory motion. Additionally, when
four dimensional (4D)-CT simulation is done, an
internal target volume (ITV) is created that incorporates the motion of the tumor as visualized throughout
the breathing cycle. A margin is then added to
the ITV to account for treatment set-up error. If
breath-hold techniques are used, the phase of respiration during CT scan should be consistent, in order
to accurately add PTV margin superiorly or inferiorly, to compensate for exhalation and inhalation,
respectively.
Studies using linear accelerator-based SBRT
without 4DCT report adding 3–8 mm to the GTV to
generate the CTV and 5–10 mm to the CTV to generate the PTV (Hoyer et al. 2006; Wulf et al. 2006;
Lee et al. 2009; Mendez Romero et al. 2009), with
some sites employing fluoroscopy to add additional
margin in the event of large diaphragmatic excursion
(Lee et al. 2009; Mendez Romero et al. 2009). Sites
using 4D-CT or an ultra slow planning CT scanner
(that encompasses all phases of the respiratory cycle
in one CT scan) create the ITV by incorporating the
GTVs from all phases of the normal respiratory cycle,
then add 5–15 mm to create a PTV (Rusthoven et al.
2009). Reports from sites that use CyberKnife for
SBRT of liver metastases indicate the addition of
3–8 mm to the GTV to create a PTV (Goodman
et al. 2010; Stintzing et al. 2010; Vautravers-Dewas
et al. 2011; Lanciano et al. 2011).

2D orthogonal techniques (Hawkins et al. 2006).
Real-time tracking using kV fluoroscopy is available, but lacks the capability for soft-tissue delineation of liver tumors and thus relies on fiducial
surrogates.
To overcome these imaging shortcomings, a
number of volumetric techniques have been incorporated to aid in treatment delivery, including
CT scanners within the treatment room, helical
MV CT scanners, and kV cone-beam CT scanners.
These volumetric imaging modalities allow for target
delineation just prior to radiation delivery. Additionally, these images can be used to ensure that organs at
risk, such as small bowel, are out of the radiation
field. A number of studies have shown that volumetric
imaging has reduced treatment set-up errors considerably (Yin et al. 2008; Mendez Romero et al. 2009;
Wang et al. 2009; Worm et al. 2010). Specifically,
Mendez Romero et al. (2009) found that setup
corrections based on daily pre-treatment CTs for
liver SBRT reduced the mean loss in target volume
coverage from 6.8 to 1.7%, while having less of an
impact on organs at risk dose.
As mentioned previously, liver metastases are
usually difficult to discern from surrounding normal
liver on unenhanced CT imaging, thus complicating
re-localization image guidance. In this setting, most
use liver-to-liver fusion as the basis for liver tumor
SBRT with on board CT image guidance.

2.3

2.4

On Board Imaging/Re-Localization

Traditionally employed two dimensional (2D) megavoltage portal imaging relies on bony alignment to
determine correct patient set-up and most of the
studies reported to date used this technology and
achieved excellent local control rates. The inherent
motion of the liver during and between treatments,
especially with respect to bony landmarks, makes 3D
image guidance like on board CT more attractive. A
variety of techniques have been employed to provide
real-time or near real-time imaging during liver SBRT
treatment, with both 2D and 3D techniques available.
Gold fiducials can serve as surrogates for tumor on
2D MV orthogonal images, but this technique lacks a
real-time component. Additionally, kV cone-beam
computed tomography has shown an average of
5 mm of setup inaccuracy compared with traditional

Treatment Delivery
and Intrafractional Motion Control

Just as tumor position changes between fractions,
requiring more advanced technology to accurately
position patients prior to treatment, intra-fractional
tumor motion occurs during radiation treatment.
During treatment planning, 4D CT and the addition of
appropriate PTV margins are used to account for this
motion. Alternatively, a number of treatment delivery
systems incorporate real-time imaging as a way of
sparing more normal tissue and reducing PTV margins. While abdominal compression and various
breath-hold techniques reduce liver motion, real-time
imaging aims to track the tumor and gate the delivery
of radiation only at a specific phase in the respiratory
cycle when the target is within certain predefined
coordinates. In contrast, CyberKnife uses Synchrony

Liver Metastasis

which correlates the position of the liver metastases
using real-time imaging of the fiducials with digitally
reconstructed radiograph (DRRs) and at the same
time correlates the fiducial throughout the respiratory
cycle detected by the optical tracking system’s
infrared markers placed on the patient. Monitoring of
the fiducials and their movement during the respiratory cycle allows for continuous treatment without the
need for gating and all of this comes with less than
2 mm accuracy.

3

Clinical Applications

3.1

Eligibility Criteria

Patients treated with SBRT for liver metastases must
have adequate liver size and function in relation to
tumor volume in order not to exceed normal liver
tolerance. In an early dose escalation study by
Schefter et al. (2005), eligible patients had up to
three lesions, tumor diameters less than 6 cm, and
adequate liver function. Dose-volume constraints
ensured at least 700 cc of uninvolved non-cirrhotic
liver received less than 15 Gy. This constraint was
developed from the critical volume model of radiation liver toxicity. They speculated that up to 80%
of the liver can be surgically removed while still
preserving normal liver function. If the average
normal liver volume is 2,000 cc, as long as at least
500 cc is spared, the patient should have normal
liver function. Conservatively, these investigators
required 700 cc of normal uninvolved liver be
spared from receiving 15 Gy or higher. The dose of
15 Gy was derived from the linear quadratic model,
assuming 30 Gy to be the tolerance dose of whole
organ radiation at conventional fractionation. Eligibility criteria for an ongoing international Phase II
SBRT trial utilizing the CyberKnife system for
hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer (ClinicalTrials.gov access number NCT01318447) includes
three or fewer hepatic metastases and cumulative
size of hepatic lesions between 1 and 10 cm.
Dose-volume constraints require half of the healthy
liver (liver minus CTV) receive less than 15 Gy,
33% receive less than 21 Gy and 700 cc receive
less than 17 Gy.

309

3.2

Studies of SBRT for Liver Metastases

While SBRT for liver metastases is a relatively
new concept, a large body of literature is available
describing early treatment results including four
prospective Phase I studies. The earliest Phase I trial
reported by Schefter et al. (2005) established the
benefit and safety of SBRT for liver metastases. Dose
limiting toxicity was not found despite dose escalation to 60 Gy in three fractions. Lee et al. (2009)
reported the results of a Phase I trial of individualized
dose escalation based on effective liver volume (liver
volume minus all CTVs). Eligibility criteria included
more than 800 cc of uninvolved liver. Patients in the
low-risk strata had dose escalation from 54 to 60 Gy
in six fractions. The 1-year local control rate was 71%
with a median overall survival of 17.6 months. There
was no dose limiting toxicity, even at the highest risk
level investigated. Goodman et al. (2010) reported a
dose escalation Phase I trial of single fraction SBRT
for liver metastases from 18 to 30 Gy without dose
limiting toxicity. The median survival of the group
was 28.6 months with 2-year actuarial overall survival of 50.4%. The cumulative risk of local failure
was 23% at 12 months. Rule et al. (2011) from UT
Southwestern reported the results of a five fraction
phase I/II dose escalation trial of SBRT for liver
metastases. After a median follow-up of 20 months
(range 4–53), two year actuarial local control rates
were 56, 89 and 100% for the 30, 50 and 60 Gy
cohorts, respectively.
Recently published retrospective analyses reporting longer follow-up and pretreatment and treatment
factors associated with improved outcome are
described. Chang et al. (2011) reported a collective
experience of SBRT for colorectal liver metastases
from three institutions: Stanford University used a
single fraction regimen delivered with CyberKnife,
the University of Colorado used a three fraction regimen and Princess Margaret Hospital used a six
fraction regimen both delivered with linac-based
systems. Sixty-five patients with 102 metastases were
analyzed. When evaluated by multivariate analysis, it
was found that total dose, dose per fraction and biological equivalent dose (BED) correlated with local
control. The estimated dose range needed for a 1-year
local control rate greater than 90% was 46–52 Gy
delivered in three fractions. Local control correlated

310

M. Stinauer et al.

Table 1 Overview of published results for stereotactic body radiation therapy for liver metastases
Study

Number of
patients/lesions

Dose (Gy)

Median follow-up
(months)

2-year local
control (%)

2-year overall
survival (%)

Wulf et al. (2006)

44/51*

26–37.5 Gy/1–4 fx

15

66

32

Ambrosino et al.
(2009)

27/1-3 mets per
pt

Median 36 Gy/3 fx
(25–60 Gy)b

13

74 crudea

93 crude

Rusthoven et al.
(2009)

47/63

36–60, 60 Gy/3 fx

16

92

30
median 20.5 m

Lee et al. (2009)

68/141

Median 41.8 Gy/6 fx

10.8

71a

47 at 18 m
median 17.6 m

van der Pool et al.
(2010)

20/31

37.5–45 Gy/3 fx

26

74

83
median 34 m

Stintzing et al.
(2010)

36/54*

24 Gy/1 fxb

21.3

87a

62
median 25.1 m

Goodman et al.
(2010)

26/40*

18–30 Gy/1 fxb

17

77a

50.4
median 28.6 m

Rule et al. (2011)

27/37

30 Gy/5 fx, 50 Gy/
5 fx
60 Gy/5 fx

20

56
89
100

50
67
56
median 37 m

Chang et al. (2011)

65/102 colorectal
mets

Median 42 Gy
22–60 Gy/1–6 fx

14.4

55

38

Vautravers-Dewas
et al. (2011)

42/62

40 Gy/4 fxb
45 Gy/3 fxb

14.3

90a

48

Lanciano et al.
(2011)

30/40*

36–60 Gy/3–5 fxb

22

57

31
median 20 m

Abbreviations fx fractions, OS overall survival, mets metastases
1 year local control; b delivered with CyberKnife; * studies that included hepatocelluar patients, 5-7 pts in each study

a

with overall survival (p = 0.06). At a median followup of 14.4 months, the 2-year local control rate was
55% for all patients which increased to 71% for a
BED greater than or equal to 79 Gy. Lanciano et al.
(2011) from Philadelphia CyberKnife also demonstrated a dose response for 39 liver tumors treated
with CyberKnife delivered SBRT. At an overall
median follow-up of 22 months, the 2-year actuarial
local control rate was 75% for those tumors receiving
a BED [100 Gy compared with 38% for those
tumors receiving a BED \100 Gy. Vautravers-Dewars et al. (2011) from the Centre Oscar Lambret in
Lille, France reported their experience with SBRT for
liver metastases delivered using the CyberKnife for
42 patients with 62 metastases treated to either 40 Gy
in four fractions or 45 Gy in three fractions. At a
median follow-up of 14.3 months, the 2-year actuarial
local control rate was 86% and the 2-year overall survival rate was 48%. No dose response was reported,

however, the dose range used in the study was narrow.
Table 1 summarizes the reported experience of SBRT
for liver metastases.

4

Toxicities

Multiple therapeutic options are available to treat
liver metastases including surgery, radiofrequency
ablation, transarterial chemo-embolization (TACE)
and stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT).
SBRT is the only non-invasive modality and as such,
avoids side effects such as bleeding and infection.
However, SBRT is not without potential toxicities,
such as radiation-induced liver disease (RILD), bowel
injury or abdominal/chest wall pain. Treatment for
liver metastases is better tolerated than for primary
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) likely due to the

Liver Metastasis

underlying liver dysfunction associated with HCC.
This discussion of liver SBRT toxicity will be limited
to patients with metastasis and not those with primary
liver cancer, the latter is covered in detail in
‘‘Primary Liver Cancer’’

4.1

Radiation-Induced Liver Disease

RILD is most commonly seen after whole liver
irradiation and ranges from transient asymptomatic
elevations of liver enzymes to permanent liver
dysfunction and death. Histopathologically radiation
can induce a form of veno-occlusive disease
(VOD) characterized by severe sinusoidal congestion,
hyperemia and dilation of central veins without
thrombi (Ingold et al. 1965). Radiation damages the
endothelium resulting in fibrin and collagen deposition without associated damage to the hepatocytes
(Reed and Cox 1966). The liver is considered a parallel organ and toxicity from low doses to the entire
liver can be severe. Emami suggested that the TD 5/5
of the whole liver was 3,000 cGy given in conventional fractionation (Emami et al. 1991). RTOG
trials established 300 cGy 9 7 as an acceptable
palliative dose to the whole liver without documented RILD (Borgelt et al. 1981). Due to the parallel
architecture of the liver, partial volumes can receive
substantially higher doses of radiation without significant toxicity (Dawson et al. 2002).
Liver toxicity from the trials included in Table 1
range from no grade 2 or greater acute or late toxicity
to to 10% grade 3 toxicity in 432 patients with liver
metastases. Thirteen patients had grade 2 or 3 liver
enzyme elevation (which could have been related to
cancer progression) but there were no clinically relevant persistent liver abnormalities. Given that RILD
tends to occur within 3–4 months after completion of
treatment, and that all studies had at least 10 months
of follow-up, the reported toxicities are representative
of SBRT treatment. Various normal liver constraints
were utilized, with the most common requiring the
volume of liver receiving 21 Gy (V21)\30% and V15
of \50%. The University of Colorado experience did
not show any liver toxicity using an aggressive regimen of 60 Gy in three fractions. The liver constraint
for that regimen required at least 700 cc of normal
liver (total liver volume minus gross tumor volume)

311

received less than 15 Gy (Schefter et al. 2005).
Strategies discussed in the section on technical aspects
of SBRT can reduce tumor movement and thereby
minimize the amount of normal tissue irradiated
resulting in a decrease in the risk of liver toxicity.
The Quantitative Analysis of Normal Tissue
Effect in the Clinic (QUANTEC) recommendations
for patients undergoing SBRT for liver metastases
recommends a mean liver dose (total liver minus
gross tumor volume) \15 Gy for three fractions and
\20 Gy for a six fraction regimen (Pan et al. 2010).
QUANTEC also endorses the constraint of at least
700 cc of normal liver volume receiving less than
15 Gy in three to five fractions. As more long-term
data for a larger number of patients treated using
hypofractionated regimens becomes available, more
accurate normal tissue constraints will emerge. More
conservative constraints are likely necessary for
patients with underlying liver dysfunction. Caution
should also be used in patients with previous radiation
to the liver, conventionally fractionated or high dose
per fraction external beam radiation and in patients
previously treated with Ytrium-90 radioembolization.

4.2

Bowel Toxicity

Depending on where the metastases are located, the
stomach, small bowel or large bowel are also at risk
for toxicity. In a phase II trial of SBRT for colorectal
liver metastases conducted by Hoyer et al. (2006), one
colon perforation requiring surgery and two duodenal
ulcerations treated with medical management occurred. In all three patients part of the intestine received
30 Gy or higher. An added challenge with bowel dose
constraints is defining the volume at risk. Both contouring individual bowel loops as well as the potential
space where the bowel lies are used. QUANTEC
recommends keeping individually contoured small
bowel receiving [15 Gy to \120 cc (Kavanagh et al.
2010). If the peritoneal space is contoured, then
the volume receiving [45 Gy should be \195 cc.
Restricting the maximum dose is also important in
decreasing the risk of bowel toxicity. QUANTEC
recommends limiting the volume of small bowel
receiving [12.5 Gy in a single dose to \30 cc, which
is primarily based on the pancreatic SBRT experience. Additional constraints include a maximum point

312

M. Stinauer et al.

dose \30 Gy for 3–5 fraction regimens. In the French
SBRT experience, one patient had gastric ulceration
(Vautravers-Dewas et al. 2011). QUANTEC data
recommends a maximum point dose to the stomach
of \30 Gy for three fractions and the volume of
stomach receiving [22.5 Gy should be \4% or 5 cc
(Kavanagh et al. 2010).
The QUANTEC report is largely based on experience using conventional fractionation, so recommendations must be taken with great caution. As we
amass more data from treatments using hypofractionation, clearer bowel constraints will emerge.

4.3

Abdominal and Chest Wall Injury

Attempts to minimize dose to the normal liver or
bowel may inadvertently push dose into the softtissue compartment or the abdominal wall. In the
University of Colorado experience one patient
developed soft-tissue breakdown requiring surgical
debridement (Rusthoven et al. 2009). This was not
unexpected once the plan was reviewed. Four static
co-planar beams delivered 48 Gy to a large area of
skin and subcutaneous tissue over three consecutive
days. Extrapolating from the chest wall toxicity seen
in lung SBRT, in order to minimize chest wall morbidity, it is important to limit the volume of chest wall
receiving more than 30 Gy to less than 30 cc (Dunlap
et al. 2010). Additionally in the French experience
one patient developed acute grade 3 epidermitis after
receiving 45 Gy in three fractions and therefore
skin morbidity can be minimized by limiting the
volume of skin receiving more than 50% of the prescription dose (Hoppe et al. 2008). In the Philadelphia
CyberKnife experience, one patient with a solitary
liver metastases adjacent to ribs (CTV 10 cc) developed rib pain and fracture diagnosed on CT scan of
the chest 19 months following SBRT with no evidence of local failure. Retrospective dose calculation
to adjacent ribs revealed 9.5 cc of total rib volume
received[30 Gy. Extrapolating again from the SBRT
lung literature, rib fractures are the most common late
toxicity from SBRT. In a series of 177 prospective
patients followed by thin section CT, rib fractures
appeared in 23.2% of patients following SBRT for
lung cancer. No rib fracture occurred if the primary
lung tumor was more than 16 mm from the chest

wall. Chest wall pain was seen in 10.2% of patients
with 78% of those with pain developing rib fracture
(Nambu et al. 2011). In a series of 33 patients with
median follow-up of 29 months and minimum followup of 15 months, 13 fractures were seen in 7 patients.
Identifying all ribs receiving at least 21 Gy/3 fx
revealed no fractures with 2 cc of rib receiving
\21 Gy, a 5% fracture rate with 2 cc receiving
27.3 Gy and a 50% fracture rate with for 2 cc
receiving 49.8 Gy (Pettersson et al. 2009). When
treating liver metastases with SBRT, generally the rib
does not need to be contoured unless the liver
metastasis is within 2 cm of the rib and then the above
dose constraints should be considered.
Overall SBRT for the treatment of liver metastases
is well tolerated. Low rates of grade 3 or higher
toxicity have been reported (Wulf et al. 2006; Hoyer
et al. 2006; Rusthoven et al. 2009; Lee et al. 2009;
Ambrosino et al. 2009; Goodman et al., 2010;
Rule et al. 2011; Stintzing et al. 2010; van der Pool
et al. 2010; Chang et al. 2011; Vautravers-Dewas
et al. 2011; Lanciano et al. 2011). Mendez Romero
(2008) prospectively studied quality of life (QoL) in
28 patients undergoing liver SBRT with two generic
QoL questionnaires in addition to a cancer-specific
questionnaire. Only fatigue in the symptom questionnaire was statistically worse at 1 month and then
returned to baseline. Pretreatment QoL was maintained
6 months after SBRT. Patients with a limited number
of metastases and normal functioning livers prior to
treatment should not experience liver toxicity if the
recommended dose constraints are met. Awareness of
dose delivered to the small bowel and abdominal/chest
wall, can reduce toxicity to these organs as well.

5

Follow-Up Imaging

Herfarth et al. (2003) described the characteristic
changes on CT as a function of time after SBRT.
Generally, there are three types of changes observed.
Type I occurs up to 3 months following SBRT where
there is a zone of hypodensity that is larger than the
original treated lesion and corresponds to approximately the 50% isodose level. This hypodensity in the
portovenous phase shrinks with time. Type II occurs
between 3 and 6 months following SBRT and type III
occurs at 6 months and beyond. Olsen et al. (2009)

Liver Metastasis

313

Fig. 1 Case 1. Case study of a 63-year-old African–American
male with two metachronous liver metastases 4 years after
colon resection (T3N0 adenocarcinoma). After receiving
2 years of chemotherapy for the liver metastases he progressed
and was referred for SBRT. He was treated with CyberKnife

SBRT sequentially to each metastasis (45 Gy in three fractions
prescribed to the CTV ? 5 mm = PTV). Shown is the axial
view of the (a, b) pre-treatment PET/CT, (c, d) the posttreatment PET/CT and (e, f) the treatment planning CT
denoting the SBRT dose distribution

have shown that there are underlying pathologic
changes consistent with classic radiation-induced
VOD corresponding to Herfarth type I, II and III
reactions, even though there was no clinically evident
liver disease. These observations support the critical
volume architecture model of the liver and explains
why partial liver irradiation has been shown to
be safe. The significance of Herfarth’s report is
more importantly in educating patients, radiologists
and treating physicians of the expected changes on
imaging following SBRT so that one does not incorrectly assume the presence of progressive disease.
The vast majority of metastases are hypodense on CT
and look very much like the ablation zone following
SBRT. It can be very difficult to distinguish tumor
from radiation reaction following SBRT, especially
early following SBRT.

colon. He received 2 years of chemotherapy with
progression of both liver metastases. He was then
treated with CyberKnife SBRT sequentially to each
metastasis (45 Gy in three fractions prescribed to the
CTV ? 5 mm = PTV). One gold fiducial marker
was placed within each liver metastases without
complication 10 days before CT for treatment planning (1.25 mm slice thickness with end expiration
hold and 64 slice helical CT). Each tumor was treated
with an independent plan sequentially due to the
significant distance between tumors with tumor #1 at
the dome and tumor #2 at the inferior tip of the liver.
Tumor #1 (PTV volume 93 cc) was treated with a
conformal planning technique utilizing 121 active
beams and a 50 mm collimator with 45 Gy prescribed to the 70% isodose line (maximum dose
64.3 Gy). Tumor #2 (PTV volume 53.7 cc) was
treated with an isocentric planning technique with 50
active beams and a 40 mm collimator with 45 Gy
prescribed to the 70% isodose line (maximum dose
64.3 Gy). The targets were defined using CT with
contrast/liver windows, MRI liver with contrast and
PET/CT. Summation of both plans revealed 1,640 cc
of normal liver received less than 15 Gy with total
liver volume of 2,449 cc. Less than 1% of large

6

Case Examples

Case 1
The patient is a 63-year-old African–American
male with two liver metastases diagnosed 4 years
after surgery for a stage T3N0 adenocarcinoma of the

314

Fig. 2 Case 2. Case study of a 47-year-old white female who
presented with a T2N2aM1 left breast cancer with a solitary
liver metastasis. She received CyberKnife SBRT to the liver
metastasis (45 Gy prescribed to the CTV ? 5 mm = PTV in
three fractions, 75% isodose line). Shown is the axial view of
the (a) pre-treatment PET/CT, (b) the post-treatment PET/CT
and (c) the treatment planning CT denoting the SBRT dose
distribution

bowel received 19 Gy in three fractions and less than
1% of right kidney received 9 Gy in three fractions.
Synchrony tracking technology was used for each
treatment. Prior to each treatment, Xsight spine
set-up was used for body alignment and couch shift
made to fiducial coordinates verifying no migration
of fiducial. During treatment maximum combined
movement in all three directions due to respiration for

M. Stinauer et al.

tumor #1 was 22 mm and for tumor #2 was 14 mm.
Overall treatment time for each fraction was 50 min
for tumor #1 and 35 min for tumor #2. The patient
remained disease free in the liver, however he died
36 months after treatment from progressive abdominal peritoneal and lung metastases. Figure 1 shows
the pretreatment PET/CT, post-treatment PET/CT
and SBRT dose distribution for both tumors.
Case 2
The patient is a 47-year-old white female who
presented with a T2N2aM1 left breast cancer with a
solitary synchronous liver metastasis. She received
CyberKnife SBRT to the liver metastasis (45 Gy prescribed to the CTV ? 5 mm = PTV in three fractions,
75% isodose line). One gold fiducial marker was placed
in the metastasis without complication 10 days before
treatment planning CT (1.25 mm slice thickness with
end expiration hold and 64 slice helical CT). The target
was defined using CT with contrast/liver windows,
MRI liver with contrast and PET/CT . SBRT was
delivered to the PTV (75 cc) with 45 Gy prescribed to
the 75% isodose line (maximum dose 60 Gy) using
isocentric planning technique, 50 mm collimator and
48 active beams. Total liver volume was 1,870
and 1,644 cc of the liver received less than 15 Gy.
Maximum heart dose was 15.5 Gy in three fractions
with only 4% of the heart receiving[5 Gy. Synchrony
tracking technology was used for each treatment. Total
maximum displacement of the fiducial due to respiration during treatment was 20 mm. Overall treatment
time was 35 min for each fraction. She also underwent
chemotherapy and left breast/axillary radiation. The
patient remained relapse free in the treated hepatic
lesion at 3 years; however, she developed bone, brain
and additional liver metastases and died of disease.
Figure 2 shows the pretreatment PET/CT, post-treatment PET/CT and SBRT dose distribution.
Case 3
A 44-year-old woman with a history of colon
cancer presented with a solitary liver lesion. Two
years after her colon surgery she was found to have
rising carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels and
PET/CT scan revealed metastatic disease in the liver
and abdominal lymph nodes. She received 6 months
of chemotherapy with decrease in size of the lymph
nodes and complete response in the liver. Re-staging
PET/CT scan 4 months later revealed a new posterior
right lobe lesion and she was referred for stereotactic
body radiation therapy.

Liver Metastasis

315

Fig. 3 Case 3. A GTV was
drawn based on the fused
images. The CTV consisted of
the GTV with no expansion.
The PTV was the GTV with
7 mm lateral and anterior–
posterior margin and 10 mm
superior–inferior margin.
Treatment was prescribed to
the 100% isodose line, with
80% isodose line covering the
PTV. A single isocenter and
four dynamic conformal arcs
were used to deliver an
optimized treatment plan,
with a prescribed dose of
60 Gy in ten fractions

Patient immobilization for simulation and treatment was accomplished using the ExacTrac patient
positioning platform (BrainLAB AG, Feldkirchen,
Germany), consisting of a Vak-Lok cushion (CIVCO,
Kalona, IA) for initial positioning and seven infrared
reflecting body fiducial markers placed on the patient’s
skin over the thorax and abdomen. A planning CT
scan of the abdomen was then obtained on a HighSpeed Advantage CT (GE healthcare, Waukesha, WI)
using an end-expiratory breath-hold technique.
Axial images of the liver were obtained with slice
thickness of 3 mm. No intravenous or oral contrast
was used.

The planning and diagnostic PET/CT scans were
transferred to the BrainScan Treatment Planning
System and fused using automatic registration.
Verification of registration was done in the axial,
coronal, and sagittal planes. The tumors and organs at
risk were subsequently contoured. A GTV was drawn
based on the fused images. The CTV consisted of
the GTV with no expansion. The PTV was the GTV
with 7 mm lateral and anterior-posterior margin and
10 mm superior-inferior margin. Treatment was prescribed to the 100% isodose line, with 80% isodose
line covering the PTV (Fig. 3). A single isocenter and
four dynamic conformal arcs were used to deliver an

316

Fig. 4 Case 3. A dose–volume histogram (DVH) was calculated for all of the irradiated OAR’s. For the liver, a volume of
1,000 cc tumor-free liver was required and the dose to 70% of
this volume was not to exceed 30 Gy

optimized treatment plan, with a prescribed dose of
60 Gy in ten fractions. A dose-volume histogram
(DVH) was calculated for all of the irradiated OAR’s.
For the liver, a volume of 1,000 cc tumor-free liver
was required and the dose to 70% of this volume was
not to exceed 30 Gy (Fig. 4).
Treatment was delivered on the Novalis system
using 6-MV photons at a dose rate of 480 monitor
units per minute. Respiratory gating was accomplished using end-expiratory breath-hold. During
treatment, infrared cameras were used to provide realtime monitoring by the radiation therapist. The beam
was turned off for displacement exceeding 3 mm in
any axial dimension. The beam was not turned on
until all displacements in the axial dimensions were
less than 2 mm. Assessment of patient positioning
and tumor localization was verified with repeat CT
scans following every third fraction. Verification

M. Stinauer et al.

scans were fused to initial planning scan using the
fiducial markers as reference. Isodose coverage of
the PTV was evaluated and approved before delivery
of the next fraction.
Treatment was well tolerated without any significant acute sequelae. A three-month follow-up PET/
CT scan showed no abnormal hypermetabolic activity. Eight months following completion of treatment
she developed enlarging retroperitoneal lymph nodes
and new liver lesions. She received several months of
chemotherapy and on further progression decided to
go to hospice.
Case 4
A 68-year-old female underwent laparoscopic
sigmoid colectomy for a T2N1M1 obstructing sigmoid cancer with solitary liver metastases right lobe.
She received one cycle of FOLFOX-6 followed by
right hepatic lobectomy and left lateral wedge resection for four metastases involving the right lobe and
one small metastasis involving the left lobe. She
subsequently completed adjuvant chemotherapy after
rendered disease free surgically. She was off chemotherapy 1 year when she noticed abdominal discomfort in the right upper quadrant scar. CT and MRI of
the abdomen revealed s/p right hepatic lobe resection
with hypertrophy of the left hepatic lobe and interval
development of an enhancing mass involving the
caudate lobe measuring up to 4.6 cm consistent with
new metastatic disease. Liver biopsy confirmed metastatic adenocarcinoma. She received Camptosar and
Avastin which was poorly tolerated. She received
4 months of Oxaliplatin, 5 FU and Avastin with
response by CT with the mass now measuring 3 cm.
She was accepted for consolidative CyberKnife SBRT
to the solitary recurrent liver metastases.
CT-guided fiducial placement was completed 10 days
before CT for treatment planning with and without IV
contrast without complication (1.25 mm slice thickness
with end expiration hold and 64 slice helical CT). The
fiducial was seen within the 2.74 cm mass which was
contoured. The GTV (CTV) ? 5 mm = PTV was
treated to 60 Gy in three fractions prescribed to the 80%
isodose over 7 days. She was pretreated with decadron
4 mg per day and denied nausea or vomiting with normal
bowel habits. Liver volume was 2,306 cc and 1,897 cc of
liver received less than 15 Gy. Mean dose to the
right kidney was 2.58 Gy. Maximum dose to the PTV
(vol 39.3 cc) was 75 Gy. Isocentric technique was used
to treat the CTV with 51 radiosurgical beams (Fig. 5).

Liver Metastasis

317

Fig. 5 Case 4. Case study of a 68-year-old white female who
presented with a T2N1M1 obstructing sigmoid cancer with
liver metastases. Following colectomy she received one cycle
of FOLFOX-6 followed by right hepatic lobectomy and left
lateral wedge resection for four metastases from the right lobe
and 1 small metastasis from the left lobe. She recurred by CT

and MRI of the abdomen with a 4.6 cm, enhancing mass
involving the caudate lobe measuring up to 4.6 cm, consistent
with new metastatic disease. She received 60 Gy in three
fractions prescribed to the 80% isodose to the GTV (CTV)
+5 mm = PTV over 7 days with CyberKnife radiosurgery

She remains free of disease by PET/CT 1.5 years
from completion of CyberKnife SBRT. She received
no further chemotherapy following SBRT. She had
no late complications associated with SBRT. CEA is
normal.

systemic therapy, lesion volume, extent of extrahepatic
disease and life expectancy. In addition, the studies
vary in terms of target margins and method used for
assessing local control. Historically, assessment of
local control included use of CT and MRI scans. More
recently, PET/CT has been used for local control
assessment with increased sensitivity and specificity
for detection of liver metastases and local liver recurrence following surgery compared to CT scan (Patel
et al. 2011). PET/CT for local control assessment
following SBRT is currently being studied in a
prospective trial using PERCIST criteria that require
a 30% decline in SUV for partial response and

7

Future Directions

As shown in Table 1, local control rates with SBRT for
liver metastases are excellent; however, follow-up
is short and most series include a heterogeneous group
of patients in terms of the primary site, response to

318

resolution of metabolic activity for complete response
(Wahl et al. 2009).
Questions also remain regarding the definition of
the CTV, especially following chemotherapy, and
adequate margins depending on the technology used
for SBRT delivery. In most series reported to date
contrast-enhanced CT was utilized for target definition. The value of MRI and PET/CT and the ability to
optimally merge these images with CT requires further
study. Homogeneous series of patients with liver
metastases treated in multi-institutional trials (RTOG
0438) are needed to further establish the dose-volume
relationships of SBRT as well as its effect on local
control and survival. Longer follow-up with a larger
number of patients may establish SBRT as an effective
treatment approach worthy of comparison to other
liver-directed therapies in a phase III randomized trial.
As our imaging techniques improve, more patients
with limited metastatic disease are considered stage IV
at diagnosis. Since the concept of oligometastatic disease was first introduced by Hellman and Weichselbaum (1995) in 1995, it is now recognized that a small
subset of patients can be cured if there is local control of
the primary tumor as well as limited metastatic disease.
For colorectal patients the liver is the primary site of
metastasis as it derives the majority of its blood supply
from the portal vein. While the gold standard for liver
metastasis is metastectomy, only a minority of patients
are able to undergo resection. Given that SBRT is a
non-invasive, well-tolerated procedure with excellent
local control rates that rival surgery, perhaps SBRT
should be considered the new gold standard for patients
presenting with oligometastatic disease to the liver.
Conflict of Interest There are no potential conflicts of interest
among the authors and this manuscript. There are no financial or
non-financial competing interests. This manuscript has been seen,
read, and agreed upon in its content by all designated authors.
This manuscript has not been submitted or published elsewhere.

References
Ambrosino G, Polistina F, Costantin G, Francescon P,
Guglielmi R, Zanco P, Casamassima F, Febbraro A,
Gerunda G, Lumachi F (2009) Image-guided robotic
stereotactic radiosurgery for unresectable liver metastases:
preliminary results. Anticancer Res 29(8):3381–3384
Balter JM, Dawson LA, Kazanjian S, McGinn CJ, Brock KK,
Lawrence TS, Haken RK (2001) Determination of ventilatory
liver movement via radiographic evaluation of diaphragm

M. Stinauer et al.
position. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 51(1):267–270. doi:
10.1016/S0360-3016(01)01649-2
Borgelt B, Gelber R, Larson M, Hendrickson F, Griffin T,
Roth R (1981) Ultra-rapid high dose irradiation schedules for
the palliation of brain metastases: final results of the first two
studies by the radiation therapy oncology group. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 7(12):1633–1638. doi: 10.1016/0360-3016
(81)90184-X
Case RB, Moseley DJ, Sonke JJ, Eccles CL, Dinniwell RE,
Kim J, Bezjak A, Milosevic M, Brock KK, Dawson LA
(2010) Interfraction and intrafraction changes in amplitude
of breathing motion in stereotactic liver radiotherapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 77(3):918–925. doi: S0360-3016
(09)03201-5[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.09.008
Chang DT, Swaminath A, Kozak M, Weintraub J, Koong AC,
Kim J, Dinniwell R, Brierley J, Kavanagh BD, Dawson LA,
Schefter TE (2011) Stereotactic body radiotherapy for colorectal liver metastases: a pooled analysis. Cancer 117(17):
4060–4069. doi: 10.1002/cncr.25997
Dawson LA, Brock KK, Kazanjian S, Fitch D, McGinn CJ,
Lawrence TS, Haken RK, Balter JM (2001) The reproducibility of organ position using active breathing control (ABC)
during liver radiotherapy. 51(5):1410–1421. doi: 10.1016/
S0360-3016(01)02653-0
Dawson LA, Normolle D, Balter JM, McGinn CJ, Lawrence TS,
Ten Haken RK (2002) Analysis of radiation-induced liver
disease using the Lyman NTCP model. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 53(4):810–821. doi: 10.1016/S0360-3016(02)02846-8
Dunlap NE, Cai J, Beidermann GB, Yang W, Benedict SH,
Sheng K, Schefter TE, Kavanagh BD, Larner JM (2010)
Chest wall volume receiving [30 gy predicts risk of severe
pain and/or rib fracture after lung stereotactic body
radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 76(3):796–801.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.02.027
Eccles CL, Dawson LA, Moseley JL, Brock KK (2011) Interfraction liver shape variability and impact on GTV position during
liver stereotactic radiotherapy using abdominal compression.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 80(3):938–946. doi: S03603016(10)03049-X[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.08.003
Emami B, Lyman J, Brown A, Coia L, Goitein M, Munzenrider JE,
Solin LJ, Wesson M (1991) Tolerance of normal tissue to
therapeutic irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 21(1):
109–122
Goodman KA, Wiegner EA, Maturen KE, Zhang Z, Mo Q,
Yang G, Gibbs IC, Fisher GA, Koong AC (2010) Doseescalation study of single-fraction stereotactic body radiotherapy for liver malignancies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
78(2):486–493. doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.08.020
Hawkins MA, Brock KK, Eccles C, Moseley D, Jaffray D,
Dawson LA (2006) Assessment of residual error in liver
position using kV cone-beam computed tomography for liver
cancer high-precision radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 66(2):610–619. doi: S0360-3016(06)00463-9[pii]10.
1016/j.ijrobp.2006.03.026
Heinzerling JH, Papiez L, Chien S, Anderson J, Forster K,
Zhang G, Timmerman R (2008) Stereotactic body radiation
therapy: evaluation of setup accuracy and targeting methods
for a new couch integrated immobilization system. Technol
Cancer Res Treat 7(3):197–206
Hellman S, Weichselbaum RR (1995) Oligometastases. J Clin
Oncol 13(1):8–10

Liver Metastasis
Hennessey H, Valenti D, Cabrera T (2009) Cardiac embolization of an implanted fiducial marker for hepatic stereotactic
body radiotherapy: a case report. J Med Case Reports 3:140
Herfarth KK, Hof H, Bahner ML, Lohr F, Hoss A, van Kaick G,
Wannenmacher M, Debus J (2003) Assessment of focal
liver reaction by multiphasic CT after stereotactic singledose radiotherapy of liver tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 57(2):444–451. doi: 10.1016/S0360-3016(03)00586-8
Hoppe BS, Laser B, Kowalski AV, Fontenla SC, PenaGreenberg E, Yorke ED, Lovelock DM, Hunt MA,
Rosenzweig KE (2008) Acute skin toxicity following
stereotactic body radiation therapy for stage i non-smallcell lung cancer: who’s at risk? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
72(5):1283–1286. doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.08.036
Hoyer M, Roed H, Traberg Hansen A, Ohlhuis L, Petersen J,
Nellemann H, Berthelsen AK, Grau C, Aage Engelholm S,
Von der maase H (2006) Phase II study on stereotactic body
radiotherapy of colorectal metastases. Acta Oncol 45(7):
823–830. doi: 10.1080/02841860600904854
Ingold JA, Reed GB, Kaplan HS, Bagshaw MA (1965)
Radiation hepatitis. Am J Roentgenol Radium Ther Nucl
Med 93:200–208
Kavanagh BD, Pan CD, Dawson LA, Das SK, Li XA,
Haken RKT, Miften M (2010) Radiation dose-volume effects
in the stomach and small bowel. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
76(3):S101–S107. doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.05.071
Kemeny N (2006) Management of liver metastases from colorectal
cancer. Oncology (Williston Park) 20(10):1161–176, 1179;
discussion 1179–1180, 1185–1166
Kim DJ, Murray BR, Halperin R, Roa WH (2001) Held-breath
self-gating technique for radiotherapy of non-small-cell
lung cancer: a feasibility study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
49(1):43–49. doi: S0360-3016(00)01372-9[pii]
Kothary N, Heit JJ, Louie JD (2009) Safety and efficacy of
percutaneous fiducial marker implantation for image-guided
radiation therapy. J Vasc Interv Radiol 20(2):235–239
Lanciano R, Lamond J, Yang J, Feng J, Arrigo S, Good M,
Brady L (2011) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for
patients with heavily pretreated liver metastases and liver
tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Bio Phys 81(2):S354
Lee MT, Kim JJ, Dinniwell R, Brierley J, Lockwood G, Wong R,
Cummings B, Ringash J, Tse RV, Knox JJ, Dawson LA
(2009) Phase I study of individualized stereotactic body
radiotherapy of liver metastases. Am Soc Clin Oncol
27(10):1585–1591. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.20.0600
Mendez Romero A, Wunderink W, van Os RM, Nowak PJ,
Heijmen BJ, Nuyttens JJ, Bradwijk RP, Verhoef C,
Ijzermans JNM, Levendag PC (2008) Quality of life after
stereotactic body radiation therapy for primary and metastatic liver tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 70(5):
1447–1452. doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.08.058
Mendez Romero A, Zinkstok RT, Wunderink W, van Os RM,
Joosten H, Seppenwoolde Y, Nowak PJ, Brandwijk RP,
Verhoef C, JN IJ, Levendag PC, Heijmen BJ (2009)
Stereotactic body radiation therapy for liver tumors: impact
of daily setup corrections and day-to-day anatomic variations
on dose in target and organs at risk. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 75(4):1201–1208. doi: S0360-3016(08)03916-3[pii]
Nambu A, Onishi H, Aoki S, Koshiishi T, Kuriyama K,
Komiyama T, Marino K, Araya M, Saito R, Tominaga L,
Maehata Y, Sawada E, Araki T (2011) Rib reacture after

319
stereotactic radiotherapy on follow-up thin-section computed tomography in 177 primary lung cancer patients.
Radiat Oncol 13(6):137
Olsen CC, Welsh J, Kavanagh BD, Franklin W, McCarter M,
Cardenes HR, Gaspar LE, Schefter TE (2009) Microscopic
and macroscopic tumor and parenchymal effect of liver
stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
73(5):1414–1424. doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.12.020
Pan CC, Kavanagh BD, Dawson LA, Li XA, Das SK,
Miften M, Haken RKT (2010) Radiation-associated liver
injury. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 76(3):S94–S100. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.06.092
Patel S, McCall M, Ohinmaa A, Bigam D, Dryden DM (2011)
Positron emission tomography/computed tomographic scans
compared to computed tomographic scans for detecting
colorectal liver metastases: a systematic review. Ann Surg
253(4):666–671. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e31821110c9
Pettersson N, Nyman J, Johansson KA (2009) Radiation-induced
rib fractures after hypofractionated stereotactic body radiation
therapy of non-small cell lung cancer: a dose-and volumeresponse analysis. Radiother Oncol. Jun;91(3):360–368. Epub
2009, May 4.00000658-201104000-00006[pii]
Reed GB, Cox AJ (1966) The human liver after radiation
injury. A form of veno-occlusive disease. Am J Pathol 48(4):
597–611
Robertson DJ, Stukel TA, Gottlieb DJ, Sutherland JM,
Fisher ES (2009) Survival after hepatic resection of
colorectal cancer metastases: a national experience. Cancer
115(4):752–759. doi: 10.1002/cncr.24081
Rule W, Timmerman R, Tong L (2011) Phase I dose-escalation
study of stereotactic body radiotherapy in patients with
hepatic metastases. Ann Surg Oncol. 18:1081–1087
Rusthoven KE, Kavanagh BD, Cardenes H, Stieber VW,
Burri SH, Feigenberg SJ, Chidel MA, Pugh TJ, Franklin W,
Kane M, Gaspar LE, Schefter TE (2009) Multi-institutional
phase I/II trial of stereotactic body radiation therapy for
liver metastases. J Clin Oncol 27(10):1572–1578. doi: JCO.
2008.19.6329[pii]10.1200/JCO.2008.19.6329
Schefter TE, Kavanagh BD, Timmerman RD, Cardenes HR,
Baron A, Gaspar LE (2005) A phase I trial of stereotactic
body radiation therapy (SBRT) for liver metastases. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 62(5):1371–1378. doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2005.01.002
Shirato H, Shimizu S, Kitamura K, Nishioka T, Kagei K,
Hashimoto S, Aoyama H, Kunieda T, Shinohara N, DosakaAkita H, Miyasaka K (2000) Four-dimensional treatment
planning and fluoroscopic real-time tumor tracking radiotherapy for moving tumor. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
48(2):435–442. doi: S0360-3016(00)00625-8[pii]
Stintzing S, Hoffmann RT, Heinemann V, Kufeld M, Rentsch M,
Muacevic A (2010) Radiosurgery of liver tumors: value of
robotic radiosurgical device to treat liver tumors. Ann Surg
Oncol Nov 17(11):2877–2883. Epub 2010Jun 24
Vautravers-Dewas C, Dewas S, Bonodeau F, Adenis A,
Lacornerie T, Penel N, Lartigau E, Mirabel X (2011)
Image-guided robotic stereotactic body radiation therapy for
liver metastases: is there a dose response relationship? Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. doi: S0360-3016(11)00042-3[pii]
van der Pool AE, Mendez Romero A, Wunderink W,
Heijmen BJ, Levendag PC, Verhoef C, Ijzermans JNM
(2010) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for colorectal

320
liver metastases. British J Surg 97(3):377–382. doi: 10.1002/
bjs.689510.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.12.047
Wahl RL, Jacene H, Kasamon Y, Lodge MA (2009) From
RECIST to PERCIST: evolving considerations for PET
response criteria in solid tumors. J Nucl Med 50(Suppl
1):122S–150S. doi: 50/Suppl_1/122S[pii]10.2967/jnumed.
108.057307
Wang Z, Nelson JW, Yoo S, Wu QJ, Kirkpatrick JP, Marks LB,
Yin FF (2009) Refinement of treatment setup and target
localization accuracy using three-dimensional cone-beam
computed tomography for stereotactic body radiotherapy.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 73(2):571–577. doi: S03603016(08)03530-X[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.09.040

M. Stinauer et al.
Worm ES, Hansen AT, Petersen JB, Muren LP, Praestegaard
LH, Hoyer M (2010) Inter- and intrafractional localisation
errors in cone-beam CT guided sterotactic radiation therapy
of tumors in the liver and lung. Acta Oncol 49(7):
1177–1183. doi: 10.3109/0284186X.2010.498435
Wulf J, Guckenberger M, Haedinger U, Oppitz U, Mueller G,
Baier K, Flentje M (2006) Stereotactic radiotherapy of primary
liver cancer and hepatic metastases. Acta Oncol 45(7):838–847.
doi: NU5W708282324644[pii]10.1080/02841860600904821
Yin FF, Zhiheng W, Yoo S, Wu QJ, Kirkpatrick J, Larrier N,
Meyer J, Willeyy CG, Marks LB (2008) Integration of
cone-beam CT in stereotactic body radiation therapy.
Technol Cancer Res Treat 7(2):133–139

Adrenal Metastasis
Mirna Abboud, Simon S. Lo, Arnold C. Paulino,
Daniel E. Lehane, and Bin S. Teh

Contents

Abstract

1

Introduction.............................................................. 321

2
2.1
2.2
2.3

Treatment Modalities for Adrenal Metastases ....
Surgery .......................................................................
Conventional Radiation .............................................
SBRT..........................................................................

3

Rationale for SBRT................................................. 324

4

Goals of Treatment with SBRT............................. 324

5

Technical Aspects .................................................... 324

6

Clinical Applications ............................................... 324

7

Toxicity...................................................................... 326

8

Case Example ........................................................... 327

9

Future Directions..................................................... 328

Adrenal metastases can arise from multiple malignancies, mainly lung, breast, renal, gastric, hepatocellular carcinomas, melanoma, and many others.
The greatest risk for spread to the adrenal glands is
seen with lung carcinoma (Abrams et al., Cancer
3:74–85, 1950). Multiple treatment options are
available to treat adrenal metastases, including open
and laparoscopic adrenalectomy, radiofrequency
ablation, transarterial chemoembolization, palliative radiation, and more recently stereotactic body
radiation therapy (SBRT). Here we discuss the role
and the benefit of SBRT in the management of
adrenal metastases, including technical aspects,
clinical applications, and treatment toxicities. We
also include clinical case examples to illustrate the
treatment plan, isodose lines, and dose–volume
histograms. We conclude with future directions in
the use of SBRT for adrenal metastases.

322
322
323
324

References.......................................................................... 328

M. Abboud  A. C. Paulino  B. S. Teh (&)
Department of Radiation Oncology, The Methodist
Hospital, Cancer Center and Research Institute,
6565 Fannin, DB1-077 Houston, TX 77030, USA
e-mail: bteh@tmhs.org
S. S. Lo
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center,
Case Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH, USA
D. E. Lehane
Department of Academic Medicine,
The Methodist Hospital,
Houston, TX 77030, USA

1

Introduction

The adrenal gland is a common site for metastatic
spread (Lam and Lo 2002). The most common lesion
found in the adrenal glands at autopsy is metastatic
tumor and this is attributed to its rich sinusoidal blood
supply. The incidence of adrenal metastases found in
autopsy series ranges from 13 to 27 % (Abrams et al.
1950) and the most common tumors associated with
adrenal metastases are lung, breast, renal, gastric,
hepatocellular carcinomas, and melanoma (Abrams
et al. 1950). Isolated adrenal metastasis may also

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2012_646, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

321

322

M. Abboud et al.

result from direct lymphatic spread via retroperitoneal
channels especially in primary lung tumors and thus
may be considered to be a regional extension (Kocijancic et al. 2003; Blumenschein et al. 2008).
Adrenal metastases are usually asymptomatic
lesions that are found on imaging studies which are
performed as part as a metastatic workup such as
computed tomography (CT), ultrasonography, magnetic resonance imaging, and positron emission
tomography (PET) scan. Clinical symptoms are generally due to enlarging adrenal lesions that may
induce a visceral- or somatic-type pain, gastrointestinal manifestations including nausea, vomiting, early
satiety, and in cases of bilateral metastases, hypoadrenalism. For a long time, patients with metastatic
cancer were treated with systemic therapy as standard
of care whereas radiation was reserved for palliation
and mainly for pain control (Short et al. 1996; Soejima et al. 1997; Miyaji et al. 1999; Zeng et al. 2005).
With the advance of new techniques, metastasisdirected therapies have come into play and are thought to
prolong disease-free survival and possibly offer the
potential of cure. Nowadays, radiation or surgical excision is often discussed in the management of patients
with oligometastatic disease in addition to systemic
therapy. This applies to adrenal metastasis in particular
given the hypothesis that aggressive management of
malignancies including local treatment of oligometastatic disease can achieve excellent disease control and
extend patients’ survival. Stereotactic body radiation
therapy (SBRT) has emerged as a specific technique that
combines accurate and focused radiation delivery, less
treatment fractions in view of the use of higher doses per
fraction compared to traditional radiation. Its application
does not only cover primary tumors in different locations
but also has extended to metastatic disease as well.
In this chapter, we highlight the role of SBRT
in the management of adrenal metastasis. Available
studies related to this topic are discussed in detail.

2

Treatment Modalities for Adrenal
Metastases

2.1

Surgery

Multiple small series (Twomey et al. 1982; Raviv et al.
1990; Reyes et al. 1990; Higashiyama et al. 1994; Luketich
and Burt 1994; Kirsch et al. 1993; Ayabe et al. 1995) have

described patients who were treated surgically for solitary
adrenal metastasis and reported overall survival up to
14 years after adrenalectomy (range 5 months–14 years)
but these retrospective data were based on limited sized
and highly selected patient cohorts.

2.1.1 Open Adrenalectomy (OA)
Kim et al. (1998) published a retrospective analysis of
37 patients treated at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, who had undergone adrenalectomy between
July 1986 and October 1996. Sarela et al. (2003)
updated these results and demonstrated a median progression-free survival (PFS) of 11 months and a
median survival of 21 months. The actuarial PFS and
overall survival (OS) were 21 and 24 % after 5 years,
respectively. However, a complication rate of 19 %
was noted, with 12 % of patients experiencing severe
complications. Approximately 50 % of the adrenal
metastases were synchronous and most of these were
from lung or renal cell carcinomas. Adrenalectomy
was performed using an anterior subcostal approach.
One peri-operative death occurred due to sepsis. The
median post-operative length of stay for the entire
group was 8 days (range 3–21 days) and increased to
15 days in the presence of major complications.
Resection of solitary M1 lesions may offer the best
chance for cure. Several groups have reported good
long-term survival with adrenal resection for patients
with metastatic lung carcinoma, renal cell carcinoma,
colorectal carcinoma, and melanoma. However, most of
these are small series or anecdotal case reports. One
large series from the Mayo Clinic (Lo et al. 1995)
reported on 52 patients undergoing resection of adrenal
metastasis from a variety of solid tumors between 1983
and 1993, overall actuarial survival at 2 years was 40 %
with a median survival of 13 months. In a French study,
(Porte et al. 1998), a total of 43 patients with lung cancer
treated between 1987 and 1998 had adrenalectomy for
isolated adrenal gland metastasis and were included in a
retrospective analysis. The median PFS was 13 months.
The overall median survival of patients who underwent
synchronous or metachronous adrenal resection was
6 months. For the eight patients who had synchronous
metastases, the mean hospital stay was 40 days and for
the three other patients who underwent metachronous
adrenal resection, the mean hospital stay was 9 days.
There was one late post-operative death. The authors
postulated that aggressive surgical treatment is the only
possibility for obtaining a potential cure.

Adrenal Metastasis

Luketich and Burt (1994) described 14 patients with a
solitary adrenal metastasis associated with non-small
cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). The median survival was
22 months for the eight patients who were treated surgically compared with 8.5 months for the six patients
who were treated with platinum-based chemotherapy.
Tanvetyanon et al. (2008) published the most recent and
the largest review discussing outcomes of adrenalectomy for isolated synchronous versus metachronous
adrenal metastases in NSCLC. The authors reviewed 10
publications of 114 patients with metastatic NSCLC,
42 % of whom had synchronous metastases and 58 %
had metachronous metastases. The 5-year OS rate after
resection of adrenal metastases was 26 and 25 %,
respectively. The findings showed a favorable prognosis
for patients with metachronous metastases compared to
those with synchronous metastases: median OS was
shorter for patients with synchronous metastasis than
those with metachronous metastasis (12 vs. 31 months).
The overall recurrence rate in the adrenal bed or retroperitoneum was 21 % in all patients. The authors concluded that adrenalectomy should be considered as a
therapeutic option for patients with metachronous or
synchronous metastases from NSCLC that is associated
with a 5-year survival rate of 25 %.

2.1.2 Laparoscopic Adrenalectomy (LA)
Other investigators have described the outcomes after
a laparoscopic approach (Adler et al. 2007; Strong
et al. 2007). In a study comparing open adrenalectomy (OA) and the laparoscopic approach (Adler
et al. 2007), at a follow-up of 97 months, no tumors
had recurred locally, and no difference in survival
after laparoscopic and OA was noted (median survival of 19 vs. 17 months). The authors postulated
that small lesions (\6 cm), with no invasion of surrounding tissue, involvement of the adrenal capsule or
vascular pedicle, are good candidates for laparoscopic
resection. Another study from Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (Strong et al. 2007) compared
outcomes of the laparoscopic adrenalectomy (LA)
versus OA in a total of 63 OA and 31 LA cases done
for isolated adrenal metastases. Findings showed no
differences in local recurrence, margin status, diseasefree interval, or OS in both groups. Median survival
was 30 and 29 months in the LA and OA, respectively. When compared with OA, LA is associated
with less intraoperative blood loss, lower analgesic
requirement, a shorter hospital stay, better cosmesis,

323

and lower post-operative complication rates (Schell
et al. 1999; Linos et al. 1997).
Laparoscopic adrenalectomy is currently the most
recommended procedure for benign adrenal masses.
Several retrospective studies also showed the possible
application of LA for solitary adrenal metastasis
(Castillo et al. 2007; Heniford et al. 1999; Moinzadeh
and Gill 2005; Kebebew et al. 2002; Sarela et al. 2003;
Sebag et al. 2006); however many peri-operative
complications have been described, including injury to
the diaphragm, inferior epigastric artery, pancreatic
fistula, wound infection, and bleeding with a complication rate that can reach 9–13 %. Moreover, laparoscopic surgery is associated with an increased operative
time compared with open surgery. Port site recurrence
after LA for adrenal metastatic tumors has also been
reported (Chen et al. 2002; Suzuki et al. 1997).

2.2

Conventional Radiation

Adrenal metastases may be amenable to external beam
radiotherapy (EBRT) especially in circumstances in
which patients refuse to undergo an invasive procedure
or are in a poor general condition. Historically, EBRT
was limited to relieve adrenal metastases-induced pain
(Soffen et al. 1990; Short et al. 1996; Soejima et al.
1997; Miyaji et al. 1999; Zeng et al. 2005).
Soffen et al. 1990 described the role of palliative
radiotherapy for adrenal metastases in 15 cases treated at the University of Pennsylvania and the Fox
Chase Cancer Center. The total doses ranged from
29.25 to 45 Gy with the most commonly used regimen
being 30 Gy and opposed anterior and posterior fields
at 3.0 or 2.5 Gy per fraction. The overall response rate
that was defined as complete or marked pain relief
was 75 %. The most common side effects from the
radiation treatments were minimal to moderate nausea, which was seen in seven patients (44 %), and
transient diarrhea in three patients (19 %). None of
the patients developed any signs of adrenal insufficiency after the treatment.
Another study from China (Zeng et al. 2005) published
a retrospective study on 22 patients with adrenal metastases from hepatocellular carcinoma who were treated with
limited-field external beam radiation therapy. The radiation dose to the adrenal lesion ranged from 36 to 54 Gy in
daily 2.0 Gy fractions with a median dose of 50 Gy.
Among the 14 patients who had pain related to adrenal

324

M. Abboud et al.

metastases, 11 (78.6 %) had complete pain relief that lasted until death without the requirement of any medication.
Two (14.3 %) patients had marked pain relief, but still
required analgesics. Partial responses (defined as [50 %
reduction in the sum of the products of the longest diameter
and its perpendicular on the CT scan or MRI) were
observed in 73 % of the patients. During follow-up, two
patients showed adrenal lesion relapse 1 year after completion of EBRT. The median survival for all patients was
10 months. Adverse effects were mild and consisted
mainly of loss of appetite and nausea that usually occurred
at the end of EBRT, and patients did not need any intravenous fluid infusion.

2.3

SBRT

SBRT is a new technique aiming at delivery of highly
conformal radiation with high dose per fraction to
treat specific areas of malignancy. Patient immobilization and daily image guidance is required. It is also
used for the management of adrenal metastases.

3

Rationale for SBRT

The rationale for the use of SBRT in adrenal metastases
derives from the fact that several studies have reported
improved survival after adrenalectomy in patients with
adrenal metastases particularly from lung cancer; and
since hypofractionated SBRT is a type of non-invasive
procedure that is aiming at killing tumors with high
doses of radiation, one would expect obtaining similar
results to those observed after adrenalectomy. SBRT
increases local tumor control and could be an alternative option to surgery without any of the surgery-related
adverse effects, i.e., anesthesia risk, infection and sepsis, bleeding, and a prolonged hospital stay.
Hypofractionated SBRT has been reported by several institutions for the treatment of adrenal metastases
and good results were observed in terms of local control, reduced toxicity, and even improved survival.

4

Goals of Treatment with SBRT

The aim of the use of SBRT in adrenal metastases is
to deliver higher higher radiation doses to the target with minimal side effects of radiation to the

surrounding normal structures. This may contribute to
improved pain relief and local control and possibly
survival. In addition, conformal and targeted radiation
to the adrenal metastases enables better sparing of the
rest of the gland and preservation of its hormonal
functions (Eldaya et al. in press).

5

Technical Aspects

Several systems are available for immobilization of the
body during SBRT. These include the stereotactic body
frame (SFB, Elekta), the Medical Intelligence BodyFix
system, and a frameless stereotactic radiation therapy
system used for the Cyberknife Image-Guided Radiosurgery. To minimize target motion, immobilization
via abdominal compression can be used, which may
limit the movement in cranio-caudal direction to a
mean of 7 mm (Lax et al. 1994). Daily reproducibility
can be achieved via 4DCT simulation with end-expiratory breath holding technique or respiratory gating.
The gross tumor volume (GTV) is defined as the
tumor as demonstrated on CT scan or MRI, and in some
centers, PET–CT fusion. A 5–10-mm margin is generally added to the GTV to generate the planning
treatment volume (PTV). Organs-at-risk include lungs,
stomach, duodenum, liver, kidneys, spinal cord, and
small and large bowels. Planning can include 3D conformal radiotherapy or intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT). Proton planning and Rapid Arc have
been evaluated by a study conducted by Scorsetti et al.
(2011) and this will be discussed in detail in Sect. 6. On
board imaging can be done through stereoscopic KV Xray (BrainLab Novalis system), conebeam CT, MVCT,
or CT-on-rail. Real-time tumor-tracking radiotherapy
was evaluated by Katoh et al. (2008) via the insertion of
fiducial markers into the tumor (see Sect. 6).

6

Clinical Applications

Several institutions have reported on the use of SBRT
for the treatment of adrenal metastases. Investigators
from the University of Rochester (Chawla et al. 2009)
reviewed the records of 30 patients who received
SBRT for adrenal metastases. The most common
primary diagnosis was lung cancer. The prescribed
dose ranged from 16 Gy in four fractions to 50 Gy
in 10 fractions. The median dose was 40 Gy. After

Adrenal Metastasis

325

Table 1 Selected series of SBRT for adrenal metastases
Reference

Number of
patients

Median follow-up
(months)

Number of fractions/
dose (Gy)

Oshiro et al. (2011)

11

10.1

1–27/30–60

Results
5 year survival: 22 %
LC: 79 %

Chawla et al. (2009)

30

9.8

4–10/16–50

1 and 2 years LC: 55 and 27 %
1 and 2 years survival: 44 and
25 %
Median OS: 11 months

Holy et al. (2011)

13 (Single
metastasis)

12

5/20–40

1 year LC: 77 %

Katoh et al. (2008)

10

16

8/48

1 year LC: 78 %

Torok et al. (2011)

7

14

1 or 3/10–36

1 year survival: 63 %

Casamassima et al.
(2012)

48

16.2

3/Median 36

Guiou et al. (2012)

9 with 11 lesions

1 year survival: 66.7 %
Median OS: 23 months
1 year survival: 78 %
Median OS: 8 month
1 and 2 years LC: 90 and 90 %
1 and 2 years survival: 39.7
and 14.5 %
7.3

5/20–37.5

1 and 2 years LC: 44 and 44 %
1 and 2 year OS: 52 and 13 %

LC local control, OS overall survival

SBRT, none of the patients continued taking analgesics. Of the 14 patients treated with curative intent,
the median survival time was 19 months compared
with 11 months for the patients treated with palliative
intent (p = 0.23). Local control was poor compared
with surgical series in which local failure was
observed in 10 patients. The actuarial 1- and 2-year
survival rate was 44 and 25 %, respectively. The
estimated median survival time was 11 months. The
authors concluded that SBRT to adrenal metastases is
well tolerated; however, the selection bias of the
patients especially that the majority had bulky disease
accounts for the poor outcomes observed in the study.
Oshiro et al. (2011) retrospectively reviewed 19
patients with adrenal metastasis from lung cancer
treated by radiation therapy between 1999 and 2008 at
the International Medical Center of Japan. Fourteen
patients had NSCLC and five had small cell carcinoma. Some had brain and bone metastases. All
tumors were asymptomatic. The median size of the
tumor was 30 mm. The median dose was 45 Gy
(range 30–60 Gy in 1–27 fractions). SBRT was performed for 11 patients using the Microtron system.
The median follow-up period for all patients was

10.1 months. This study reported good outcomes after
SBRT with OS of 22 % at 5 years and recurrence rate
of 21 %. These results are comparable to those following adrenalectomy (Tanvetyanon et al. 2008) even
though the patients in this study were not candidates
for surgical resection, and therefore, their prognosis
was likely to be poorer than that for patients in the
other paper. Patients with a metachronous metastasis
derived the best outcome from SBRT with a median
survival of 44.3 and 6.3 months for patients with
metachronous and synchronous metastasis, respectively. The authors concluded that radiotherapy may
improve survival of patients with adrenal metastasis
from lung cancer (Table 1).
Investigators from Germany (Holy et al. 2011) retrospectively evaluated 18 patients who received SBRT
for adrenal metastases from NSCLC. A total of 13
patients had isolated adrenal metastasis and received
SBRT with curative intent, whereas five patients with
multiple metastatic lesions had SBRT for local control of
back pain. Depending on treatment intent and target size,
the dose regimen varied from 20 to 40 Gy in five fractions. After a median follow-up of 12 months, local
control was achieved in 77 % of the patients who had

326

isolated adrenal metastases. The median PFS time for all
patients was 4.2 months (12 months in patients with
solitary adrenal metastasis, which is equivalent to results
reported with adrenalectomy). The median OS for the
entire patient cohort was 21 months (23 months in
patients with a solitary metastasis). All but two patients
had complete pain relief during the follow-up period.
Katoh et al. (2008) published a pilot study on ten
patients who received SBRT after insertion of internal
fiducial markers, with most receiving 48 Gy in 8 fractions, and the 80 % isodose covering the PTV. Fiducial
markers were placed near the adrenal gland and a realtime tumor-tracking radiotherapy system was used to
investigate the three-dimensional movement of markers near the adrenal tumors in both supine and prone
positions. Eligible patients were those who have metastatic adrenal tumors considered to be refractory to
chemotherapy, or not good candidates for surgery or
chemotherapy. Investigators in the study showed that
the average absolute amplitude of the marker movement in the prone position was 6.1 ± 4.4, 11.1 ± 7.1,
and 7.0 ± 3.5 mm in the left–right, craniocaudal, and
anterior–posterior directions, respectively. The corresponding numbers in the supine position were 3.4 ±
2.9, 9.9 ± 9.8, and 5.4 ± 5.2 mm. The average absolute amplitude was found to be significantly smaller in
the left–right direction compared to the craniocaudal
direction (p = 0.0364) and anterior–posterior direction (p = 0.0441) in the supine position. There was no
statistically significant difference in the average absolute amplitude between the supine and prone positions
along the three axes. Also, there were no statistically
significant differences in the distance between the
tumor and the stomach and that between the tumor and
the duodenum regardless of whether the patients were
in the prone or supine position. The 1-year local control
rate was 100 % and the 1-year survival was 78 %. Five
tumors showed a complete response, two had partial
response, and four had stable disease according to
RECIST criteria.
In a small retrospective study evaluating the role of
SBRT in adrenal metastases (Torok et al. 2011), a total
of seven patients with nine adrenal metastases treated at
the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute were
studied. The median dose was 16 Gy (range 10–22 Gy)
in a single fraction or 27 Gy (range 24–36 Gy) over
three fractions. After a median follow-up of 14 months
(range 1–60 months), imaging studies revealed one
complete response, two partial responses, and five

M. Abboud et al.

stable lesions. Five of the lesions experienced local
failure, with an actuarial local control of 63 % at 1 year
and a median OS of 8 months from SBRT.
A recent study from Italy (Scorsetti et al. 2011)
compared different treatment techniques with photons
and protons for the treatment of adrenal metastases with
SBRT. Plans for 10 patients receiving a total dose of
45 Gy in 7.5 Gy fractions were assessed. Comparison
was made among RapidArc, IMRT, dynamic conformal
arcs, 3D conformal static fields, and intensity-modulated
protons. According to the authors, RapidArc presented
the second lowest dose bath (V10 Gy and integral dose)
after protons and provided the best conformality together with IMRT. This study showed that the use of protons can achieve better results in terms of sparing of
organs at risk and integral dose. RapidArc and IMRT
resulted in excellent target coverage comparable to
protons and achieved better conformal coverage compared to other techniques based on conformal fields with
photons. The investigators concluded that hypofractionated SBRT of adrenal metastases is promising and
intensity modulation might be preferable to other conventional techniques. To our knowledge, this is the only
study that evaluated the different treatment techniques
including protons in SBRT for adrenal metastases.
Casamassima et al. (2012) from University of
Florence reported the results of the largest series of 48
patients with adrenal metastases treated with SBRT.
The median prescribed dose was 36 Gy in three fractions. At a median follow-up of 16.2 months, the 1- and
2-year local control rates were both 90 % and the corresponding survival rates were 39.7 and 14.5 %,
respectively. In a recent study from Ohio State University, Guiou et al. (2012) reported the outcomes of
nine patients with 10 adrenal metastases from nonsmall cell or small cell lung cancer treated with SBRT.
Prescribed dose ranged from 20 to 37.5 Gy in five
fractions. The RECIST-based response rate was 67 %
and the 1- and 2-year local control rates were 44 %.
Corresponding OS rates were 52 and 13 %, respectively. Patients with metachronous lesions had longer
survival than patients with synchronous lesions.

7

Toxicity

Since the adrenal gland is located near critical organs
such as the stomach, duodenum, small and large bowels, kidneys, spinal cord, and liver, one should take into

Adrenal Metastasis

consideration the tolerance of these organs in the
treatment of adrenal tumors. Rigorous accounting of
organ motion is also mandatory to ensure accurate
radiotherapy of the adrenal gland. The total dose,
fractional dose, volume of normal tissue exposed to
high doses of radiation, and location of the target are
critical variables in predicting late toxicity. SBRT
allows safer delivery of radiation. With advanced
technology including improved imaging modalities
and immobilization techniques, effective radiation
treatment of adrenal metastases can be achieved with
better sparing of surrounding healthy tissue. Further
reduction of healthy tissue involvement is now an
option with SBRT, which enables a great improvement
in the quality of life of patients.
In the study by Oshiro et al. (2011) none of the
patients experienced a Grade 3 or higher severe toxicity
related to radiotherapy. One patient developed a Grade 2
duodenal ulcer after radiation to 30 Gy in three fractions
with a maximum dose of 30 Gy to the duodenum.
Mild fatigue and Grade 1 nausea were the most
frequent acute adverse effects in the study by Chawla
et al. (2009) No patient developed acute Radiation
Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) Grade 2–4 gastrointestinal, hepatic, renal, or dermatologic toxicity.
A total of 16 patients were assessed for late toxicity
6 months after treatment: none of the late side effects
including gastrointestinal, renal, or hepatic toxicity
was described in any patient. In this study, the median
volume of the ipsilateral kidney receiving [15 Gy
was 21.5 % and [10 Gy was 10.5 % and the median
gastrointestinal volume receiving [30 Gy was 5 cm3.
In the Italian study, (Scorsetti et al. 2011), the dose
constraints were set to have V15 Gy \ 35 % for the
ipsilateral kidney and V15 Gy \ (liver volume—700
cm3) for the liver. Maximum dose to the spinal cord
was limited to D1 % \ 18 Gy. In the paper published
by Katoh et al. (2008), none of the patients developed
appreciable symptomatic toxicity during the median
follow-up period of 16 months (range 5–21 months).
In two patients, one who had bilateral tumors and
another who underwent surgical removal of the
opposite adrenal gland for aldosteronoma 14 years
prior to RT, the adrenal hormonal level was examined
at rest before the treatment and every 3 months
thereafter; there was no decline in hormonal level in
any of the patients. Adrenal function preservation is
an added benefit of SBRT when compared with
adrenalectomy. No acute gastrointestinal adverse

327

Fig. 1 Isodose plan of a 32-year-old female with metastatic
small cell carcinoma of cervix to the left adrenal treated with
SBRT to a dose of 30 Gy in five fractions

effects were observed. No other symptomatic adverse
effects were observed within the median follow-up
period of 16 months (range 5–21 months) in nine
patients.
In the German study, (Holy et al. 2011), the most
common acute side effect was mild to moderate nausea
in six patients. No sign of adrenal or renal insufficiency
was observed during the follow-up period two patients
developed gastric and duodenal ulcer 2–4 weeks after
SBRT and responded well to treatment with proton
pump inhibitor. Both patients received a biologic
effective dose (BED) of 72 Gy to the PTV. The maximal
dose to the gastric wall was 49.3 % to a small part of less
than 3 %. This corresponded to a maximum dose of
19.7 Gy (BED = 35.5 Gy). The authors attributed this
to a different filling of the stomach for each treatment
since the patients were not treated with an empty stomach, which may have resulted in organ movement.

8

Case Example

Case 1
A 32-year-old woman with known metastatic small
cell carcinoma of cervix presented with abdominal
pain. She has received multiple cycles of chemotherapy. PET–CT showed a large 3-cm left adrenal
mass with SUV of 9.1, consistent with metastatic

328

M. Abboud et al.

Fig. 2 A 65-year-old man with metastatic renal cell carcinoma
to left adrenal gland and left rib (a) on PET–CT; SBRT was
offered to treat his oligometastases and both lesions were

treated to 40 Gy in five fractions (b); 3 years later, his PET–CT
showed complete response in size and SUV uptake (c)

disease. She has metastatic disease elsewhere and
refused surgery. She was treated with SBRT to 30 Gy
in five fractions. SBRT plan (Fig. 1) shows the
sparing of critical surrounding normal tissues, i.e.,
small bowels, stomach, spleen, left kidney, spinal
cord, and liver from receiving high dose radiation.
She achieved complete pain relief and PET–CT in
2 months, showed reduction in size and SUV.
Unfortunately, the patient passed away from widespread metastatic disease.
Case 2
A 65-year-old man with known metastatic renal
cell carcinoma presented with left abdominal discomfort and right rib pain. He had right nephrectomy
and adrenalectomy 12 years ago for his renal cell
carcinoma. He developed lung metastases 2 years
ago, status post surgery, and adjuvant sunitinib for
1 year. PET–CT (Fig. 2a) shows two separate PET
avid lesions involving his remaining left adrenal
gland and right rib. Patient refused surgery and targeted agent. SBRT was offered to treat his oligometastases. Both lesions were treated to 40 Gy in five
fractions. Figure 2b shows the SBRT plan demonstrating the rapid fall-off of the dose, minimizing the
surrounding normal tissues especially the remaining
left kidney, small bowels and stomach, and spinal
cord receiving high dose radiation. He tolerated and
responded to SBRT very well without any toxicity
and achieved complete resolution of his pain. Three
years later, his PET–CT (Fig. 2c) showed complete
response in size and SUV uptake. Additionally, taking
into consideration his single remaining kidney and
adrenal gland, his renal and adrenal function has

remained normal now for more than 3 years post
SBRT.

9

Future Directions

SBRT has been investigated in almost all disease sites and
has been used for adrenal metastases with minimal toxicity
and good results. It may offer the chance to achieve
effective palliation for painful lesions and high local
control rates that appear to be similar to adrenalectomy.
Patients with metachronous metastases have better outcomes than those with synchronous metastases; therefore,
aggressive management including SBRT to adrenal
metastases can be a good tool in hand to achieve cure. With
lack of randomized data or large prospective studies, the
real benefit derived from SBRT in the treatment of adrenal
metastases remains to be determined. The potential benefit
of adrenal function preservation with SBRT will also need
to be investigated in prospective trials.

References
Abrams RL, Spiro R, Goldstein N (1950) Metastases in
carcinoma: analysis of 1000 autopsied cases. Cancer 3:74–85
Adler JT, Mack E, Chen H (2007) Equal oncologic results for
laparoscopic and open resection of adrenal metastases.
J Surg Res 140(2):159–164
Ayabe H, Tsuji H, Hara S, Tagawa Y, Kawahara K, Tomita M
(1995) Surgical management of adrenal metastasis from
bronchogenic carcinoma. J Surg Oncol 58:149–154
Blumenschein GR Jr, Khuri FR, von Pawel J et al (2008) Phase
III trial comparing carboplatin, paclitaxel, and bexarotene
with carboplatin and paclitaxel in chemotherapy-naive

Adrenal Metastasis
patients with advanced or metastatic non-small-cell lung
cancer: SPIRIT II. J Clin Oncol 26:1879–1885
Casamassima F, Livi L, Masciullo S, Menichelli C, Masi L,
Meattini I, Bonucci I, Agresti B, Simontacchi G, Doro R (2012)
Stereotactic radiotherapy for adrenal gland metastases: University of Florence experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
82(2):919–923
Castillo OA, Vitagliano G, Kerkebe M, Parma P, Pinto I, Diaz M
(2007) Laparoscopic adrenalectomy for suspected metastasis
of adrenal glands: our experience. Urology 69:637–641
Chawla S, Chen Y, Katz AW, Muhs AG, Philip A, Okunieff P,
Milano MT (2009) Stereotactic body radiotherapy for
treatment of adrenal metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 75(1):71–75
Chen B, Zhou M, Cappelli MC, Wolf JS Jr (2002) Port site,
retroperitoneal and intra-abdominal recurrence after laparoscopic adrenalectomy for apparently isolated metastasis.
J Urol 168:2528–2529
Eldaya RW, Paulino AC, Blanco AI et al (in press) Preservation
of adrenal function after successful stereotactic body
radiation therapy of metastatic renal cell carcinoma involving the remaining contralateral adrenal gland. Pract Radiat
Oncol
Guiou M, Mayr NA, Kim EY, Williams T, Lo SS (2012)
Stereotactic body radiotherapy for adrenal metastases from
lung cancer. J Radiat Oncol. doi:10.1007/s13566-012-0037-8
(online first 16 May 2012)
Heniford BT, Arca MJ, Walsh RM, Gill IS (1999) Laparoscopic adrenalectomy for cancer. Semin Surg Oncol 16:
293–306
Higashiyama M, Doi O, Kodama K, Yokouchi H, Imaoka S,
Koyama H (1994) Surgical treatment of adrenal metastasis
following pulmonary resection for lung cancer: comparison
of adrenalectomy with palliative therapy. Int Surg 79:
124–135
Holy R, Piroth M, Pinkawa M, Eble MJ (2011) Stereotactic
body radiation therapy (SBRT) for treatment of adrenal
gland metastases from non-small cell lung cancer. Strahlenther Onkol 187(4):245–251
Katoh N, Onimaru R, Sakuhara Y et al (2008) Real-time tumortracking radiotherapy for adrenal tumors. Radiother Oncol
87:418–424
Kebebew E, Siperstein AE, Clark OH, Duh QY (2002) Results
of laparoscopic adrenalectomy for suspected and unsuspected malignant adrenal neoplasms. Arch Surg 137:
948–951
Kim SH, Brennan MF, Russo P et al (1998) The role of surgery
in the treatment of clinically isolated adrenal metastasis.
Cancer 82:389–394
Kirsch AJ, Oz MC, Stoopler M, Ginsburg M, Steinglass K
(1993) Operative management of adrenal metastases from
lung carcinoma. Urology 42:716–719
Kocijancic I, Vidmar K, Zwitter M et al (2003) The significance of adrenal metastases from lung carcinoma. Eur J
Surg Oncol 29:87–88
Lam KY, Lo CY (2002) Metastatic tumours of the adrenal
glands: a 30-year experience in a teaching hospital. Clin
Endocrinol (Oxf) 56:95–101
Lax I, Blomgren H, Naslund I et al (1994) Stereotactic
radiotherapy of malignancies in the abdomen. Acta Oncol
33:677–683

329
Linos DA, Stylopoulos N, Boukis M, Souvatzoglou A, Raptis S,
Papadimitriou J (1997) Anterior, posterior, or laparoscopic
approach for the management of adrenal diseases? Am J Surg
173:120–125
Lo CY, van Heerden JA, Soreide CS, Grant CS, Thompson GB,
Lloyd RV et al (1995) Adrenalectomy for metastatic disease
to the adrenal glands. Br J Surg 83:528–531
Luketich JD, Burt ME (1994) Does resection of isolated adrenal
metastases in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) improve
survival? Lung Cancer 10:153
Miyaji N, Miki T, Itoh Y et al (1999) Radiotherapy for adrenal
gland metastasis from lung cancer: report of three cases.
Radiat Med 17:71–75
Moinzadeh A, Gill IS (2005) Laparoscopic radical adrenalectomy for malignancy in 31 patients. J Urol 173:519–525
Oshiro Y, Takeda Y, Hirano S, Ito H, Aruga T (2011) Role of
radiotherapy for local control of asymptomatic adrenal
metastasis from lung cancer. Am J Clin Oncol 34(3):
249–253
Porte HL, Roumilhac D, Graziana JP et al (1998) Adrenalectomy for a solitary adrenal metastasis from lung cancer. Ann
Thorac Surg 65:331–335
Raviv G, Klein E, Yellin A, Schneebaum S, Ben-Ari G (1990)
Surgical treatment of solitary adrenal metastases from lung
carcinoma. J Surg Oncol 4:123–131
Reyes L, Parvez S, Nemoto T, Regal AM, Takita H (1990)
Adrenalectomy for adrenal metastasis from lung carcinoma.
J Surg Oncol 44:32–34
Sarela AI, Murphy I, Coit DG et al (2003) Metastasis to the
adrenal gland: the emerging role of laparoscopic surgery.
Ann Surg Oncol 10:1191–1196
Schell SR, Talamini MA, Udelsman R (1999) Laparoscopic
adrenalectomy for nonmalignant disease: improved safety,
morbidity, and cost-effectiveness. Surg Endosc 13:30–34
Scorsetti M, Mancosu P, Navarria P, Tozzi A, Castiglioni S,
Clerici E, Reggiori G, Lobefalo F, Fogliata A, Cozzi L
(2011) Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) for
adrenal metastases: a feasibility study of advanced techniques with modulated photons and protons. Strahlenther
Onkol 187(4):238–244
Sebag F, Calzolari F, Harding J, Sierra M, Palazzo FF, Henry JF
(2006) Isolated adrenal metastasis: the role of laparoscopic
surgery. World J Surg 30:888–892
Short S, Chaturvedi A, Leslie MD (1996) Palliation of
symptomatic adrenal gland metastases by radiotherapy.
Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol) 8:387–389
Soejima T, Hirota S, Hishikawa Y et al (1997) Radiation
therapy for adrenal metastases. Nippon Igaku Hoshasen
Gakkai Zasshi 57:801–804
Soffen EM, Solin LJ, Rubenstein JH et al (1990) Palliative
radiotherapy for symptomatic adrenal metastases. Cancer
65:1318–1320
Strong VE, D’Angelica M, Tang L et al (2007) Laparoscopic
adrenalectomy for isolated adrenal metastasis. Ann Surg
Oncol 14:3392–3400
Suzuki K, Ushiyama T, Mugiya S, Kageyama S, Saisu K, Fujita K
(1997) Hazards of laparoscopic adrenalectomy in patients
with adrenal malignancy. J Urol 158:2227
Tanvetyanon T, Robinson LA, Schell MJ et al (2008) Outcomes
of adrenalectomy for isolated synchronous versus metachronous adrenal metastases in non small-cell lung cancer: a

330
systematic review and pooled analysis. J Clin Oncol 26:
1142–1147
Torok J, Wegner RE, Burton SA, Heron DE (2011) Stereotactic
body radiation therapy for adrenal metastases: a retrospective
review of a noninvasive therapeutic strategy. Future Oncol
7(1):145–151

M. Abboud et al.
Twomey P, Montgomery C, Clarck O (1982) Successful
treatment of adrenal metastases from large-cell carcinoma
of the lung. JAMA 248:581–583
Zeng ZC, Tang ZY, Fan J et al (2005) Radiation therapy for
adrenal gland metastases from hepatocellular carcinoma.
Jpn J Clin Oncol 35:61–67

Histology-Specific Metastasis
Michael T. Milano and Joseph K. Salama

Contents
1

Introduction.............................................................. 331

2

Studies of Any Histology to Any Primary Site.... 333

Abstract

For patients with metastases, limited in the number
of sites and extent of organ involvement (termed
oligometastases), metastasis-directed therapies,
including stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT)
can render some patients free of disease for
extended periods of time, and potentially cured.
When oligometastatic patients are classified by
their underlying histopathologic disease, the
impact of metastasis-directed therapy on the natural history of that specific disease state can be
better understood for that specific cancer type. To
date, there are published outcome studies of SBRT
for oligometastases from non-small-cell lung cancer, colorectal cancer, renal cancer, melanoma,
sarcoma, and breast cancer, which we review.
The available data suggests that SBRT for oligometastases is associated with favorable outcomes,
including in patients with cancers generally
thought to be radioresistant. Patients treated to all
known sites of disease can achieve very long
disease-free intervals bordering on cure.

3
Lung Cancer............................................................. 334
3.1 Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer ................................... 334
3.2 Small-Cell Lung Cancer............................................ 335
4

Colorectal Cancer .................................................... 335

5

Renal Cell Carcinoma and Melanoma.................. 336

6

Sarcoma .................................................................... 336

7

Breast Cancer........................................................... 337

8

Prostate Cancer........................................................ 337

9

Eligibility Criteria ................................................... 337

10

Toxicities ................................................................... 338

11

Case Examples ......................................................... 338

12

Future Directions..................................................... 339

References.......................................................................... 341

1
M. T. Milano (&)
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Rochester, 601 Elmwood Avenue,
Box 647, Rochester NY 14642, USA
e-mail: Michael_milano@urmc.rochester.edu
J. K. Salama
Department of Radiation Oncology, Duke University,
Box 3085, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham NC 27710, USA

Introduction

For most patients with metastatic cancer, systemic
therapy remains the standard of care. Specific chemotherapeutics, hormonal therapies, or immunotherapies
are selected based on primary site, histology, pathologic features, and molecular genotype, These therapies are rarely curative. However, for patients with
metastases, limited in the number of sites and extent of
organ involvement, metastasis-directed therapies such

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2011_441, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

331

332

as surgical resection, stereotactic body radiotherapy
(SBRT), or other ablative therapies can render some
patients free of disease for extended periods of time,
and potentially cured. In 1995, Drs. Hellman and
Weichselbaum coined the term ‘‘oligometastases’’ to
describe this less-advanced state of metastatic disease
progression, amenable to potentially curable metastasis
directed therapy (Hellman and Weichselbaum 1995;
Weichselbaum and Hellman 2011). Distinct from
widespread metastases, oligometastases likely represent a unique biologic state.
One can categorize patients with oligometastases,
by the anatomic location of their radiographically
apparent metastases. For example, patients can be
subclassified into those with lung metastases (discussed
in ‘‘Lung Metastasis’’), those with liver metastases
(discussed in ‘‘Liver Metastasis’’), those with adrenal
metastases (discussed in ‘‘Adrenal Metastasis’’), and/or
those with bone/spine metastases (discussed in ‘‘Bone
Metastasis’’ and ‘‘Spinal Metastasis’’). This manner of
categorization is useful to study and describe specific
techniques for the treatment of oligometastases. Organspecific questions (such as what is the best technique to
surgically resect lung metastases or what are the doselimiting structures for pulmonary SBRT for patients
with multiple lung metastases) can be addressed with
this categorization. However, patients grouped by site
of metastases are often heterogeneous with respect to
their primary pathology.
When oligometastatic patients are classified by
their underlying histopathologic disease, the impact of
multiple different techniques can be investigated in a
more homogenous population, and the impact of
metastasis-directed therapy on the natural history of
that specific disease state can be better understood.
Thus, in this chapter, we will discuss published outcome studies of patients with oligometastases categorized by the primary cancer type (i.e. breast cancer,
lung cancer, renal cancer, etc.). Of course, it must be
understood that all broad classifications of patients
with metastatic disease represent an oversimplification of a complex disease processes. The interplay of
tumor, organ, and host biologic conditions, measured
with clinical signs and symptoms, crude laboratory
assays, and radiographic and metabolic imaging
reflect poorly understood tumor and host genomic and
proteomic factors, which presumably impact relative

M. T. Milano and J. K. Salama

disease indolence and aggressiveness, as well as
response to systemic and local therapies. For example, breast cancer metastasized only to bone carries a
more favorable prognosis than breast cancer metastasized to other organ sites; breast cancer metastasized to other body organ sites likely carries a more
favorable prognosis than melanoma metastasized only
to bone. Yet select patients with breast cancer metastatic only to bone may have an extremely poor
prognosis, either from widespread extent of disease,
aggressiveness of spread or resistance to therapy,
indicative of the complicated nature of cancer.
Although SBRT was in its early development
when the oligometastatic state was described in 1995,
few select institutions were using SBRT to treat
patients with metastatic lesions (Blomgren et al.
1995). The treatment of organ-specific oligometastases with SBRT has greatly expanded since. SBRT is
one of many technical tools available to radiation
oncologists. Effective metastasis-directed therapy for
oligometastatic disease is independent of the technology—if ablating the tumor results in favorable
outcomes, the approach to doing so is likely secondary, aside from the possibility of hypofractionation
uniquely yielding an abscopal effect remote from the
targeted lesion/lesions (Demaria et al. 2004; Formenti
et al. 2008; Formenti and Demaria 2009). Currently, a
true stereotactic-based hypofractionated treatment
(relying on an external coordinate system to define the
location of a tumor within a patient) is rarely performed. More commonly, intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), image-guided radiation therapy
(IGRT), four-dimensional planning, respiratory
motion management, and particle therapy are all used
independent from or in conjunction with each other to
deliver few high-dose radiation treatments, with an
effect similar to the early descriptions of SBRT.
These underlying technologies, compared to conventional radiotherapy, allow for greater targeting accuracy, more conformal dose delivery, and dose
escalation, thus maximizing potential tumor control,
while minimizing the normal tissue exposure. Hence,
these technologies minimize toxicity risks and provide physicians with a greater comfort level treating
oligometastatic patients with hypofractionated radiation. In this chapter, we discuss studies describing
outcomes after utilizing SBRT for oligometastases as

Histology-Specific Metastasis

well as after approaches that do not strictly fall under
the category of SBRT.
Patients are treated with metastasis-directed therapy for oligometastatic disease based upon a small
number of non-bulky radiographically or metabolically detected metastases and therefore represent a
selected group. This is presumably due to either an
indolent disease process or earlier diagnosis of metastatic disease. Thus, in describing the outcomes of
these patients, it must be understood that their survival is anticipated to be greater than unselected
patients with metastatic disease. With lack of randomized data, or large prospective cooperative group
studies, it remains unknown what benefit, if any,
SBRT provides for these patients. In this chapter, we
also discuss studies that are ongoing or in development that will attempt to fill this void.

2

Studies of Any Histology to Any
Primary Site

Several studies have examined outcomes of patients
with oligometastases from any primary site, metastatic to any organ (Milano et al. 2008a, b, c; Salama
et al. 2008; Kao et al. 2009; Greco et al. 2011).
Some have treated patients with a relatively homogeneous radiation regimen contributing outcome data
on the overall natural history of limited metastatic
patients as well as the efficacy of a specific regimen.
Others have investigated the tolerability of extremely
hypofractionated radiotherapy when used alone in
either single- (Greco et al. 2011) or multipledose regimens (Salama et al. 2008). Another study
has investigated hypofractionated radiotherapy in
combination with an oral systemic agent (Kao et al.
2009).
The University of Rochester series represent
the largest to date, enrolling 121 patients with 293
oligometastatic lesions (each with B5 metastases;
Milano et al. 2008a, b, c). Patients with breast cancer
(n = 39) experienced significantly better tumor control and survival outcomes, while those with pancreas,
liver, or biliary tract primary sites (n = 7) fared significantly worse. While colorectal cancer metastases
(n = 31 patients) were significantly less likely to be
controlled following treatment in an initial analysis,
more recent analyses with longer follow-up have not
confirmed this (Milano et al. 2012).

333

In a study from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center (MSKCC) of 103 patients with 126 metastases, most commonly, prostate cancer (n = 42) or
renal cell carcinoma (n = 42), patients were treated
with single dose SBRT ranging from 18 to 24 Gy.
Colorectal cancer (n = 15), non-small-cell lung cancer (n = 4), and breast cancer (n = 3) represented a
small percentages of lesions. Although not mentioned
in the manuscript, it appears that the median number
of metastases was one. Local control was significantly
different based on histology. Patients with prostate
cancer had 83% control compared to renal cell (60%)
and colorectal cancer (50%). In particular, four of five
colorectal cancer patients with liver metastases had
locoregional progression (Greco et al. 2011). When
analyzed by dose delivered (excluding those with
hepatic metastases) patients treated to higher doses
(23–24 Gy) had higher metastasis control (82%)
compared to those treated to intermediate (21–22 Gy)
(69%) or low dose (18–20 Gy) single fraction treatment. As well, target organ (bone versus lymph node
vs. lung) was not associated with differences in treated metastasis progression.
Investigators at the University of Chicago, using a
three fraction hypofractionated regimen (8–16 Gy per
fraction) assigned metastases to one of five organs
based on the potential for normal tissue toxicity and
dose escalated metastases in each organ separately.
The initial report, describing the first 29 patients,
reported tumor control rate of 57% at last follow-up
(median 15 months) and 1-year progression-free survival of 25% for those with 1–2 lesions and 10% for
those with 3–5 lesions. Updated results including 61
patients and 116 metastases with a median follow-up
of 21 months, demonstrated in select patients, a three
fraction SBRT regimen could be delivered safely and
effectively (Salama et al. 2012). Additionally, 18% of
patients remained free of disease at last follow-up.
Different from the MSKCC series with single dose,
but similar to the University of Rochester series, these
patients had a mean of 2 metastases treated with
radiation. The histologies included in this study were
primarily non-small-cell lung cancer, breast cancer,
renal cell carcinoma, as well as head and neck primary tumors. Dose response was not formally analyzed given the multitude of varying histologies
included. However, 45.7% of metastases treated to
24 Gy (8 Gy per fraction for three fractions) were
controlled compared to 65% of those treated with

334

M. T. Milano and J. K. Salama

30 Gy, 83% of those treated to 36 Gy, 62.5% of those
treated to 42 Gy, and 100% of those treated to 48 Gy.
The relatively poor metastasis control at 42 Gy is
likely due to tumor types and location irradiated in
this cohort. Additionally patients with 1–3 metastases
had better outcomes as did patients without small-cell
or Ewing’s histologies.
Investigators from Mount Sinai School of Medicine conducted a Phase I study of SBRT with concurrent and adjuvant sunitinib (Kao et al. 2009). The
study was designed to determine the maximally tolerated dose of both sunitinib and hypofractionated
SBRT when given in combination. Twenty-one
patients with 5 oligometastases or less were enrolled.
The recommended phase II dose of SBRT was 50 Gy
in ten fractions in combination with 37.5 mg sunitinib
in 6 week cycles (4 weeks of treatment and 2 weeks
off). The 1-year local control, progression-free survival, and overall survival rates were 85, 44, and 75%,
respectively. Histologic type was not correlated with
outcomes.
All of these studies demonstrate that patients with
limited metastatic disease to multiple organs can be
identified, and can be treated with various radiotherapy treatment schedules with acceptable toxicity. A
subset of these patients have prolonged disease-free
intervals. Outcomes differ between these studies
based on the exact patient population included, but
these data suggest that SBRT is an appropriate treatment for patients with multiple metastatic sites, particularly those who are not technically resectable or
medically fit for surgical metastasectomy.

3

Lung Cancer

3.1

Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer

Systemic therapy is the standard therapy for nonsmall-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients presenting
with metastatic disease or relapsing to distant sites
as it has been shown to improve overall survival
without being detrimental to long-term quality of
life. Typically, radiation is often used for palliation of
the primary site and/or metastatic sites. This strategy
is appropriate for patients with diffuse metastatic
disease. Limited data exist describing the prevalence and incidence of oligometastatic disease in
NSCLC. However, data that are available suggest that

oligometastases are more common than expected.
Among patients eligible for a University of Chicago
Phase II chemotherapy protocol, 19 of 38 patients
(50%) had B3 metastatic sites (in addition to the
primary lung and nodal sites; Mehta et al. 2004). In a
study from the University of Colorado, 34 of 64
(53%) had oligometastatic disease (Rusthoven et al.
2009). Furthermore, following the administration of
standard systemic therapy, the majority progress in
known metastatic sites. In these aforementioned
studies of NSCLC patients treated with chemotherapy
alone, (Mehta et al. 2004; Rusthoven et al. 2009)
roughly two-thirds did not develop new metastases
(Mehta et al. 2004; Rusthoven et al. 2009). Arguably,
these patients could benefit from metastasis-directed
therapy by delaying progression, which one study
estimated to be in the order of 3 months (Rusthoven
et al. 2009).
Prolonged overall survival and prolonged relapsefree survival resulting from metastasis-directed therapy to non-small-cell lung cancer metastases may be
achievable. Rush University reported a 22% rate of
long-term survival rate among 23 NSCLC patients
primarily with solitary metastases (n = 20) with 1–2
oligometastases, treated with resection, conventional
radiation, and/or SBRT (Khan et al. 2006). In a retrospective study from the University of Rochester, the
5-year survival of 38 patients with up to eight
metastases from non-small-cell lung cancer treated
with SBRT was 14% (Cheruvu et al. 2011). Similar
findings were seen in patients treated at the University
of Chicago. In selected patients with limited metastatic disease (\5 sites), following SBRT, their
median survival was 22 months and 28% were disease free at last follow-up (Hasselle et al. 2012). In
addition, patients with [3 metastases, those with nonadenocarcinoma histology, and those treated with
radiation immediately following progression through
chemotherapy were less likely to benefit from hypofractionated RT. Control of treated metastases was
promising.
These data from multiple institutions are interesting as the reported median and overall survival are
comparable to those commonly reported for Stage III
NSCLC patients. Additionally, the sum of these
studies demonstrates that a population of patients that
remain in a long-term free of cancer, suggesting that
there is a potentially curative population. To better
ascertain the potential benefit of SBRT for NSCLC

Histology-Specific Metastasis

oligometastases, The University of Chicago (http://
clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00887315) and the
North Central Cancer Treatment Group (NCCTG;
http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00776100) have
randomized patients with 1–5 metastases from
NSCLC, receiving platinum-based chemotherapy to
receive or not receive radiotherapy (50 Gy in 5 Gy
fractions for University of Chicago study, and 60 Gy
in 2 Gy fractions for NCCTG study). Due to accrual
issues, these studies have been closed. Analysis of
these studies is ongoing as is development of new
investigations as well. Wake Forest University is
prospectively studying SBRT (50–54 Gy in 3–5
fractions) for NSCLC oligometastases, stable or
responding to initial chemotherapy (http://clinical
trials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01185639).

3.2

Small-Cell Lung Cancer

Although typically considered a systemic disease, the
addition of both thoracic radiation and prophylactic
cranial irradiation (PCI) for limited stage small-cell
lung cancer results in significant improvements in
overall survival. Additionally, for patients with
extensive stage small-cell lung cancer (SCLC), prophylactic cranial irradiation and in patients with good
responses to chemotherapy thoracic radiation as well
has been shown to improve overall survival. The
application of radiotherapy to metastatic sites in
extensive stage SCLC is currently being investigated
in RTOG 0937. Extensive stage SCLC patients with a
good response to systemic therapy are randomized to
PCI only or PCI and moderately hypofractionated
radiation (45 Gy total in 3 Gy fractions or 40 Gy total
in 4 Gy fractions) to known sites of disease. Accrual
is ongoing.

4

Colorectal Cancer

The most common site of metastases from colorectal
cancer (CRC) is the liver, although patients can
present with metastases to other sites, with or
without clinical evidence of liver metastases. Several
studies have investigated surgical resection of liver
metastases, from CRC (Fong et al. 1999; Kuvshinoff
and Fong 2007; Al-Asfoor et al. 2008; Timmerman
et al. 2009; Brown et al. 2010; Mahmoud and

335

Bullard Dunn 2010). SBRT is an alternative metastasis-directed therapy for patients whose liver oligometastases are not amenable to resection, because
of the number and/or location of metastases, or
because of comorbidities prohibiting surgery.
Other approaches, such as radiofrequency ablation,
cryoablation, or hepatic embolization (bland, chemoor radio-embolization), can also be considered,
although for patients with few metastatic lesions,
SBRT is an effective, less invasive approach. Several
studies have prospectively investigated SBRT for
liver metastases (‘‘Liver Metastasis’’); these studies
mostly include patients with CRC. A Dutch study of
20 patients with B3 liver metastases from CRC
reported 2-year local control and survival rates of 74
and 83% respectively, after SBRT (van der Pool
et al. 2010).
While resection is an option for CRC pulmonary
metastasis(es) (Inoue et al. 2004) and/or metastasis(es) to other site(s) (Elias et al. 2005), SBRT may
be considered the preferred approach for most
patients with CRC oligometastases to multiple sites.
A Korean study described using SBRT (39–51 Gy in
3 fractions) for 13 patients with 1–3 lung metastases
from CRC (Kim et al. 2009); they reported 3-year
overall survival, local control, and progression-free
survival rates of 65, 53, and 12%, respectively. The
University of Rochester reported on 41 patients treated with 10-fraction SBRT for lung metastases from
CRC, of whom 14 also had metastases to other sites
as well; they reported 2-year overall survival, progression-free survival and local control rates of 41,
20, and 25%; metastases to additional organ sites was
not an adverse prognostic factor (Cheruvu et al.
2010).
Several studies have investigated patients treated
with SBRT for CRC oligometastases to any organ
site. Adverse survival and tumor control outcomes
appear to be associated with greater tumor burden
(Kim et al. 2009; Kang et al. 2010; Metcalfe et al.
2010). In a Phase II study from Aarhus University, 64
patients with 1–6 CRC metastases were treated with
45 Gy in 3 fractions (Hoyer et al. 2006). Most (69%)
had liver metastases, and most (94%) had metastases
to one organ site. Median survival was 19 months,
and the 2-year overall survival and local control were
38 and 64% respectively. Another Korean study
investigated 59 patients with 78 CRC metastases, to
one organ (more than half to lymph nodes); they

336

M. T. Milano and J. K. Salama

reported 5-year overall survival, progression-free
survival and local control rates of 29, 19 and 24%
(Kang et al. 2010). A University of Rochester study of
41 patients with CRC oligometastases to any organ
site(s), mostly treated with 50 Gy in 10 fractions,
reported 2- and 5-year survivals of 77 and 28%
(Metcalfe et al. 2010). A Belgian study investigated
Tomotherapy-based SBRT (40 Gy in 10 fractions)
among 23 patients with 5 or fewer CRC metastases
(of whom 16 had metastases outside of the liver, and
10 had metastases to lymph nodes); the 1-year local
control, progression-free survival, and overall survival were 54, 25 and 86%, respectively (Engels et al.
2011).

5

Renal Cell Carcinoma
and Melanoma

Historically, renal cell carcinoma (RCC) has been
considered relatively radioresistant, although brain
metastases respond well to single fraction radiosurgery, and SBRT has proven efficacious for inoperable
primary RCC (‘‘Renal Cell Carcinoma’’). Several
studies have investigated SBRT for RCC oligometastases. A Swedish study analyzed 50 RCC patients
with 162 metastases to any site ([60% to lung),
treated with various fractionation schemes (Wersall
et al. 2005). Total regression was seen in 30%, and
tumor progression in 2%. Seventy-four percent of
those with 1–3 metastases and 57% of those with [3
metastases developed new metastases (after a median
of 9 and 5 months respectively). In a study from The
Methodist Hospital (Houston, TX) of patients with 23
metastases from RCC, 93% achieved palliation of
symptoms, and 87% of patients’ tumors were controlled after a median follow-up of 9 months
(Teh et al. 2007).
The use of SBRT for RCC has also been studied at
the University of Chicago. Eighteen patients with 39
metastases were treated with SBRT, including 12
patients treated with SBRT in three fraction or ten
fraction regimens to all known sites of disease. The
median follow-up was 16.2 months for all patients
and 21 months in those treated to all known metastatic sites. Treatment was tolerated with no grade 3
or higher toxicity. Similar to the other studies mentioned above, high rates (91.4%) of treated metastases

were controlled with SBRT. Those patients whose
duration from initial diagnosis to SBRT was longer
experienced a lower rate of new metastatic progression following SBRT (Ranck et al. 2012). Additionally, in patients treated to all metastatic sites, SBRT
often allowed for a delay in the initiation of systemic
therapy (median time to systemic therapy after SBRT
22 months), suggesting that SBRT could be used to
delay initiation of systemic agents such as sunitinib,
sorafenib, pazopanib, and everolimus.
Similar to RCC, melanoma has been considered
relatively radioresistant, although brain metastases
respond well to single fraction radiosurgery, and
hypofractionated regimens are often used as adjuvant
and/or palliative therapy for primary or metastatic
melanoma. In a University of Colorado study, 13
patients with 25 metastases from RCC were analyzed
in a combined cohort with 17 patients with 28
metastases from melanoma (Stinauer et al. 2011). The
1.5 year local control was 88%, and was non-significantly (p = 006) superior among RCC patients; the
median survival was significantly greater among RCC
patients (not reached vs. 22.2 months, p = 0.015).
In separate reports, the University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center reported outcomes of patients treated
with single fraction SBRT (maximum dose
17.5–25 Gy) for RCC (Gerszten et al. 2005a, b) or
melanoma (Gerszten et al. 2005a, b) spinal metastases. Among 48 patients with 60 RCC spine metastases
(of which 42 were previously irradiated), pain
improved in 89% at a median follow-up of [3 years;
among 8 patients whose tumors had progressed after
conventional radiotherapy, 7 were controlled (Gerszten et al. 2005a, b). Among 28 patients with 36
melanoma spine metastases (of which 23 were previously irradiated), pain improved in 96% at a median
follow-up of [3 years; among 4 patients whose
tumors had progressed after conventional radiation, 3
were controlled (Gerszten et al. 2005a, b).

6

Sarcoma

Sarcoma represents a variety of histologies, most of
which commonly metastasize to the lung. Surgical
resection of lung metastases (Pastorino et al. 1997;
Sternberg and Sonett 2007; Timmerman et al. 2009)
particularly from sarcoma (Billingsley et al. 1999;

Histology-Specific Metastasis

Blackmon et al. 2009), has been well-studied. Little
data exists regarding SBRT for lung metastases. In a
recent study from the University of Rochester, 52
patients with lung metastases from sarcoma (excluding ‘round blue cell’ subtypes) underwent surgical
resection and/or SBRT (Dhakal et al. 2012). Fifteen
patients underwent SBRT, mostly 50 Gy in 10 fractions, to 74 lesions. After SBRT, the 3-year local
control was 82% and median survival was 2.1 years.

7

Breast Cancer

Patients with metastatic breast cancer, particularly
those with bone-only metastases, and those with hormonal responsive cancer, can survive many years with
metastatic diagnosis. SBRT provides a means to prolong tumor control, and perhaps survival, in patients
with oligometastatic disease. Among 40 patients with
oligometastatic breast cancer,treated with SBRT at the
University of Rochester, the four-year overall survival,
progression-free survival and lesion local control were
of 59, 38, and 89%. On univariate analyses, 1 metastatic
lesion (vs. 2–5), smaller tumor volume, bone-only
disease, and stable or regressing lesions prior to SBRT
were associated with more favorable outcome. The
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group, Southwest
Oncology Group, and North Central Cancer Treatment
Group are developing protocols to investigate survival
and tumor control outcomes after SBRT for oligometastatic breast cancer, and to correlate these outcomes
with biologic and clinical prognostic factors.

8

Prostate Cancer

Prostate cancer primarily metastasizes to pelvic
nodes and to bony sites. To our knowledge, no study
has specifically examined SBRT for oligometastases
from prostate cancer. In an analysis from the University of Rochester, 369 patients with localized
Stage T1–T3a prostate were retrospectively followed
for [10 years (Singh et al. 2004). Interestingly, the
overall survival of 30 patients who developed B5
bony metastases (not treated with SBRT) was similar
to the survival of those who developed no metastatic
lesions, and was significantly better than for the
survival of 44 patients who developed [5 lesions.

337

The authors postulated that early detection and
aggressive treatment of prostate cancer patients with
a small number of metastatic lesions may improve
long-term survival.

9

Eligibility Criteria

Patients would be considered eligible for SBRT for
oligometastases if:
(1) Their performance status and anticipated survival
justifies aggressive therapy of metastases.
(2) The metastatic lesion(s) can be completely targeted with acceptable risks to critical normal
tissues. While most prospective studies have used
3–5 metastatic lesions as a cut-off for study
eligibility, arguably this is somewhat arbitrary.
The number of lesions may or may not predict for
better outcomes after SBRT, and if so, the
‘‘threshold number’’ beyond which local therapy
is ineffective may vary based upon tumor histology and other tumor and host-related factors.
(3) The patient refuses surgical resection and/or the
metastatic lesion(s) are not amenable to surgical
resection, either due to the number of apparent
metastatic lesions, location of lesion(s), and/or
anticipated morbidity or mortality of resection.
The first two criteria are considered indications for
medical necessity of SBRT by ASTRO (http://astro.
org/PublicPolicy/WhitePapersAndOtherDocuments/
documents/SBRTMP.pdf).
To our knowledge, there are no absolute or relative
indications or contraindications of SBRT for oligometastases related to tumor histology. Case examples are shown in a later section.
There is a paucity of data on the safety of SBRT
with concurrent chemotherapy. At the University of
Rochester, SBRT is not offered to patients receiving
anthracycline-based chemotherapy until after they
have completed chemotherapy. For patients receiving
chemotherapy, SBRT (or any other local therapy) will
prohibit accurate assessment of chemotherapy
response. We therefore advocate offering SBRT after
completion of the planned cycles of chemotherapy, or
after radiographic or metabolic evidence of progression. After disease progression, the choice to offer
SBRT versus second- or third-line chemotherapy
should be made by a multidisciplinary team.

338

M. T. Milano and J. K. Salama

Fig. 1 The isodose lines
overlaid on the planning CT
scan

10

Toxicities

The total dose, fractional dose, volume of normal
tissue exposed to high doses of radiation, and location
of the target are critical variables in predicting late
toxicity. The anticipated toxicities from SBRT for
oligometastases, to our knowledge, is unrelated to
tumor histology. The chapters on SBRT for specific
organ sites provide more detailed information on toxicities after SBRT for that given organ and ‘‘Normal
Tissue Constraints’’ reviews normal tissue constraints.
Several recent articles have reviewed toxicity after
SBRT (Milano et al. 2008a, b, c) and the recommended
normal tissue dose-volume constraints for SBRT
(Milano et al. 2008a, b, c; Timmerman 2008; Benedict
et al. 2010).

11

Case Examples

Case 1
The patient was a 65-year-old gentleman diagnosed with a T1bN0, Stage I NSCLC 7 years
ago, treated with lobectomy and no adjuvant therapy
at that time. Two years ago, he developed lung

metastases treated with wedge resections. He presented
with newly diagnosed retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy, with four contiguous lymph nodes seen on CT and
PET imaging. These were causing abdominal discomfort. The retroperitoneal lymph nodes were treated to a
dose of 50 Gy in 5 Gy fractions, resulting in a small
bowel maximum dose of 50 Gy, and \1 ml of small
bowel receiving [37 Gy (Fig. 1). He achieved complete pain control, and is being followed with serial CT
imaging with no recurrence to date (\6 months after
SBRT).
Case 2
The patient was a 70-year lady diagnosed with
oligometastatic colon cancer 8 years prior, initially
treated with colectomy followed by a wedge resection
of a solitary lung metastasis, and then systemic therapy. She underwent additional wedge resections
4 years ago for lung metastases involving the right
upper and middle lobes, and two years ago for a lung
metastasis of the left upper lobe. She then presented
with a growing, PET avid (SUV = 3.5) lung nodule in
the left upper lobe. Poor pulmonary function precluded
surgical resection. She was therefore treated with
SBRT to a dose of 60 Gy in 12 Gy fractions (Fig. 2).
The lung V20 was 3%. She has remained with no
evidence of recurrence [18 months after SBRT.

Histology-Specific Metastasis

339

Fig. 2 The isodose lines
overlaid on the planning CT
scan

Case 3
The patient was a 61-year-old man diagnosed with
stage IIIB NSCLC. He was treated with concurrent
carboplatin, paclitaxel, and radiotherapy to 66 Gy.
Follow-up imaging revealed a PET avid left adrenal
mass in addition to an effusion in the right lung.
The effusion was sampled with no evidence of
malignancy. Therefore the left adrenal was treated
with three 10 Gy fractions on a dose escalation
protocol. Following treatment, he had a radiographic
partial response and a metabolic complete response
(Fig. 3a–c). His left adrenal lesion remained
controlled but his disease progressed six months after
the initial SBRT course, with three new liver
metastatic lesions. These were treated with SBRT as
well. These too remained controlled.
Case 4
The patient was a 72-year-old man who was
diagnosed with a left renal cell carcinoma and
underwent a left radical nephrectomy. Four years
later, surveillance imaging revealed an enlarged right
adrenal gland and a single left paraaortic lymph node.
Biopsy of the paraaortic lymph node was consistent
with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. He was reluctant
to initiate systemic therapy and was enrolled on a
dose escalation study of SBRT for limited metastatic
disease. He was treated to both the right adrenal and

left paraaortic lymph nodes simultaneously. Both
metastatic sites were prescribed 30 Gy in three 10 Gy
fractions (Fig. 4). Both sites remained controlled at
last follow-up 36 months post SBRT.

12

Future Directions

Patients with metastatic disease are clearly a diverse
group with a spectrum of cancer spread and aggressiveness. Future efforts should be directed at identifying those patients who are likely to benefit from
SBRT for oligometastatic disease. There is a need for
a better understanding of the underlying tumor and
host genotypic and phenotypic traits that correlate
with better outcomes after SBRT.
As the radiation biology of fractional radiation
doses [8 Gy is poorly understood (Milano et al.
2008a, b, c), both with respect to cancerous tumors
and normal tissues, the role of radiation modifiers,
either radiation sensitizers or radiation protectors, in
conjunction with SBRT for oligometastases is
unknown, and should be studied further.
Lastly, the optimal dose and fractional dose with
respect to efficacy and safety of SBRT should be
vetted with well-designed studies. Currently, ASTRO
defines SBRT as 5 or fewer fractions, though several

340

M. T. Milano and J. K. Salama

Fig. 3 a The isodose
distribution overlaid on the
planning CT scan; (b) pre-and
post- coronal CT images
showing volumetric
regression of the treated left
adrenal; and, (c) shows preand post-treatment FDG-PET
images demonstrating a
metabolic complete response
in the treated left adrenal

studies have been published in which patients
received 6–10 fractions using stereotactic localization. Limiting the number of SBRT fractions to 5 is

somewhat arbitrary, and may hinder our understanding of the optimal dose-fractionation schedules for
various tumor types and treatment locations.

Histology-Specific Metastasis

341

Fig. 4 The axial and coronal beam arrangements and dose distributions overlaid on the planning CT scan

In summary, SBRT, whether delivered in single or
multiple fractions, has been shown to be a viable
option for patients with limited metastases, and is
associated with high rates of tumor control with
limited toxicity. The data available to date suggests
that SBRT for oligometastases is associated with
favorable outcomes in patients with cancers generally
thought to be radioresistant. Patients treated to all
known sites of disease can achieve very long diseasefree intervals bordering on cure. Studies are ongoing,
and more are needed, to identify patients best suited
for these treatments as well as to further optimize
available regimens.

References
Al-Asfoor A, Fedorowicz Z, Lodge M (2008) Resection versus
no intervention or other surgical interventions for colorectal
cancer liver metastases. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
16:CD006039
Benedict SH, Yenice KM, Followill D, Galvin JM, Hinson W,
Kavanagh B, Keall P, Lovelock M, Meeks S et al (2010)
Stereotactic body radiation therapy: the report of AAPM
task group 101. Med Phys 37:4078–4101
Billingsley KG, Burt ME, Jara E, Ginsberg RJ, Woodruff JM,
Leung DH, Brennan MF (1999) Pulmonary metastases from
soft tissue sarcoma: analysis of patterns of diseases and
postmetastasis survival. Ann Surg 229:602–610; discussion
610–602
Blackmon SH, Shah N, Roth JA, Correa AM, Vaporciyan AA,
Rice DC, Hofstetter W, Walsh GL, Benjamin R, Pollock R,
Swisher SG, Mehran R (2009) Resection of pulmonary and
extrapulmonary sarcomatous metastases is associated with

long-term survival. Ann Thorac Surg 88:877–884 discussion 884–875
Blomgren H, Lax I, Naslund I, Svanstrom R (1995) Stereotactic
high dose fraction radiation therapy of extracranial tumors
using an accelerator: clinical experience of the first thirtyone patients. Acta Oncol 34:861–870
Brown RE, Bower MR, Martin RC (2010) Hepatic resection
for colorectal liver metastases. Surg Clin North Am 90:
839–852
Cheruvu P, Metcalfe SK, Katz AW, Philip A, Okunieff P,
Milano MT (2010) Retrospective review of stereotactic
body radiotherapy (SBRT) for lung metastases from colorectal cancer (CRC). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 78:S316
Cheruvu P, Metcalfe SK, Metcalfe J, Chen Y, Okunieff P,
Milano MT (2011) Comparison of outcomes in patients with
stage III versus limited stage IV non-small cell lung cancer.
Radiat Oncol 6:80
Demaria S, Ng B, Devitt ML, Babb JS, Kawashima N, Liebes
L, Formenti SC (2004) Ionizing radiation inhibition of
distant untreated tumors (abscopal effect) is immune
mediated. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 58:862–870
Dhakal S, Corbin KS, Milano MT, Philip A, Sahasrabudhe D,
Jones C, Constine LS (2012) Stereotactic body radiotherapy
for pulmonary metastases from soft-tissue sarcomas: excellent local lesion control and improved patient survival. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys (in press)
Elias D, Liberale G, Vernerey D, Pocard M, Ducreux M, Boige
V, Malka D, Pignon JP, Lasser P (2005) Hepatic and
extrahepatic colorectal metastases: when resectable, their
localization does not matter, but their total number has a
prognostic effect. Ann Surg Oncol 12:900–909
Engels B, Everaert H, Gevaert T, Duchateau M, Neyns B,
Sermeus A, Tournel K, Verellen D, Storme G, De Ridder M
(2011) Phase II study of helical tomotherapy for oligometastatic colorectal cancer. Ann Oncol 22:362–368
Fong Y, Fortner J, Sun RL, Brennan MF, Blumgart LH (1999)
Clinical score for predicting recurrence after hepatic
resection for metastatic colorectal cancer: analysis of 1001
consecutive cases. Ann Surg 230:309–318 discussion
318–321

342
Formenti SC, Demaria S (2009) Systemic effects of local
radiotherapy. Lancet Oncol 10:718–726
Formenti S, Friedman K, Chao K, Adams S, Fenton-Kerimian
M, Donach ME, Demaria S (2008) Abscopal response in
irradiated patients: results of a proof of principle trial. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 72:S6–S7
Gerszten PC, Burton SA, Ozhasoglu C, Vogel WJ, Welch WC,
Baar J, Friedland DM (2005a) Stereotactic radiosurgery for
spinal metastases from renal cell carcinoma. J Neurosurg
Spine 3:288–295
Gerszten PC, Burton SA, Quinn AE, Agarwala SS, Kirkwood
JM (2005b) Radiosurgery for the treatment of spinal
melanoma metastases. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg
83:213–221
Greco C, Zelefsky MJ, Lovelock M, Fuks Z, Hunt M,
Rosenzweig K, Zatcky J, Kim B, Yamada Y (2011)
Predictors of local control after single-dose stereotactic
image-guided intensity-modulated radiotherapy for extracranial metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
79:1151–1157
Hasselle MD, Haraf DJ, Rusthoven KE, Golden DW, Salgia R,
Villaflor VM, Shah N, Hoffman PC, Chmura SJ, Connell
PP, Vokes EE, Weichselbaum RR, Salama JK (2012)
Hypofractionated image-guided radiation therapy for
patients with limited volume metastatic non-small cell lung
cancer. J Thorac Oncol (in press)
Hellman S, Weichselbaum RR (1995) Oligometastases. J Clin
Oncol 13:8–10
Hoyer M, Roed H, Traberg Hansen A, Ohlhuis L, Petersen J,
Nellemann H, Kiil Berthelsen A, Grau C, Aage Engelholm
S, Von der Maase H (2006) Phase II study on stereotactic
body radiotherapy of colorectal metastases. Acta Oncol
45:823–830
Inoue M, Ohta M, Iuchi K, Matsumura A, Ideguchi K,
Yasumitsu T, Nakagawa K, Fukuhara K, Maeda H, Takeda
S, Minami M, Ohno Y, Matsuda H (2004) Benefits of
surgery for patients with pulmonary metastases from
colorectal carcinoma. Ann Thorac Surg 78:238–244
Kang JK, Kim MS, Kim JH, Yoo SY, Cho CK, Yang KM, Yoo
HJ, Seo YS, Lee DH, Kang HJ, Kim YH, Shin US (2010)
Oligometastases confined one organ from colorectal cancer
treated by SBRT. Clin Exp Metas 27:273–278
Kao J, Packer S, Vu HL, Schwartz ME, Sung MW, Stock RG,
Lo YC, Huang D, Chen SH, Cesaretti JA (2009) Phase 1
study of concurrent sunitinib and image-guided radiotherapy followed by maintenance sunitinib for patients with
oligometastases: acute toxicity and preliminary response.
Cancer 115:3571–3580
Khan AJ, Mehta PS, Zusag TW, Bonomi PD, Penfield Faber L,
Shott S, Abrams RA (2006) Long term disease-free survival
resulting from combined modality management of patients
presenting with oligometastatic, non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). Radiother Oncol 81:163–167
Kim MS, Yoo SY, Cho CK, Yoo HJ, Choi CW, Seo YS, Kang
JK, Lee DH, Hwang DY, Moon SM, Kang HJ, Kim YH
(2009) Stereotactic body radiation therapy using three
fractions for isolated lung recurrence from colorectal
cancer. Oncology 76:212–219
Kuvshinoff B, Fong Y (2007) Surgical therapy of liver
metastases. Semin Oncol 34:177–185

M. T. Milano and J. K. Salama
Mahmoud N, Bullard Dunn K (2010) Metastasectomy for stage
IV colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 53:1080–1092
Mehta N, Mauer AM, Hellman S, Haraf DJ, Cohen EE, Vokes
EE, Weichselbaum RR (2004) Analysis of further disease
progression in metastatic non-small cell lung cancer:
implications for locoregional treatment. Int J Oncol 25:
1677–1683
Metcalfe SK, Cheruvu P, Katz AW, Philip A, Okunieff P,
Milano MT (2010) Prospective trial of stereotactic body
radiation therapy for colorectal oligometastases. In: Proceedings of American Radium Society, vol S059
Milano MT, Constine LS, Okunieff P (2008a) Normal tissue
toxicity after small field hypofractionated stereotactic body
radiation. Radiat Oncol 3:36
Milano MT, Katz AW, Muhs AG, Philip A, Buchholz DJ,
Schell MC, Okunieff P (2008b) A prospective pilot study of
curative-intent stereotactic body radiation therapy in
patients with 5 or fewer oligometastatic lesions. Cancer
112:650–658
Milano MT, Katz AW, Schell MC, Philip A, Okunieff P
(2008c) Descriptive analysis of oligometastatic lesions
treated with curative-intent stereotactic body radiotherapy.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 72:1516–1522
Milano MT, Katz AW, Zhang H, Okunieff P (2012)
Oligometastases treated with stereotactic body radiation
therapy: long-term follow-up of a prospective study. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys (in press)
Pastorino U, Buyse M, Friedel G et al (1997) Long-term results
of lung metastasectomy: prognostic analyses based on 5206
cases: the international registry of lung metastases. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 113: 37–49
Ranck MC, Golden DW, Corbin KS, Hasselle MD, Liauw SL,
Stadler WM, Hahn OM, Weichselbaum RR, Salama JK
(2012) Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy for the Treatment of
Oligometastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma. Am J Clin Oncol
[Epub ahead of print]
Rusthoven KE, Hammerman SF, Kavanagh BD, Birtwhistle
MJ, Stares M, Camidge DR (2009) Is there a role for
consolidative stereotactic body radiation therapy following
first-line systemic therapy for metastatic lung cancer? a
patterns-of-failure analysis. Acta Oncol 48:578–583
Salama JK, Chmura SJ, Mehta N, Yenice KM, Stadler WM,
Vokes EE, Haraf DJ, Hellman S, Weichselbaum RR (2008)
An initial report of a radiation dose-escalation trial in
patients with one to five sites of metastatic disease. Clin
Cancer Res 14:5255–5259
Salama JK, Hasselle MD, Chmura SJ, Malik R, Mehta N,
Yenice KM, Villaflor VM, Stadler WM, Hoffman PC,
Cohen EEW, Connell PP, Haraf DJ, Vokes EE, Hellman S,
Weichselbaum RR (2012) Stereotactic body radiotherapy
(SBRT) for multi-site extracranial oligometastases: final
report of a dose escalation trial in patients with one to five
sites of metastatic disease. Cancer (in press)
Singh D, Yi WS, Brasacchio RA, Muhs AG, Smudzin T,
Williams JP, Messing E, Okunieff P (2004) Is there a
favorable subset of patients with prostate cancer who
develop oligometastases? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
58:3–10
Sternberg DI, Sonett JR (2007) Surgical therapy of lung
metastases. Semin Oncol 34:186–196

Histology-Specific Metastasis
Stinauer MA, Kavanagh BD, Schefter TE, Gonzalez R, Flaig T,
Lewis K, Robinson W, Chidel M, Glode M, Raben D (2011)
Stereotactic body radiation therapy for melanoma and renal
cell carcinoma: impact of single fraction equivalent dose on
local control. Radiat Oncol 6:34
Teh B, Bloch C, Galli-Guevara M, Doh L, Richardson S,
Chiang S, Yeh P, Gonzalez M, Lunn W, Marco R, Jac J,
Paulino A, Lu H, Butler E, Amato R (2007) The treatment
of primary and metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) with
image-guided stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT).
Biomed Imaging Interv J 3:e6
Timmerman RD (2008) An overview of hypofractionation and
introduction to this issue of seminars in radiation oncology.
Semin Radiat Oncol 18:215–222

343
Timmerman RD, Bizekis CS, Pass HI, Fong Y, Dupuy DE, Dawson
LA, Lu D (2009) Local surgical, ablative, and radiation
treatment of metastases. CA Cancer J Clin 59:145–170
van der Pool AE, Mendez Romero A, Wunderink W, Heijmen
BJ, Levendag PC, Verhoef C, Ijzermans JN (2010) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for colorectal liver metastases.
Br J Surg 97:377–382
Weichselbaum RR, Hellman S (2011) Oligometastases revisited. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 8:378–382
Wersall PJ, Blomgren H, Lax I, Kalkner KM, Linder C, Lundell
G, Nilsson B, Nilsson S, Naslund I, Pisa P, Svedman C
(2005) Extracranial stereotactic radiotherapy for primary
and metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Radiother Oncol
77:88–95

Bone Metastasis
Mirna Abboud, Arnold C. Paulino, B. S. Teh, Simon S. Lo,
and Rex Marco

9

Contents

Future Directions..................................................... 353

References.......................................................................... 353
1

Introduction.............................................................. 345

2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7

Treatment Modalities ..............................................
Surgical Fixation .......................................................
Bisphosphonates ........................................................
Chemotherapy and Hormonal Therapy.....................
Systemic Radionuclides.............................................
Hemibody Irradiation ................................................
External Beam Radiation Therapy............................
Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy .......................

3

Rationale for SBRT................................................. 348

4

Goals of Treatment with SBRT............................. 348

5

Technical Aspects .................................................... 349

346
346
346
346
346
347
347
348

Abstract

Bone is a common metastatic site for many types of
solid cancers, especially those arising in the lung,
breast and prostate. Around 80 % of patients with
solid tumors develop painful bone metastases to the
spine, pelvis, and extremities during the course of
their disease (Nielson et al., Radiotheraphy Oncology 52:95, 1999). Multiple treatment options are
available to treat bone metastases, including surgical fixation, bisphosphonates, chemotherapy and
hormonal therapy, systemic radionuclides, hemibody irradiation, external beam radiation therapy
and more recently stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT). Here we describe the effectiveness of
SBRT in the management of bone metastases, its
technical aspects, clinical applications and treatment toxicities. Clinical case examples will be
included with the treatment plan, isodose lines and
dose-volume histograms. We conclude with future
directions in the use of SBRT for bone metastases.

6
Clinical Applications ............................................... 349
6.1 SBRT for Sacral Metastases ..................................... 349
6.2 SBRT for the Treatment
of Radioresistant Tumors .......................................... 349
7

Toxicity...................................................................... 351

8

Case Examples ......................................................... 352

An erratum to this chapter is available at
10.1007/978-3-642-25605-9_9646.
M. Abboud  A. C. Paulino  B. S. Teh (&)
Department of Radiation Oncology, The Methodist
Hospital, Cancer Center and Research Institute,
6565 Fannin, Houston, TX 77030, USA
e-mail: bteh@tmhs.org
S. S. Lo
Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospitals
Seidman Cancer Center, Case Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
R. Marco
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Texas
Health Science Center, 77030 Houston, TX, USA

1

Introduction

Bone metastases are frequently seen in different types of
solid cancers. Recent reviews have demonstrated that
68 % of prostate cancer patients, 35 % of lung cancer
patients and 42 % of thyroid cancer patients develop
metastases to the skeleton (Coleman et al. 2006). The
most common site of skeletal metastases is the spine,
followed by the femur and the humerus (Doung et al.

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2012_641, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

345

346

M. Abboud et al.

2011). The humerus is the second most common longbone site of metastatic bone disease (Wedin et al. 2011).
Bone metastases may lead to impaired mobility
and deterioration in the quality of life. In addition,
pain control may require high doses of different
analgesic medications with the subsequent risk of
developing tolerance, adverse effects from the medications and thus worsening in the quality of life.
External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) has been
used for palliation of painful bone metastases and significant response can be achieved in 50–80 % of
patients. Up to one-third of the patients may experience
complete pain relief at the treated site (Chow et al. 2007).
Early intervention may be a good option for maintaining
a decent quality of life and minimizing side effects of
analgesic medications (Kirou-Mauro et al. 2008).
In this chapter, we will present all available
treatment options for bone metastases and discuss the
growing role of stereotactic body radiation therapy
(SBRT) in this field.

2

Treatment Modalities

(Hatoum et al. 2008; Rosen et al. 2004). They can
lead to a longer time to skeletal-related events (SRE),
with reduced risk of SRE per year by 17 %. A skeletal-related event is defined as an event involving
fracture, orthopedic intervention, radiation therapy, or
spinal cord compression. Some trials have shown that
bisphosphonates may play a role in improving bone
pain (Pavlakis et al. 2005).
Currently, the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group
is conducting a randomized phase III trial (RTOG 0517)
to evaluate the combination of radiopharmaceuticals
and bisphosphonates in the palliation of osteoblastic
metastases from lung, breast, and prostate cancer.

2.3

Chemotherapy and Hormonal
Therapy

These systemic options are tailored by the type of the
primary malignancy. Patients with breast or prostate
cancer may benefit from hormonal therapy; chemotherapy can be an option in several tumors and is
dictated by the histologic type and the primary site of
involvement.

Several treatment modalities are available for palliation of bone metastases.

2.4
2.1

Surgical Fixation

Surgical fixation may be indicated prior to the
delivery of radiation therapy for bone metastases
involving the long bones or other weight bearing
bones to treat or prevent a pathologic fracture. This is
mainly applicable to humeral and femoral metastases.
Options include internal fixation using screws, plates,
intramedullary bone nails with or without polymethylmethacrylate, and endoprostheses.

2.2

Bisphosphonates

Bisphosphonates are the standard of care for the
treatment of patients with bone metastases from
breast or multiple myeloma, although metastases from
other primaries, such as prostate cancer, have been
investigated with encouraging results. Bisphosphonates are considered an effective treatment in slowing
or reversing the progression of skeletal metastases

Systemic Radionuclides

Bone-targeting radioisotopes are one method of
treating multiple sites of metastatic bone disease.
They localize to areas of osteoblastic activity, and are
indicated for the treatment of bone pain in patients
with predominantly osteoblastic metastases. This is
the reason why this treatment should not be given to
patients with lytic bone lesions as manifested by
inadequate uptake on bone scan. Other contraindications include fractures or impending fractures,
thrombocytopenia, spinal cord or nerve root compression, or any bone metastases with a large extraosseous component.
These agents are systemically administered, thus
they are most appropriate for patients with multifocal
painful lesions and those with persistent or recurrent
pain despite receiving EBRT to maximal normal tissue
tolerance. They are mainly used in men with advanced
prostate cancer and women with breast cancer.
Multiple radioisotopes have been used; the most
extensive data are with 89-strontium (89 Sr) and 153samarium (153 Sm) that are the radioisotopes

Bone Metastasis

currently approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of patients with blastic bone
metastases. Complete pain relief has been reported
with 89Sr in up to 43 % of patients, with response
rates ranging from 37 % to 90 %. Pain relief starts
approximately two weeks after treatment and maximum relief is usually achieved by 6 weeks (Firusian
et al. 1976; Buchali et al. 1988; Quilty et al. 1994;
Reddy et al. 1986).
A recent Cochrane Database systematic review
(Roqué i Figuls et al. 2011) observed a small but
significant benefit of radioisotopes for complete or
partial pain relief. There is no conclusive evidence to
demonstrate that radioisotopes modify the use of
analgesic consumption with respect to placebo. This
improvement in pain is described in 25 % to 80 % of
patients and is likely to last two to six months but
severe adverse effects (leucocytopenia and thrombocytopenia) are frequent. Two randomized trials
(Oosterhof et al. 2003; Smeland et al. 2003) failed to
find any improvement in preventing subjective progression of the bone metastases by the addition of
89Sr to EBRT or when compared to EBRT alone in
the treatment of patients with bone metastases.

2.5

Hemibody Irradiation

This modality was largely used to treat a large portion
of the body with EBRT and can provide pain relief in
case of multiple sites of symptomatic bone metastases
(Salazar et al. 2001). This has been less frequently
used since other less toxic options such as the
administration of radiopharmaceuticals became
available with a similar degree of pain relief.

2.6

External Beam Radiation Therapy

EBRT has been used for many years with good results
in terms of local control, prevention of further bone
destruction, function preservation and pain relief. The
molecular mechanisms of radiation therapy remain
unknown. Current hypotheses include an anti-tumor
effect of radiation secondary to DNA disruption in the
tumor cells. Anti-osteoclast and anti-osteoblast function has also been documented in addition to inhibition of the release of chemical pain mediators
following radiation therapy.

347

The response to treatment involves multiple factors, in addition to the reduction in tumor burden by
direct killing of the cells. Two studies (Morony et al.
2001; Boyle et al. 2003) have suggested that osteolysis and bone resorption are mediated through the
RANK (receptor activator of nuclear factor j B)
signalling pathway. The target for inhibition of bone
resorption may be bone growth factors or cytokines
derived from bone matrix or osteoclasts, and inhibition of tumor-associated osteolysis may reduce the
bone tumor cell burden (Boyle et al. 2003). The effect
of radiation therapy may be related to its impact on
osteoclasts and the RANK signalling pathway rather
than the number of cells that are directly killed by
radiation. This hypothesis is supported by the results
of another paper (Hoskin et al. 2000) that showed that
the level of pain relief after radiotherapy for painful
bone metastases correlates with persistently low urinary concentrations of pyridinoline and deoxypyridinoline which are markers of bone resorption.

2.6.1 Dose Fractionation
Multiple EBRT fractionation schedules have been
reported in the literature, with 30 Gy in 10 fractions,
20 Gy in five fractions and single-fractions of 8 Gy
being the most commonly prescribed regimens
(Ben-Josef et al. 1998; Chow 2000). Several randomized clinical trials have compared these different
fractionation schedules with a single fraction. In the
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) trial
9714 (Hartsell et al. 2005), 949 patients with prostate
or breast cancer and painful bone metastases were
randomly assigned to 8 Gy in a single fraction or 30
Gy in 10 fractions. Patients with evidence of cauda
equina syndrome or epidural spinal cord compression
were excluded. There were no statistically significant
differences between the two groups in the rates of
complete and partial pain relief, the use of narcotics,
or the incidence of subsequent pathologic fractures.
The complete and partial pain response rates for
patients receiving 8 Gy were 15 % and 50 %,
respectively, compared to 18 % and 48 % for patients
receiving 30 Gy (P = 0.6). The incidence of subsequent pathologic fracture was 5 % for the 8-Gy arm
and 4 % for the 30-Gy arm. Grade 2 – 4 acute toxicity
was more frequent in the 30-Gy arm (17 %) than in
the 8-Gy arm (10 %) (P = 0.002) and consisted
mainly of skin, hematologic and gastrointestinal
toxicity. Late toxicity was rare (4 %) in both arms.

348

However, patients treated with a single fraction were
twice as likely to undergo retreatment (18 Vs. 9 %).
Two meta-analyses compiling single fraction versus multifraction EBRT trials in the palliation of
painful bone metastases have been published (Wu
et al. 2003; Sze et al. 2003), and both agree that for
the purpose of pain relief, there is no significant difference between the single and multiple fractions with
regard to complete and overall pain relief.
In the meta-analyses by Sze et al. the overall painresponse rates for single fraction radiotherapy and
multifraction radiotherapy were 60 % and 59 %,
respectively. The complete pain response rates for
single fraction radiotherapy and multifraction radiotherapy were 34 % and 32 %. Patients treated by
single fraction radiotherapy had a higher re-treatment
rate of 21.5 % compared with 7.4 % in the multifraction radiotherapy arm. The pathological fracture
rate was also higher in single fraction radiotherapy
arm patients (3 % vs. 1.6 %).
A more recent paper by Chow et al. (2007) presents an update of the meta-analyses and confirms the
findings that there is no significant difference between
the fractionation schedules. The increased risk of
pathological fracture and spinal cord compression
with the single fraction regimen did not reach any
statistical significance.
Guidelines from the American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) (Lutz et al. 2011), based
upon a systematic review of the literature, found that
treatment with a single fraction of 8 Gy provided
equivalent palliation for patients with previously
unirradiated painful bone metastases compared with
fractionated schedules including 30 Gy in 10 fractions, 24 Gy in 6 fractions, 20 Gy in 5 fractions. There
is also better patient convenience.
Retreatment was necessary in approximately 20
percent of patients treated with a single fraction compared with eight percent in those initially managed with
a fractionated regimen because of recurrent pain. There
was no evidence that the use of a single fraction regimen was associated with an increase in acute or late
toxicity. The Task Force did not find any suggestions
that single-fraction therapy produces unacceptable
rates of long-term side effects. Based upon these
results, the management of painful bone metastases
should strongly consider using a single fraction of 8 Gy.
The National Cancer Institute of Canada (NCIC SC20)
is conducting an international trial to examine the

M. Abboud et al.

efficacy of two different fractionation schedules for
the retreatment of bone metastases: a single-fraction
radiotherapy to 8 Gy versus multiple-fraction radiotherapy (to a total of 20 Gy) over five days or over eight
days if re-irradiation of the spine and/or whole pelvis is
involved (Chow et al. 2006).

2.7

Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy

SBRT is a new technique that has proved to be safe
and efficient in the management of multiple disease
sites. The need for SBRT depends on the location of
critical structures and since we worry about the spinal
cord in the spinal metastases, the spine is the most
frequent site that was investigated for SBRT, whereas
the other sites of bone metastases are infrequently
treated with SBRT.

3

Rationale for SBRT

The benefits of SBRT include the ability to deliver
high radiation doses and provide ablative treatment in
a non-invasive manner. The dose fractionation
schemes used in SBRT, ranging from 6–34 Gy per
fraction, deliver a more potent radiobiological dose
leading to improved clinical outcomes, but not at the
expense of normal tissue toxicities. It has been
hypothesized that higher doses will result in better
local control rates and longer duration of symptom
alleviation (Milker-Zabel et al. 2003).
Most of the available trials on bone metastases have
been conducted on spinal bone metastases and have
shown good results with the use of SBRT. SBRT may
be particularly useful for reirradiating sites such as the
spine, when there is a significant concern about normal
tissue toxicity. Despite the increasing use of SBRT as a
primary treatment modality for spinal metastases, there
has been no direct comparison with EBRT, which is
regarded as the standard treatment. Spinal SBRT will
be discussed in detail in Chapter Spinal Metastasis.

4

Goals of Treatment with SBRT

The hesitation for the use of larger fraction size may
be related to the increased late effects. The larger
radiation fraction size may produce a greater risk of

Bone Metastasis

complications, such as fibrosis of normal soft tissue or
fracture of the bone, which can cause a decrease in the
quality of life if patients live longer than six months.
There may also be a greater incidence of acute side
effects of nausea and vomiting if the treatment field
includes the stomach.
SBRT may have a role in treating selected patients
with painful bone metastases. One of the benefits
from SBRT would be in treating the tumor with a
certain margin instead of treating all or a big part of
the bone, thus reducing the risk of adverse effects.
This option is especially beneficial for radioresistant
tumors such as renal cell carcinoma, melanoma or
sarcoma where the higher dose per fraction may add
some benefit and provide a radiobiological advantage.
There are now several reports confirming safety and
efficacy of SBRT (Jhaveri et al. 2008; Nguyen et al.
2010; Teh et al. 2007a; Teh et al. 2007b). A great
interest has been devoted to assess whether newer
technologies in radiotherapy such as SBRT could
achieve better results compared to the conventional
treatment for the primary treatment or the re-irradiation of metastatic bone lesions.

5

Technical Aspects

Since the number of published studies of SBRT in
bone metastases is small, we will refer to our institution’s recommendations in SBRT. In the paper by
Jhaveri et al. (2011), gross tumor volume (GTV) was
defined as the area of disease seen on CT scan, MRI
or PET/CT scan. There is no true clinical target
volume (CTV) representing sub-clinical disease
involvement. Planning treatment volume (PTV) was
created by adding 5 mm to the GTV, unless there is
extension into critical normal structures such as the
spinal cord and bowel. All patients with rib and clavicular lesions had a 4-D CT simulation to account for
respiratory motion while immobilized in a vacuum
molded body cast (Medical Intelligence, USA).

6

Clinical Applications

Little data is available with regard to the use of SBRT
for the treatment for non-spinal bone metastases.

349

6.1

SBRT for Sacral Metastases

Two studies have reported on the use of SBRT for
metastases located in the sacrum (Gibbs et al. 2003;
Gerszten et al. 2003). The major potential benefits of
radiosurgical ablation of sacral lesions are relatively
short treatment time in an outpatient setting and
minimal or no side effects. Investigators from
Stanford University (Gibbs et al. 2003) described the
role of single fraction SBRT in the management of
sacral tumors. Three patients received 18 Gy in a
single fraction. No long-term side effects were noted
even though two patients have undergone conventional radiation prior to SBRT.
Investigators from the University of Pittsburgh
(Gerszten et al. 2003) evaluated eighteen patients
with sacral lesions who received a single fraction
SBRT performed using the CyberKnife Real-Time
Image-Guided Radiosurgery System. PTV was
defined as the radiographically documented tumor
volume with no margin. The mean tumor dose was 15
Gy (12–20 Gy to the 80 % isodose line). After a mean
follow-up period of six months, there were no acute
radiation toxicities or new neurological deficits. Pain
improved in all 13 patients who were symptomatic
prior to treatment. Follow-up imaging did not show
any tumor progression.

6.2

SBRT for the Treatment
of Radioresistant Tumors

SBRT may also be a good treatment option for bone
metastases from radioresistant tumors such as renal
cell carcinoma, sarcoma and melanoma.
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is traditionally
thought to be a radio-resistant malignancy. However,
conventional radiotherapy has been effective as palliative treatment of many sites of metastatic RCC
including lung, bone and soft tissues in approximately
50 % of patients even though it is considered to be a
radio-resistant malignancy (DiBiase et al. 1997). A
prospective trial (Huguenin et al. 1998) reported on
multiple radiation dosing regimens in the treatment of
patients with metastatic melanoma and RCC. Patients
received a variety of regimens ranging from 30 Gy in
10 fractions, 20 Gy in 10 fractions, 20 Gy in 5

350

fractions, or 24 Gy in 3 fractions. They reported a
63 % reduction in pain that lasted for more than four
weeks. Stereotactic radiosurgery has also been shown
in different series to provide a very high local control
rate of up to 95 % (Doh et al. 2006; Hoshi et al. 2002;
Noel et al. 2004; Sheehan et al. 2003). Pathologic
complete response has been shown after SRS for RCC
brain metastases. (Teh et al. 2007). This suggests that
RCC may more likely be ‘‘radio-resistant’’ to lower
fraction sizes. High ablative radiation dose has also
been shown to be effective in treating human RCC in
animal models (Walsh et al. 2006). Higher dose per
fraction with either SRS or SBRT is one method to
overcome radio-resistance in RCC.
A study from the University of Pittsburgh
(Gerszten et al. 2005) reported on 60 patients with
spinal lesions from renal cell carcinoma, 42 of which
had failed previous treatment with conventional
external beam radiotherapy. After a single mean
fraction of 20 Gy using SBRT, 89 % of the patients
experienced an improvement in their pain, and 87 %
of those who were treated for tumor progression had
disease control. The authors concluded that single
fraction spinal SBRT in RCC may offer a viable
solution after failure of treatment with external beam
radiotherapy.
Nguyen et al. (2010) reported on 48 patients were
treated with SBRT to spinal metastases from RCC;
doses included 24 Gy in a one fraction, 27 Gy in three
fractions, or 30 Gy in five fractions. 58 % of their
patients had previous EBRT. At pretreatment baseline, 23 % patients were pain free; at 1 month and 12
months post-SBRT, 44 % and 52 % patients were
pain free, respectively. No Grade 3–4 neurologic
toxicity was observed.
Another study (Teh et al. 2007a) used the imageguided Brainlab Novalis stereotactic system to treat
fourteen patients with 23 extra-cranial metastatic RCC
lesions. Metastatic sites included orbits, head and neck,
lung, mediastinum, sternum, clavicle, scapula,
humerus, rib, spine and abdominal wall. The total dose
was 24 to 40 Gy in 3 to 6 fractions over 1 to 2 weeks.
PET/CT and MRI images were fused with simulation CT images to help with target delineation and dose
determination. SBRT target delineation generally
included only GTV with no true clinical target volume
representing sub-clinical disease involvement.
Maximum intensity projection (MIP) images from
4D-CT scans were used for delineating targets in the

M. Abboud et al.

lung. For many patients, tumor/organ motion data
were obtained using 4D-CT with patients immobilized in the body cast. There was only minimal
motion with bony lesions including spine and pelvis
when the patients were placed in the supine position.
GTVs (or internal target volume, including internal
motion as determined by 4D CT) were expanded 2–3
mm uniformly to account for setup error. Vertebral
lesions were not expanded at all. Dose constraints
have been placed on partial organ volume based on
existing protocols and published literature, e.g. 700 cc
liver receiving 15 Gy or less in three fractions
(Schefter et al. 2005), no more than 10 % of the
adjacent spinal cord receiving 10 Gy, no part of the
esophagus, stomach or small bowels receiving 8 Gy
or more per fraction, central tracheo-bronchial trees
or large vessels receiving no more than 8 Gy per
fraction as well as V20 of the lung is 10–15 %
(Timmerman et al. RTOG 0236). All patients were
immobilized in body cast or head and neck mask.
Image–guidance was used for all fractions. This was
achieved with kV-stereoscopic images overlaid on the
digitally reconstructed radiographs was performed
before each SBRT fraction. Median follow-up was
nine months. Thirteen patients (93 %) who received
SBRT to extra-cranial metastases experienced significant pain relief with a great reduction in the need
for narcotic analgesics. Local control rate was 87 %.
No significant treatment-related toxicity was noted in
any patient.
A follow-up study (Jhaveri et al. 2011) reported on
eighteen patients with 24 painful bone metastases
from renal cell carcinoma, treated with SBRT.
Tumors were located in the spine, ribs, clavicles, and
pelvis. The most common treatment regimens were 24
Gy in 3 fractions and 40 Gy in 5 fractions. Gross
tumor volume (GTV) was defined as the area of
disease seen on CT scan, MRI or PET/CT scan. PTV
was created by adding 5 mm to the GTV, unless there
is extension into critical normal structures such as the
spinal cord and bowel.
Median follow up was 37.7 weeks. The authors
found that 78 % of all patients had pain relief and that
patients treated with a biologic effective dose (BED)
[85 Gy achieved faster and more durable pain relief
and had a tendency for a lower number of painful
recurrences as compared to those treated with a BED
\85 Gy. This retrospective study showed that SBRT
may be a good option for radioresistant tumors such as

Bone Metastasis

351

Fig. 1 A representative
SBRT isodose distribution
showing the high dose
delivered to the targets while
minimizing the dose to the
critical surrounding structures
(a). Because of rapid fall-off
in the isodose lines, only very
limited normal tissues beyond
tumor target received highdose radiation as shown by
the dose volume histogram
(DVH) (b)

renal cell carcinoma; it also proved that pain control
can be achieved in less time (2.05 weeks) than in the
conventional radiation, where pain levels stabilize
anywhere from 4–6 weeks to 3 months after treatment
in a variety of tumors that have metastasized to the
bone (Agarawal et al. 2006; Greenberg et al. 1980).
RTOG 0631 is currently comparing a single fraction of 16 or 18 Gy spinal SBRT with 8 Gy conventional single fraction external beam radiation.

7

Toxicity

In the few published papers on SBRT in bone metastases, all reported no significant acute or late toxicity. In
the paper by Jhaveri et al. (2011), there was only one
patient with grade one skin toxicity. No neurological or
other toxicity was observed. In the paper by Teh et al.
(2007a), there was no RTOG grade 2 or higher

352

M. Abboud et al.

Fig. 2 The patient was treated with SBRT to 40 Gy in 4 fractions. SBRT plan shows rapid dose falloff beyond the treated area (a).
Comparison of pre-SBRT PET/CT (b) and post-SBRT PET/CT one year later (c) showed excellent response with no progression

treatment-related toxicity. Toxicities associated with
spinal SBRT will be discussed in detail in ‘‘Spinal
Metastasis’’.

8

Case Examples

Case 1
A 74-year-old gentleman initially presented with
hematuria and was diagnosed with localized transitional
cell carcinoma of the bladder for which he underwent
prostatectomy, cystectomy, bladder reconstruction and
chemotherapy. Few years later, he developed metastatic

disease and received conventional EBRT to L2 vertebral
body; EBRT field included L1 to L4 vertebrae. Nine
months later, the patient began to experience right hip pain.
A single focus of increased activity in the right posterior
iliac bone was seen on a whole body bone scan. The patient
had a CT of the abdomen and pelvis that demonstrated an
ill-defined, sclerotic lesion in the posterior right iliac bone.
There was some concern because of its proximity to the
sacrum and to the vertebrae and because of the patient’s
previous pelvic surgery and neobladder. SBRT was offered
to minimize radiation to his bowels and neobladder. In
addition, bone marrow could be preserved since only a
part of the pelvic bone was treated. This would help

Bone Metastasis

continuation of systemic therapy afterwards. The patient
received 40 Gy in 5 fractions to the GTV plus 5 mm margin
(Fig. 1). He achieved complete pain resolution at the end of
the five fractions SBRT.
Case 2
This 58 year old gentleman, with known metastatic
renal cell carcinoma, presented with severe left chest
pain and imaging showed large lesion (SUV= 6.5)
involving his left lateral fifth rib. His pain was not
controlled with oral pain medications. He also complained of the side effects of pain medications, namely
constipation, drowsiness and nausea. He was also taking sorafenib for his metastatic renal cell carcinoma. He
was treated with SBRT to 40 Gy in 4 fractions. SBRT
plan is shown on Fig. 2a, illustrating the rapid dose
falloff. Critical normal tissues including lungs, heart
and skin were kept below radiation tolerance. Despite
the ‘‘radioresistant’’ renal cell carcinoma, he achieved
complete pain relief at the end of his SBRT. Comparison of pre-SBRT PET/CT (Fig. 2b) and post-SBRT
PET/CT one year later (Fig. 2c) revealed excellent
response with no progression and SUV = 2.4. He continued to be pain free at this site.

9

Future Directions

The use of SBRT for various anatomical bony sites
allows the precise delivery of high-dose radiation.
This new technique offers an important therapeutic
modality for the re-treatment of bone metastases or
for lesions that are considered radioresistant. It has
been hypothesized to provide better local control and
longer duration of symptom control.
In the recently published ASTRO guidelines, the
Task Force strongly suggests that the patients should be
treated with SBRT within available clinical trials given
that the complexities of dosing and target delineation
for SBRT have yet to be fully defined. There is a need
for more prospective clinical trials with a longer term
follow-up to confirm the safety and efficacy of SBRT in
the management of bone metastases.

References
Agarawal J, Swangsilpa T, van der Linden Y et al (2006) The
role of external beam radiotherapy in the management of
bone metastases. Clinical Oncology 18:747–760

353
Ben-Josef E, Shamsa F, Williams AO, Porter AT (1998)
Radiotherapeutic management of osseous metastases: a survey
of current patterns of care. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 40:915
Boyle WJ, Simonet WS, Lacey DL (2003) Osteoclast differentiation and activation. Nature 423:337–342
Buchali K, Correns HJ, Schuerer M et al (1988) Results of a double
blind study of 89-strontium therapy of skeletal metastases of
prostatic carcinoma. Eur J Nucl Med 14:349–351
Chow E, Danjoux C, Wong R et al (2000) Palliation of bone
metastases: a survey of patterns of practice among Canadian
radiation oncologists. Radiother Oncol 56:305
Chow E, Hoskin PJ, Wu J, Roos D, van der Linden Y, Hartsell W,
Vieth R, Wilson C, Pater J (2006) A phase III international
randomised trial comparing single with multiple fractions for
re-irradiation of painful bone metastases: National Cancer
Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group (NCIC CTG) SC 20.
Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol) 18:125
Chow E, Harris K, Fan G et al (2007) Palliative radiotherapy
trials for one metastases: A systematic review. J Clin Oncol
25:1423–1436
Coleman RE. (2006) Clinical Features of Metastatic Bone
Disease and Risk of Skeletal Morbidity. Clin Cancer Res
12(20S):S6243–S6249
DiBiase SJ, Valicenti RK, Schultz D, Xie Y, Gomella LG, Corn
BW (1997) Palliative irradiation for focally symptomatic
metastatic renal cell carcinoma: Support for dose escalation
based on a biological model. J Urol 158(3Pt 1):746–749
Doh LS, Amato RJ, Paulino AC, Teh BS (2006) Radiation
therapy in the management of brain metastases from renal
cell carcinoma. Oncol (Williston Park) 20(6):603–613;
discussion 613, 616, 619–620 passsim
Doung YC, Kenan S, Rapp T (2011) Metastatic lesions of the
proximal femur. Bull NYU Hosp Jt Dis. 69(1):81–86
Firusian N, Mellin P, Schmidt CG (1976) Results of 89
strontium therapy in patients with carcinoma of the prostate
and incurable pain from bone metastases: A preliminary
report. J Urol 116:764–768
Gerszten PC, Ozhasoglu C, Burton SA, Welch WC, Vogel WJ,
Atkins BA, Kalnicki S (2003) CyberKnife frameless singlefraction stereotactic radiosurgery for tumors of the sacrum.
Neurosurg Focus 15(2):E7
Gerszten P, Burton S, Ozhasoglu C et al (2005) Stereotactic
radiosurgery for spinal metastases from renal cell carcinoma. JNeurosurg Spine 3:288-295
Gibbs IC, Chang SD (2003) Radiosurgery and radiotherapy for
sacral tumors. Neurosurg Focus 15(2):E8
Greenberg H, Kim J, Posner J (1980) Epidural spinal cord
compression from metastatic tumor: results of a new
treatment protocol. Ann Neurol 8:361–366
Hartsell WF, Scott CB, Bruner DW, Scarantino CW, Ivker RA,
Roach M 3rd, Suh JH, Demas WF, Movsas B, Petersen IA,
Konski AA, Cleeland CS, Janjan NA, DeSilvio M (2005)
Randomized trial of short- versus long-course radiotherapy
for palliation of painful bone metastases. J Natl Cancer Inst
97(11):798–804
Hatoum HT, Lin SJ, Smith MR et al (2008) Zoledronic acid and
skeletal complications in patients with solid tumors and
bone metastases. Cancer 113(6):1438–1445
Hoshi S, Jokura H, Nakamura H, Shintaku I, Ohyama C, Satoh M,
Saito S, Fukuzaki A, Orikasa S, Yoshimoto T (2002) Gammaknife radiosurgery for brain metastasis of renal cell

354
carcinoma: Results in 42 patients. Int J Urol 9(11):618–625;
discussion 626; author reply 627
Hoskin PJ, Stratford MR, Folkes LK, Regan J, Yarnold JR
(2000) Effect of local radiotherapy for bone pain on urinary
markers of osteoclast activity. Lancet 355:1428–1429
Huguenin PU, Kieser S, Glanzmann C et al (1998) Radiotherapy for metastatic carcinomas of the kidney or melanomas:
An analysis using palliative end points. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 41(2):401–405
Jhaveri P, Teh BS, Bloch C, Amato R, Butler EB, Paulino AC
(2008) Stereotactic body radiotherapy in the management
of painful bone metastases. Oncol(Williston Park) 22(7):
782–788; discussion 788–789, 796–787
Jhaveri P, Teh B, Paulino A, Blanco A, Lo S, Butler EB, Amato R
(2012) A Dose-response relationship for time to bone pain
resolution after stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for renal
cell carcinoma bony metastases. Acta Oncol J 51(5):584–588
Kirou-Mauro A, Hird A, Wong J, Sinclair E, Barnes EA, Tsao
M, Danjoux C, Chow E (2008) Is response to radiotherapy
in patients related to the severity of pretreatment pain? Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 71:1208
Lutz S, Berk L, Chang E et al (2011) Palliative radiotherapy for
bone metastases: An ASTRO evidence-based guideline. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 79:965
Milker-Zabel S, Zabel A, Thilmann C et al (2003) Clinical
results of retreatment of vertebral bone metastases by
stereotactic conformal radiotherapy and intensity-modulated
radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 55:162–167
Nguyen QN, Shiu AS, Rhines LD, Wang H, Allen PK, Wang
XS, Chang EL (2010) Management of spinal metastases
from renal cell carcinoma using stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 76(4):1185–1192
Nielsen OS (1999) Palliative radiotherapy of bone metastases:
there is now evidence for the use of single fractions.
Radiother Oncol 52:95
Noel G, Valery CA, Boisserie G, Cornu P, Hasboun D (2004)
Marc Simon J, Tep B, Ledu D, Delattre JY, Marsault C,
Baillet F, Mazeron JJ. Linac radiosurgery for brain metastasis of renal cell carcinoma. Urol Oncol 22(1):25–31
Oosterhof GO, Roberts JT, de Reijke TM, et al (2003)
Strontium(89) chloride versus palliative local field radiotherapy in patients with hormonal escaped prostate cancer:
A phase III study of the European Organisation for Research
and Treatment of Cancer, Genitourinary Group. Eur Urol
44:519–526
Pavlakis N, Schmidt RL, Stockler M (2005) Bisphosphonates for
breast cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 20;(3):CD003474
Quilty PM, Kirk D, Bolger JJ et al (1994) A comparison of the
palliative effects of strontium-89 and external beam radiotherapy in metastatic prostate cancer. Radiother Oncol 31:33–40
Reddy EK, Robinson RG, Mansfield CM (1986) Strontium 89 for
palliation of bone metastases. J Natl Med Assoc 78:27–32
Roqué i Figuls M, Martinez-Zapata MJ, Scott-Brown M,
Alonso-Coello P (2011) Radioisotopes for metastatic bone
pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6;(7):CD003347
Rosen LS, Gordon D, Tchekmedyian NS et al (2004) Long-term
efficacy and safety of zoledronic acid in the treatment of

M. Abboud et al.
skeletal metastases in patients with nonsmall cell lung
carcinoma and other solid tumors. Cancer 100(12):2613–2621
Salazar OM, Sandhu T, da Motta NW et al (2001) Fractionated
half-body irradiation (HBI) for the rapid palliation of
widespread, symptomatic, metastatic bone disease: a randomized Phase III trial of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 50:765
Schefter TE, Kavanagh BD, Timmerman RD et al (2005) A phase
I trial of stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) for liver
metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 62(5):1371–1378
Sheehan JP, Sun MH, Kondziolka D, Flickinger J, Lunsford LD
(2003) Radiosurgery in patients with renal cell carcinoma
metastasis to the brain: Long-term outcomes and prognostic
factors influencing survival and local tumor control. J
Neurosurg 98(2):342–349
Smeland S, Erikstein B, Aas M et al (2003) Role of strontium89 as adjuvant to palliative external beam radiotherapy is
questionable: Results of a double-blind randomized study.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 56:1397–1404
Sze WM, Shelley M, Held I, et al (2003) Palliation of metastatic
bone pain: Single fraction versus multifraction radiotherapy:
A systemic review of randomized trials. Clin Oncol
15:345–352, Wedin R, Hansen BH, Laitinen M, Trovik C,
Timmerman RD et al A Phase II Trial of Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy (SBRT) in the treatment of patients with
medically inoperable stage I/II non-small cell lung cancer.
radiation therapy oncology Group; RTOG 0236
Teh BS, Bloch C, Galli-Guevara M, Doh L, Richardson S,
Chiang S, Yeh P, Gonzalez M, Lunn W, Marco R, Jac J,
Paulino AC, Lu HH, Butler EB, Amato RJ (2007a) The
treatment of primary and metastatic renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) with image-guided stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT). Biomed Imaging Interv J 3(1):e6
Teh BS, Bloch CB, Paulino AC, Shen S, Hinckley L, Baskin D,
Butler EB, Amato RJ (2007b) Pathological complete
response in renal cell carcinoma brain metastases treated
with stereotactic radiosurgery. Clin Genitourin Cancer
5(5):334–337
Teh BS, Paulino AC, Lu HH, Chiu JK, Richardson S, Chiang S,
Amato R, Butler EB, Bloch C (2007c) Versatility of the
Novalis system to deliver image-guided stereotactic body
radiation therapy (SBRT) for various anatomical sites.
Technol Cancer Res Treat 6(4):347–354
Walsh L, Stanfield JL, Cho LC, Chang CH, Forster K, Kabbani W,
Cadeddu JA, Hsieh JT, Choy H, Timmerman R, Lotan Y
(2006) Efficacy of ablative high-dose-per-fraction radiation for
implanted human renal cell cancer in a nude mouse model. Eur
Urol 50(4):795–800; discussion 800,
Wedin R, Hansen BH, Laitinen M, Trovik C, Timmerman RD
et al (2011) A Phase II Trial of Stereotactic Body Radiation
Therapy (SBRT) in the Treatment of Patients with Medically Inoperable Stage I/II Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group; RTOG 0236
Wu JS, Wong R, Johnston M et al (2003) Meta-analysis of
dose-fractionation radiotherapy trials for the palliation of
painful bone metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
55:594–605

Spinal Metastasis
Simon S. Lo, Andrew E. Sloan, Mitchell Machtay, Bin S. Teh,
Arjun Sahgal, Samuel T. Chao, and Eric L. Chang

Contents
1

Introduction.............................................................. 356

2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5

Technical Aspects ....................................................
Immobilization...........................................................
Target Delineation .....................................................
Treatment Planning ...................................................
On-Board Imaging.....................................................
Treatment Delivery and Intra-Fractional Motion
Control .......................................................................

356
356
356
357
359
359

3
Clinical Applications ............................................... 360
3.1 Eligibility Criteria...................................................... 360

360
363
364
364
365

3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6

Retrospective Studies ................................................
Clinical Trials ............................................................
Treatment of Recurrent Disease ...............................
Spinal Cord Compression..........................................
Prognostic Factors .....................................................

4

Patterns of Failure................................................... 365

5
5.1
5.2
5.3

Toxicities ...................................................................
Radiation Myelopathy ...............................................
Nerve Injury...............................................................
Vertebral Fracture......................................................

6

Case Examples ......................................................... 368

7

Future Directions..................................................... 369

366
366
366
366

References.......................................................................... 369
S. S. Lo (&)  M. Machtay
Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospitals
Seidman Cancer Center, Case Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
e-mail: Simon.Lo@UHhospitals.org
A. E. Sloan
Brain Tumor and Neuro-Oncology Center, University
Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
B. S. Teh
Department of Radiation Oncology, Weill Cornell College
of Medicine, The Methodist Hospital Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA
A. Sahgal
Department of Radiation Oncology, Princess Margaret
Hospital and Toronto Sunnybrook Hospital, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada
S. T. Chao
Department of Radiation Oncology, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, OH, USA
E. L. Chang
Department of Radiation Oncology, Keck School of
Medicine and Norris Cancer Hospital, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA

Abstract

Spinal metastasis can cause pain and neurologic
dysfunction as a result of compression of spinal
cord, cauda equina, or nerve roots. In patients with
spinal cord compression, surgical resection with
postoperative radiotherapy is offered. Otherwise,
radiotherapy is often given alone for the palliation
of these symptoms. However, the amount of
radiation that can be given to the spine is limited
by the spinal cord tolerance, especially in cases of
re-irradiation for recurrent disease. Stereotactic
body radiation therapy (SBRT) or stereotactic
ablative radiation therapy (SABR) can potentially
provide a favorable therapeutic window by allowing the delivery of an ablative dose of radiation to
spinal metastases while limiting the spinal cord
dose to within the constraints. In the recent years,
abundant data on the use of SBRT/SABR for
spinal metastasis have emerged in the literature.
This chapter will provide an overview of the

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2011_454, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

355

356

S. S. Lo et al.

technical and clinical aspects of SBRT/SABR for
spinal metastasis.

1

SBRT/SABR for spinal metastasis (Sahgal et al. 2008,
2011). The details of various treatment devices are
covered in the earlier chapters.

Introduction
2.1

The vertebral column is one of the most common sites of
metastasis in solid tumors. Patients can suffer significant
debilitation from spinal metastasis as a result of severe
pain and neurologic deterioration caused by tumor
involvement of the spinal cord, cauda equina, or nerve
roots. In patients with spinal metastasis but without associated spinal cord compression, palliative radiation therapy is often given for symptomatic control. In patients with
mechanical instability or spinal cord compression, surgery
is often offered for surgical stabilization or decompression
and postoperative radiation therapy to the spine is often
recommended to enhance local tumor control. However,
the amount of radiation that can be given to the spine is
often limited by the radiation tolerance of the spinal cord,
especially for re-irradiation of the same spinal levels for
recurrent disease, and durable tumor control is not readily
achieved. As a result, the quality of life of patients is
jeopardized when tumor progresses.
Building upon the experience with SRS for intracranial tumors or lesions, stereotactic body radiation
therapy (SBRT) or stereotactic ablative radiation therapy (SABR) has been used to treat spinal metastasis in
the past decade with promising results (Lo et al. 2007,
2010; Sahgal et al. 2008, 2011). Various institutions
have utilized different treatment devices to deliver
SBRT/SABR, yielding similar outcomes. SBRT/SABR
has been used as primary and postoperative treatment of
spinal metastasis and as treatment for recurrent spinal
metastasis after prior external beam radiation therapy
(Sahgal et al. 2008, 2009, 2011). It has also been used in
patients with spinal cord compression (Jin et al. 2009; Lo
et al. 2010; Ryu et al. 2010). This chapter will provide an
overview of the technical and clinical aspects of SBRT/
SABR for spinal metastasis.

2

Immobilization

Unlike lung and liver tumors, there is minimal motion of
the spinal tumor as a result of respiration. However, rigid
fixation of the spine is not readily achievable. Hamilton
et al. have described the use of an invasive fixation in the
delivery of SBRT for spinal tumors, but it is not a
practical solution (Hamilton et al. 1995). Compared to
SBRT/SABR for non-spinal tumors, the requirement for
very robust immobilization is much more stringent in
SBRT/SABR for spinal tumors because there is typically
a very steep dose gradient from the clinical target volume (CTV) to the spinal cord. The overall accuracy
should be in the order of 1–2 mm as the dose delivered to
the spinal cord can increase significantly even with a
shift in the order of 2–3 mm (Chang et al. 2004; Lo et al.
2010; Shiu et al. 2003). A stereotactic bodyframe is
typically used for immobilization. As demonstrated in a
study from M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, this is
achievable even without rigid immobilization (Chang
et al. 2004; Shiu et al. 2003). Several in-house and
commercially available devices have been used to deliver SBRT/SABR for spinal tumors (Sahgal et al. 2008).
The Medical Intelligence BodyFix system, a commercially available system, is being widely used in conjunction with various treatment machines (Fig. 1). Inhouse systems have been used with success at Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and University of Heidelberg, Germany (Sahgal et al. 2008). If a CyberKnife
unit is used for SBRT, a regular vacuum cushion or alpha
cradle can be used because of the unit’s capability of
real-time tracking based on bony landmarks (Lo et al.
2010; Sahgal et al. 2008). Regardless of the immobilization device used, it is crucial for the treating team to be
cognizant of and to take into account the potential
positional error and to take appropriate quality assurance
measures to ensure accuracy.

Technical Aspects

As with other body sites, immobilization, accurate
delineation of clinical target volume and organs-atrisks (OARs), sophisticated treatment planning, onboard imaging, intra-fractional motion management,
and accurate treatment delivery are important for

2.2

Target Delineation

The gross tumor volume (GTV) is defined as the
tumor as demonstrated on MRI of the spine (T1 with
contrast and T2 sequences) (Sahgal et al. 2008). The

Spinal Metastasis

357

Fig. 1 Stereotactic
bodyframe with vacuum

CTV is defined as any areas that may harbor microscopic disease. A margin is placed around the GTV or
CTV to generate a planning treatment volume (PTV)
to account for daily setup variations. The volume to
which the radiation dose is prescribed is highly variable among different treatment centers (Table 1).
There is no consensus as to what is regarded as
standard. In a phase II trial of Radiation Therapy
Oncology Group (RTOG 0631), there are guidelines
on the delineation of the target volume (http://www.
rtog.org/ClinicalTrials/ProtocolTable/StudyDetails.
aspx?study=0631). When the vertebral body alone is
involved, the whole vertebral body and the pedicles
are included in the target volume. When the vertebral
body and the pedicles are involved, the whole
vertebral body and the pedicles +/- lamina are
included in the target volume. If the disease involves
the lamina alone, only the lamina and the pedicles are
included.
For SBRT/SABR, the most important OARs are
the spinal cord and cauda equina (Lo et al. 2010;
Sahgal et al. 2008). The spinal cord and cauda equina
usually cannot be easily identified on a CT except in
the cervical region. Therefore, fusion of MRI to the
treatment planning CT is often performed to allow for
better delineation of the spinal cord. In patients who
are unable to undergo MRI or in cases where the
spinal cord cannot be well visualized on MRI due to

artifacts from metallic hardware, a CT myelogram
can be used to delineate the spinal cord (Chang et al.
2004; Lo et al. 2010). Investigators from University
of Virginia, using dynamic MRI, show that there is
thoracic spinal cord motion, which parallels the
motion of the bony spinal canal during normal
breathing and the mean motion range at different
thoracic levels is typically within 0.5 mm (Cai et al.
2007). Therefore, a safety margin of 2 mm is typically expanded around the spinal cord to create a
planning organ-at-risk volume (PRV) to account for
the spinal cord motion with respiration and intrafractional motion. Alternatively, the thecal sac is
contoured as the PRV (Lo et al. 2010; Sahgal et al.
2008, 2010, 2011). Non-neural OARs, including
lungs, esophagus, liver, kidneys, small bowels, and
occasionally stomach, should also be contoured.

2.3

Treatment Planning

Intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is
typically used for inverse treatment planning because
it is necessary to steer the radiation dose away from
the spinal cord while covering the target volume as
much as possible in the prescribed isodose line by
creating a very concave isodose distribution around
the spinal cord (Lo et al. 2010). Except when a

358

S. S. Lo et al.

Table 1 Target volume definition in published series
Author (year)

Type of
study

Target volume definition

Imaging
modality
used

Ryu (2003) (Ryu et al.
2003)

Unirradiated

Site of spinal involvement

CT or MRI

Ryu (2004) (Ryu et al.
2004)

Unirradiated

Involved spinal segment

CT or MRI

Rock (2006) (Rock
et al. 2006)

Postoperative

Contrast-enhanced margin

CT fused
with MRI

Chang (2007) (Chang
et al. 2007)

Mixed

GTV ? potential spinal extension

CT

Yamada (2005)
(Yamada et al. 2005)

Mixed

PTV = GTV ? 1 cm excluding spinal cord

CT

Gerszten (2005)
(Gerszten et al.
2005d)

Postoperative

Post-kyphoplasty vertebral body and areas of spinal extension

CT

Gerszten (2007)
(Gerszten et al. 2007)

Mixed

PTV = GTV

CT

Gibbs (2007) (Gibbs
et al. 2007)

Mixed

Target lesion ? 2 mm margin

CT

Sahgal (2007) (Sahgal
et al. 2007)

Mixed

PTV = GTV

CT

Hamilton (1995)
(Hamilton et al. 1995)

Recurrent

GTV ? suspicious area of involvement

CT

Amdur (2009)
(Amdur et al. 2009)

Mixed

PTV = GTV ? 1 cm bone margin +/- 0.2 cm margin beyond the
bone cortex if GTV close to external surface of bone

CT fused
with MRI

GTV gross tumor volume, CTV clinical target volume, PTV planning treatment volume, CT computerized tomography, MRI
magnetic resonance imaging

CyberKnife unit is used, all the beams are typically
coplanar. For metastatic lesions in the thoracic and
lumbar spine, it may be desirable to try to minimize
the number of beams that enter from the anterior or
anterior oblique directions because the thickness of
the chest and abdomen is subject to variation from
respiratory motion, potentially leading to dosimetric
uncertainty (Kuijper et al. 2010). Furthermore, the
anteriorly located critical structures such as the heart,
bowels, and stomach can be readily spared. On the
contrary, the cervical spine is not subject to the same
kind of limitations and beams that enter from the
anterior or anterior oblique directions can be used
(Kuijper et al. 2010).
Apparatus-dependent dosimetric differences have
been examined. In a multi-institutional study, comparisons were made among CyberKnife-based, proton-based and linear accelerator (LINAC)-based

spinal SBRT. Intensity modulated planning was used
for proton-based SBRT. For LINAC-based SBRT,
techniques included fixed field IMRT with 5 mm (11
field), 4 mm (9 field), and 2.5 mm (8- and 9-field) leaf
widths and volumetric modulated arc therapy
(VMAT) with 2.5 mm leaves (Ma et al. 2010).
Treatment plans were generated for target volumes
consisting of 1–3 vertebral bodies with spinal cord
and esophagus contoured. Acceptable treatment
planning constraints were achieved regardless of
techniques or modalities used. However, after normalization, fixed field IMRT with 2.5 mm leaves,
VMAT, and intensity modulated proton therapy
yielded the smallest ratio of maximum dose divided
by the prescription dose for one-, two- and threevertebral body PTVs (Ma et al. 2010). The 2.5 mm
leaf width 9-field IMRT, VMAT, and CyberKnife
plans resulted in the least dose to 0.1 ml volumes of

Spinal Metastasis

spinal cord and esophagus (Ma et al. 2010). Greatest
degree of target dose inhomogeneity was present in
CyberKnife plans. As the level of complexity
increased with an increasing number of vertebral
bodies targeted, the use of a high number of beams
and a finer leaf size multileaf collimator (MLC) was
favored (Ma et al. 2010).
To achieve a highly conformal isodose distribution, thinner leaves (B5 mm) are preferred, if available. Several commercially available treatment
devices adapted for image-guided radiation therapy
have thinner leaves. Compared to conventional IMRT
technique, VMAT does not significantly improve the
isodose distribution, although the treatment time is
significantly shortened (Kuijper et al. 2010; Wu et al.
2009). When VMAT is used for spinal SBRT, utilization of two instead of one arc may yield dosimetric
advantage (Wu et al. 2009).

2.4

359

HiArt TomoTherapy utilizes MVCT for OBI. Alternatively, when a CT-on-rail unit is used, the position
of the target volume in the spine can be verified using
a CT scanner prior to treatment (Chang et al. 2004).
Soft tissue resolution is better with kVCT but the
latter is more subject to artifacts created by metallic
hardware, whereas MVCT is less subject to artifacts
created by metallic hardware but the soft tissue resolution is worse. When comparing stereoscopic X-ray
(ExacTrac X-ray 6D) with conebeam CT based on the
Novalis TX unit, modest discrepancy is detected. In a
study from Duke University, the translational and
rotational discrepancies were \1.0 mm and \1° and
\2.0 mm and \1.5° in phantom and patient studies,
respectively, indicating that conebeam CT is preferred over ExacTrac X-ray 6D (Chang et al. 2010).
When a CyberKnife unit is used for spinal SBRT,
stereoscopic X-ray is used to compare with digitally
reconstructed radiographs based on fiducial markers
or bone landmarks (Lo et al. 2010).

On-Board Imaging

Multiple studies have showed that positional deviation of spinal cord during SBRT may result in
delivery of more than the planned cord dose (Kim
et al. 2009; Wang et al. 2008). Investigators from
M.D. Anderson showed that a 2-mm translational
error in any direction can result in [5% tumor coverage loss and [25% maximal dose increase to the
OARs and rotational correction is very important for
patients with multiple targets and for the setup of
paraspinal patients when the isocenter is away from
bony structures (Wang et al. 2008). Setup translational errors of B1 mm and rotational errors of B2°
are recommended for spinal SBRT. Therefore, optimal on-board imaging (OBI) is crucial to ensure the
accuracy and precision of treatment delivery.
Typically, verification of the position of the target
volume is done prior to treatment. Stereoscopic Xrays or CT, depending on the treatment device used,
can be used for OBI (Lo et al. 2010). For instance,
Novalis TX has both stereoscopic X-ray and conebeam CT capabilities for OBI while other devices
such as Varian Trilogy (kV), Elekta Synergy-S (kV),
and Siemens Artiste or Oncor (MV) have conebeam
CT alone. Patient alignment is performed with ExacTrac X-ray 6-degree-of-freedom (6D) for the Novalis TX unit when the stereoscopic X-ray option is
used for pretreatment verification (Lo et al. 2010).

2.5

Treatment Delivery and IntraFractional Motion Control

Once appropriate adjustments are made based on
OBI, treatment is delivered. The process of treatment
delivery is dependent upon the treatment device used.
For LINAC-based SBRT, IMRT using static beams or
VMAT is used, depending on the capability of the
treatment device and the choice of the treating team.
During radiation delivery, intra-fractional motion can
potentially occur, leading to inaccuracies of the
delivered dose. To tackle this, manual intra-fractional
OBI can be performed to verify the accuracy of the
position during treatment. Radiation delivery is
interrupted during this process. The Novalis TxTM
unit allows for near real-time positional assessment
using a stereoscopic X-ray image guidance system; if
corrections are to be made for intra-fractional motion,
radiation delivery is stopped and couch shifts are
applied (Lo et al. 2010).
CyberKnife is a LINAC mounted on a robotic arm
that allows for near real-time tracking of target
motion using bony landmarks for spinal SBRT (Lo
et al. 2010). The robotic arm can move the LINAC to
correct residual errors in all six-degrees of freedom
and in near real-time. In a study from University of
California, San Francisco, it was found that the

360

S. S. Lo et al.

residual target motions were patient-specific and
typically on the order of 2 mm for CyberKnife-based
SBRT for spinal tumors (Chuang et al. 2007).

3

Clinical Applications

3.1

Eligibility Criteria

To be eligible for SBRT for spinal metastasis, patients
must have a reasonable life expectancy (more than
6–12 months) and relatively good performance status
and must have limited number (typically no more than
2 consecutive or non-contiguous spinal segments) of
well demonstrated spinal or paraspinal metastasis of
non-myeloma histology on MRI of the spine (Lutz
et al. 2011; Sahgal et al. 2008). Ideally, the distance
between the gross tumor and the spinal cord should be
at least 3–5 mm (Lo et al. 2010). The patient must be
able to tolerate the procedure. For patients who fail
prior spinal radiotherapy, the prior dose should not
exceed 45 Gy in conventional fractionation.
In general, patients with worsening neurologic
status as a result of radiographic evidence of epidural
compression of the spinal cord or cauda equina, prior
history of SBRT to the same spinal segment,
mechanical instability of the spine, systemic radiation
therapy (Sr-89) within 30 days before SBRT, prior
radiation therapy to the site to be treated within
3 months before SBRT, spinal metastasis from
radiosensitive histologies, history of connective tissue
disease, or spinal canal compromise greater than 25%
are considered not to be good candidates for spinal
SBRT (Lutz et al. 2011; Sahgal et al. 2008).

3.2

Retrospective Studies

There have been multiple retrospective studies of
SBRT for spinal metastasis (Lo et al. 2007, 2010;
Sahgal et al. 2008). Some studies included only
patients receiving SBRT for primary treatment, some
only patients receiving SBRT as postoperative treatment, some only patients receiving SBRT for salvage
treatment, and some a mixture. Different treatment
devices have been used in various series but overall,
there appears to be no difference in outcomes (Lo
et al. 2007, 2010; Sahgal et al. 2008). Data in the
literature show local control rates ranging from

approximately 80 to 100% (Table 2). However, most
of the studies have very short follow-up intervals (Lo
et al. 2007, 2010; Sahgal et al. 2008). Furthermore,
the criteria for local control are not consistent, with
some studies using pain relief, some using radiographic control, some using clinical control, and some
using combined metrics. A significant number of
studies used crude rate instead of actuarial or Kaplan–
Meier analysis. These make comparison of different
studies very difficult.
Several series from University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center (UPMC) on the use of CyberKnifebased SBRT for spinal metastases showed promising
results (Gerszten et al. 2005a, b, c, d, 2007). In one of
the largest series of 393 patients with 500 spinal
metastases treated with single fraction CyberKnifebased SBRT, long-term pain improvement occurred
in 86% of the patients and long-term local control was
achieved in 90% of lesions treated as a primary
treatment modality and in 88% of lesions treated for
radiographic tumor progression (Gerszten et al. 2007).
The median dose given was 20 Gy. For patients with
a progressive neurologic deficit before SBRT, 84%
experienced at least some clinical improvement. In a
UPMC study combining kyphoplasty with CyberKnife-based SBRT for compression fractures (with no
canal compromise) caused by spinal metastases, 26
patients, including 7 who had prior radiotherapy,
received a mean dose of 18 Gy (range, 16–20 Gy) in
one fraction. At a median follow-up of 16 months,
axial pain was improved in 92% of patients (Gerszten
et al. 2005d). Investigators from Henry Ford Hospital
also reported their treatment outcomes of SBRT for
spinal metastases in several studies (Jin et al. 2009;
Rock et al. 2006; Ryu et al. 2003, 2004, 2007, 2010).
In a study including only patients with solitary spinal
metastases, 49 patients with 61 lesions were treated
with single fraction SBRT to a dose of 10–16 Gy. The
median time to pain relief was 14 days with the earliest time of pain relief within one day. Complete pain
relief, partial pain relief, and stable symptoms were
achieved in 46, 18.9, and 16.2%, respectively (Ryu
et al. 2004). The rate of pain relapse was 6.9%. The
median duration of pain was 13.3 months. The overall
rate of pain control was 84%. In another study where
18 patients received postoperative SBRT with spinal
tumors (10 with spinal metastases, 3 with sarcomas, 4
with plasmacytoma/myeloma, and 1 with giant cell
tumor), a mean dose of 11.6 Gy in 1 fraction (range,

LINAC
CyberKnife

26/26; 7 had prior
EBRT
49/61
18/18; 1 had prior
EBRT
74/102; 50 tumors
had prior EBRT
21/21; 1 had prior
EBRT
93/103
32/33; 22 patients
had prior EBRT
40/110
63/74; 35
patients had prior
EBRT
21/25; 12 patients
had prior EBRT
60/81; all patients
had prior EBRT
59/63; all patients
had prior EBRT
97/97; all patients
had prior EBRT
24/31 (myeloma)

Gerszten/retrospective/
postoperative (Gerszten et al.
2005d)

Ryu/retrospective/unirradiated
(Ryu et al. 2004)

Rock/retrospective/postoperative
(Rock et al. 2006)

Gibbs/retrospective/mixed (Gibbs
et al. 2007)

Yamada/retrospective/mixed
(Yamada et al. 2005)

Yamada/retrospective/mixed
(Yamada et al. 2008)

Nelson/retrospective/mixed
(Nelson et al. 2009)

Sheehan/retrospective/mixed
(Sheehan et al. 2009)

Chang/phase I and II trial/mixed
(Chang et al. 2007)

Amdur/phase I and II trial/mixed
(Amdur et al. 2009)

Mahadevan/retrospective/
previously irradiated (Mahadevan
et al. 2010)

Garg/retrospective/previously
irradiated (Garg et al. 2011)

Damast/retrospective/previously
irradiated (Damast et al. 2011)

Jin/retrospective/spinal cord
compression (Jin et al. 2009)

Novalis

LINAC

LINAC

LINAC

TomoTherapy

LINAC

LINAC

LINAC

CyberKnife

Novalis

Novalis

CyberKnife

CyberKnife

393/500; 344
tumors had prior
EBRT

Gerszten/retrospective/mixed
(Gerszten et al. 2007)

Apparatus
used

No. of patients/
lesions

Series/type/patient group

Table 2 Selected studies of SBRT for spinal metastases

16 in 1 fx (range, 10–18)

20 (42 patients) or 30 (55
patients) in 5 fxs

30 in 5 fxs or 27 in 3 fxs

24 in 3 fxs or 25–30 in 5
fxs (if tumor touched
cord)

15 in 1 fx

30 in 5 fxs or 27 in 3 fxs

17.3 in 1 fx (range,
10–24)

14–30 in 1–4 fxs

24 in 1 fx (range, 18–24)

20–30 in 5 fxs

11.2 months

12.1 months

17.6 months

12 months

21.3 months

12.7 months

6 months

15 months

7 months

9 months

7 months

11.6 in 1 fx (range, 6–16)a
14–25 in 1–5 fxs

6–14 months

16 months

21 months

Follow-up

10–16 in 1 fx

18 in 1 fx (range, 16–20)

20 in 1 fx (range,
12.5–25)

Dose (Gy)

100% (CR: 81.2%; PR:
18.8%)
71% with neurologic
deficits improved

20 Gy: 55%
30 Gy: 74%

76% (1-year local
control)/92% (1-year
FFND)

93%/65% had pain
control

96%/43% pain relief

84% (1-year free from
progression)

82% (local control)/
85% (pain control)

87.9%

90%

81% (actuarial, based
on imaging)

Relief of pain in 84%
of symptomatic
patients

94% based on imaging
or clinical

93%

92% for pain control

88%/86% for pain
control

Local control

No RM or RR

No RM

(continued)

2 had grade 3 neurologic
toxicities

4 patients developed neurologic
deficits related to tumor
progression

No RM or RR

73% had progressive kyphosis

No toxicities

No RM or RR

No RM or RR

3 patients developed RM

No RM or RR

No RM or RR

No RM or RR

No RM

Toxicities

Spinal Metastasis
361

21/21; none had
prior EBRT
Moulding/retrospective/spinal cord
compressionb (Moulding et al.
2010)

EBRT external beam radiotherapy, LINAC linear accelerator, fx fraction, CR complete response, PR partial response, RM radiation myelitis, RR radiation radiculopathy
4 patients had EBRT and SBRT was used as a boost
b
All patients had surgical decompression prior to SBRT
a

No RM or RR
81% (crude)/93.8% for
those receiving 24 Gy
10.3 months
LINAC

62/85
Ryu/retrospective/spinal cord
compression (Ryu et al. 2010)

24 in 1 fx (range, 18–24)

Novalis

No. of patients/
lesions

16 in 1 fx (range, 12–20)

11.5 months

81% with neurologic
deficits improved
65% epidural tumor
reduction at 2 months

No RM or RR

S. S. Lo et al.

Series/type/patient group

Table 2 (continued)

Apparatus
used

Dose (Gy)

Follow-up

Local control

Toxicities

362

6–16 Gy) was given. Four patients had conventional
radiotherapy with SBRT being used as a boost. At a
median follow-up of 7 months, the crude local control
rate was 94% (Rock et al. 2006). For those patients
initially presenting with neurologic deficits, 92%
either remained neurologically stable or improved.
The group from Stanford University also reported
their experience with CyberKnife-based SBRT for
spinal metastases. Seventy-four patients (62 were
symptomatic) with 102 spinal metastases were treated
with CyberKnife-based SBRT to a dose of 16–25 Gy in
1–5 fractions. At a median follow-up of 9 months,
improvement or resolution of symptoms occurred in
84% of symptomatic patients after SBRT. Three
patients developed spinal cord injury (Gibbs et al.
2007). Yamada and colleagues from Memorial SloanKettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) reported the results
of 21 patients treated with SBRT for spinal metastases
to a dose of 20–30 Gy in 5 fractions. Local control was
achieved in 90% of the patients (Yamada et al. 2005).
In another report from MSKCC, 93 patients with 103
spinal metastases were treated with single fraction
SBRT to a dose of 24 Gy (range, 18–24 Gy). The cord
dose was limited to 14 Gy or lower. At a median follow-up of 15 months, the local control rate was 90%
and the median overall survival was 15 months
(Yamada et al. 2008). The radiation dose was the only
factor predicting local control. No radiation radiculopathy or myelopathy was observed. In a separate
study, they have demonstrated that no local failures
were observed when the minimum dose received by the
100% of the GTV was[15 Gy (Lovelock et al. 2010).
Investigators from Duke University reported a
crude local control rate of 87.9% for the 32 patients
(22 with prior radiotherapy) whose 33 spinal tumors
(32 metastases) were treated with SBRT to a dose of
18 Gy (range, 14–30 Gy) in 3 fractions (range,
1–4 fractions) (Nelson et al. 2009). In a study from
University of Virginia, 40 patients with 110 spinal
metastases were treated with single dose TomoTherapy-based SBRT to a mean dose of 17.3 Gy (range,
10–24 Gy). At a mean follow-up of 12.7 months,
crude local control rate was 82 and 85% of patients
noticed pain improvement (Sheehan et al. 2009).
The group from UPMC performed a match-pair
analysis of external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) and
SBRT in the treatment of spine metastases with 44
patients (22 pairs) matched based on age, primary
tumor site, year of treatment, and location of

Spinal Metastasis

metastasis. There was no statistically significant difference in pain between the 2 groups in one month
(Haley et al. 2011). Patients who underwent SBRT
had the highest total gross charge and EBRT treatments ranged from 29 to 71% of the SBRT charge.
Patients who underwent EBRT had more acute toxicities, and more of them underwent further intervention at the treated spinal level. No late
complications were observed after EBRT or SBRT.
Outcomes for histology-specific spinal metastases
have also been reported. Investigators from Georgetown University reported the outcomes of 18 patients
(17 had prior radiotherapy to the same involved region)
with breast cancer spinal metastases treated with CyberKnife-based SBRT to a dose of 21–28 Gy in 3–5
fractions, and compared them with those treated with
conventional radiotherapy upfront for spinal metastases. Ambulation, performance status, and worsening
of pain were similar for patients in both groups after
treatment. Patients treated with CyberKnife-based
SBRT seem to have better survival and fewer complications but the differences did not reach statistical
significance (Gagnon et al. 2007). In a UPMC study of
50 breast cancer patients with 68 spinal metastases
treated with single fraction CyberKnife-based SBRT to
median dose of 19 Gy, local control was 100% at a
median follow-up time of 16 months (Gerszten et al.
2005c). Long-term axial and radicular pain improvement occurred in 96% of patients who were treated
primarily for pain. There were no toxicities associated
with SBRT. In another study from UPMC, 28 patients
with 36 melanoma spinal metastases were treated with
single fraction CyberKnife-based SBRT to median
dose of 21.7 Gy. At a median follow-up of 13 months,
27 (96%) patients noticed improvement in pain
(Gerszten et al. 2005b). Again, no radiation-induced
toxicities were observed. There were also studies pertaining to SBRT for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) spinal
metastases. In the UPMC series, 48 patients with 60
RCC spinal metastases (42 had prior radiotherapy)
were treated with single fraction CyberKnife-based
SBRT to a median dose of 20 Gy and at a median follow-up of 37 months, 34 (89%) of 38 patients who were
treated primarily for pain had improved axial and
radicular pain. Seven (87.5%) of the 8 patients treated
primarily for radiographically documented tumor progression achieved local control (Gerszten et al. 2005a).
There were no toxicities observed. In a study from M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, 48 patients with 55 RCC

363

spinal metastases were treated with LINAC-based
SBRT and at a median follow-up time of 13.1 months,
the actuarial 1-year spinal tumor progression-free survival was 82.1% (Nguyen et al. 2010). The regimens
used included 30 Gy in 5 fractions, 27 Gy in 3 fractions, or 24 Gy in 1 fraction. Before SBRT, 23%
patients were pain free and at 1 and 12 months after
SBRT, 44 and 52% patients were pain free, respectively. There were no grade 3–4 neurologic toxicities.

3.3

Clinical Trials

There are very limited number of prospective trials on
the use of SBRT for spinal metastases (Table 2). In a
phase I/II study from M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
(MDACC), 63 patients with 74 spinal metastases were
treated with near-simultaneous CT-guided SBRT to a
dose of either 30 Gy in 5 fractions or 27 Gy in 3 fractions. The first 32 patients were treated with 30 Gy in 5
fractions and the subsequent patients were treated with
27 Gy in 3 fractions. Fifteen, ten, and 38 patients
received SBRT as postoperative, salvage, and definite
treatment. Seventeen patients developed tumor progression and 37 died. The 1-year actuarial freedom
from imaging-documented tumor in different progression rate was 84% at a median follow-up time of
21.3 months (Chang et al. 2007). Variables such as
tumor volume, prior history of radiation therapy, history of surgery, and number of fractions used did not
impact on freedom from tumor progression. The 1-year
survival rate was 69.8%. Documented narcotic usage
decreased from 60 to 36% in 6 months (Chang et al.
2007). The main sites offailure were the epidural space,
posterior elements, and the pedicles. No neuropathy or
myelopathy was observed. In a follow-up publication
of this phase I/ II trial where the outcomes of 149
patients with 166 spinal metastases were reported, at a
median follow-up of 15.9 months, the percentage of
patients reporting no pain from bone metastases
increased from 26% before SBRT to 54% 6 months
after SBRT (Wang et al. 2012). No grade 4 toxicities
were observed. In another phase I/ II trial of single dose
SBRT for spinal metastasis from MDACC, 61 patients
who had 63 non-cervical spinal metastases were treated
with a single dose of 16-24 Gy and at a mean follow-up
of 20 months, the actuarial 18-month imaging local
control rate for all patients was 88% (Garg et al. 2012).
There were two grade 3 or higher adverse events.

364

S. S. Lo et al.

In a phase II study from University of Florida, 21
patients with 25 spinal metastases were treated with
single fraction SBRT to a dose of 15 Gy. The spinal
cord dose was limited to 12 Gy in previously unirradiated patients, and 5 Gy in previously treated
patients. In-field vertebral body compression occurred
in 3 patients with one symptomatic from the fracture.
The local control rate was 95% and pain relief was
achieved in 43% of the patients (Amdur et al. 2009).
Unfortunately, most patients died or developed progressive systemic disease shortly after SBRT, resulting in a 1-year progression-free survival rate of 5%;
and a 2-year progression-free survival rate of 10% in
patients with spinal metastasis as the only site of
metastatic disease, the 2-year progression-free survival was 10% (Amdur et al. 2009). Acute toxicities
were mild and no late toxicities were observed.

3.4

Treatment of Recurrent Disease

Various retrospective studies and clinical trials included
a mixture of patients who received SBRT as primary
treatment, as postoperative treatment, and as salvage
treatment and the results were discussed in the previous
sections (Sahgal et al. 2008). There were some studies
that included exclusive or near exclusive patients who
had prior radiotherapy to the index vertebrae.
Colleagues from University of California, San
Francisco treated 39 patients with 60 spinal metastases
(37 lesions had prior radiotherapy) with CyberKnifebased SBRT to a dose of 24 Gy in 3 fractions. Thirtyone spinal metastases were treated for salvage and the
1-year progression-free rate was 96% (Sahgal et al.
2009). No radiation-induced myelopathy or radiculopathy. Stanford University reported their results on
the use of CyberKnife-based SBRT for treatment of 42
patients with 51 recurrent spinal metastases (prior
radiotherapy dose of 40 Gy). The median prescribed
marginal dose was 20 Gy (range, 10–30 Gy) in 2
fractions (range, 1–5). At a median follow-up of
7 months, the 6- and 12-month local control were 87
and 73%, respectively (Choi et al. 2010). In patients
with a retreatment interval of \12 months, the 6- and
12- month local control rates were 88 and 58% with a
single session equivalent dose of [15 Gy (10). One
patient developed grade 4 neurotoxicity.
In a series from Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital,
Mahadevan and colleagues treated 60 patients with 81

recurrent spinal metastases (all had prior radiotherapy) with epidural involvement with CyberKnifebased SBRT. For lesions not touching the cord, the
prescribed dose was 24 Gy in 3 fractions whereas in
lesions touching the cord, the prescribed dose was
25–30 Gy in 5 fractions. Ninety-three percent of
patients had stable or improved disease and 65% had
pain relief (Mahadevan et al. 2010). No neurologic
toxicities were observed. Colleagues from MDACC
treated 59 patients with 63 recurrent spinal metastases
with SBRT to a dose of either 30 Gy in 5 fractions or
27 Gy in 3 fractions. At a mean follow-up of
17.6 months, the actuarial 1-year radiographic local
control and overall survival rates were both 76%. Of
the 16 patients who developed progression after
SBRT, 13 (81%) had tumors within 5 mm of the
spinal cord and 6 of them eventually developed spinal
cord compression (Garg et al. 2011). Two patients
developed lumbar plexopathy. The 1-year freedom
from neurologic deterioration from any cause was
92% (Garg et al. 2011). Given the results, they recommended surgical intervention before SBRT when
the spinal tumor is within 5 mm from the spinal cord.
The amount of radiation that can be delivered for
recurrent spinal metastases is limited and the prescribed dose is frequently lowered to decrease the risk
of radiation myelitis. However, the group from
MSKCC found that when the prescribed dose of
SBRT was increased from 4 to 6 Gy 9 5 fractions in
the recurrent setting, the local failure rate decreased
from 45 to 26% without increasing the risk of radiation myelitis (Damast et al. 2011). This data has to be
interpreted with caution since the median follow-up
was only 12.1 months and most patients may not
survive long enough to develop complications.

3.5

Spinal Cord Compression

External beam radiotherapy with or without surgical
decompression is regarded as the standard treatment
for spinal cord compression. The data on the use of
SBRT for the treatment of epidural spinal cord compression, either in the postoperative setting or as primary treatment, are emerging. In a study from Henry
Ford Hospital, the outcomes of 18 patients, ten of
whom with extremity weakness presumably from
spinal cord compression prior to decompression surgery, who received postoperative SBRT for spinal

Spinal Metastasis

tumors were reported. Ten had spinal metastases. The
mean dose was 11.4 Gy (range, 6–16 Gy). Neurologic
improvement was observed in 62% patients and neurologic progression, caused by rapidly progressive
tumor, occurred in one patient (Rock et al. 2006).
Gerszten et al. from UPMC combined immediate balloon kyphoplasty and postoperative single fraction
CyberKnife-based SBRT to a mean dose of 19 Gy for
11 patients with symptomatic vertebral body metastasis causing moderate spinal canal compromise (B50%)
but with no myelopathy or neurologic deficits. Longterm pain and tumor control was achieved in all
patients and there were no complications observed
(Gerszten and Monaco 2009). In a study from MSKCC,
21 patients were treated with surgical decompression
and instrumentation followed by postoperative single
fraction SBRT for high-grade epidural spinal cord
compression from spinal metastases. The median dose
was 24 Gy (range, 18–24 Gy). Crude local control rate
was 81%. Median survival was 10.3 months. Those
patients receiving 24 Gy had a local control rate of
93.8% compared to 40% for those receiving 18 or
21 Gy (Moulding et al. 2010). One patient experienced
a significant radiation-related complication.
Investigators from Henry Ford Hospital reported two
studies examining SBRT as the primary treatment for
metastatic epidural spinal cord compression. In the first
study, 24 patients with 31 lesions presenting with epidural spinal cord compression from myeloma were
treated with single fraction SBRT to a dose of 16 Gy
(range, 10–18 Gy). At a median follow-up of
11.2 months, the rates of complete and partial pain relief
were 54 and 32%, respectively. Out of the seven patients
who presented with neurologic deficits, five (71%) had
improved or normalized neurologic function after
SBRT. Complete radiologic response rate was 81.2%
among the 16 evaluable patients and partial response for
the remaining (Jin et al. 2009). No neurologic toxicities
were observed. In the second study, 62 patients with 85
lesions of metastatic epidural compression from nonradiosensitive tumors were treated with single fraction
SBRT to a median dose of 16 Gy (range, 12–20 Gy).
The spinal cord dose constraint was 10 Gy to the 10%
partial volume of the spinal cord. All patients had muscle
power of at least 4 of 5. At a median follow-up of
11.5 months, the mean epidural tumor volume reduction
was 65% at 2 months after SBRT. There was a reduction
of epidural tumor area at the level of the most severe
spinal cord compression from 0.82 to 0.41 cm2 after

365

SBRT (Ryu et al. 2010). The thecal sac patency was
improved from 55 to 76% after SBRT. Neurological
function improved in 81% of the patients. No neurologic
toxicities were observed.

3.6

Prognostic Factors

Colleagues from Cleveland Clinic Foundation generated a prognostic index using recursive partitioning
analysis (RPA) for patients undergoing SBRT for
spinal metastases (Chao et al. 2011). Histologies were
divided into favorable (breast and prostate carcinoma),
radioresistant (renal cell carcinoma, melanoma, and
sarcoma), and other (all other histologies). RPA was
performed to identify any association of the different
variables with overall survival (OS) after SBRT for the
treatment of spinal metastases and they included histology, gender, age, Karnofsky performance status
(KPS), control of primary disease, extraosseous
metastases, time from primary diagnosis, SBRT dose
(B14 Gy vs.[14 Gy), extent of spine disease (epidural
disease only vs. bone and epidural disease vs. bone
disease only), upfront or salvage treatment, presence of
paraspinal extension, and previous surgical intervention. Three RPA classes were generated:
Class 1—Time from primary diagnosis
[30 months and KPS of [70
Class 2—Time from primary diagnosis
[30 months and KPS of B70 or time from primary
diagnosis B30 months and age \70 years old;
Class 3—Time from primary diagnosis
B30 months and age C70 years old.
The median overall survival times were
21.1 months for Class 1 (n = 59), 8.7 months for
Class 2 (n = 104), and 2.4 months for Class 3
(n = 11) (Chao et al. 2011).
The results of this study are intriguing but validation
of its general applicability to patients receiving SBRT
for spinal metastases is necessary. Based on the data, it
appears that RPA class 1 or 2 patients may benefit more
from SBRT compared to RPA class 3 patients.

4

Patterns of Failure

Contrary to external beam radiation therapy, SBRT
only targets the involved vertebra, including adjacent
soft tissue mass if present, with very little margins.

366

S. S. Lo et al.

Concerns arise as to whether there would be a risk of
a geographic miss, resulting eventually in tumor
recurrence. Data in the literature show that the risk of
failure in the adjacent vertebrae is in general very low
(Sahgal et al. 2008, 2011). In the series from UPMC
with 500 spinal metastases treated, no failures were
observed in adjacent vertebrae (Gerszten et al. 2007).
Multiple series showed that the epidural space is
an area at significant risk of recurrence (Chang et al.
2007; Sahgal et al. 2011). This is likely related to the
fact that efforts are typically made to spare the spinal
cord during treatment planning. This likely results in
potentially under-dosing of part of the GTV or CTV,
especially when there is very little or no gap between
the CTV and the spinal cord. In the phase I/II study
from MDACC, where the cord dose was limited to
10 Gy in 5 fractions or 9 Gy in 3 fractions, nearly half
of the recurrences occurred in the epidural space
(Chang et al. 2007; Sahgal et al. 2011). Surgical
debulking of the epidural disease may be reasonable
to widen the gap between the CTV and spinal cord,
resulting in improvement of the therapeutic ratio.
As shown in Table 1, target delineation practice
varies across different centers. In some centers, certain
components of the vertebra, such as the posterior elements and paraspinal tissues, are intentionally excluded.
Recurrence in those areas have been reported in the literature (Sahgal et al. 2011). If the metastatic lesion is
located in the vertebral body based on MRI, the risk of
recurrence in the posterior elements is probably low and
inclusion in the CTV is not mandatory and this is currently the RTOG strategy. With regard to paraspinal
tissues, it is reasonable to expand a 3–5 mm margin,
especially when the metastatic tumor breaks through the
cortex of the vertebra. On the other hand, the better target
coverage has to be balanced against the risk of damage to
the nerves and nerve plexus in the paraspinal region.
Controversies still exist regarding the optimal
delineation of CTV for spinal SBRT and more research
is definitely needed to determine the standard practice.

5

Toxicities

Complications have been reported after SBRT for spinal
metastases and other tumors close to neural structures
and the more common and serious complications,
including radiation-induced myelopathy, nerve injury,
and vertebral fractures will be discussed in this section. ‘‘

Reported Toxicities Associated with Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy’’ will cover complications associated
with SBRT in more detail.

5.1

Radiation Myelopathy

Radiation myelitis is one of the most feared complications in radiation oncology and it rarely occurs with
external beam radiotherapy but has been reported in the
spinal SBRT literature. This is likely related to the fact
that the tolerance of spinal cord to radiation in the
ablative dose range is not well understood. Sahgal and
colleagues reported 5 cases of radiation myelopathy
based on pooled data on patients who had SBRT for
previously unirradiated spinal tumors from multiple
institutions (Sahgal et al. 2010). The thecal sac was
used as the PRV in the analysis. For single fraction
SBRT, a dose of 10 Gy was regarded as safe since
radiation myelopathy occurred after a single SBRT
dose of 10.6, 13.1, and 14.8 Gy. Modeling the data
using biologically effective dose (BED) formulation, it
was determined that 30–35 2-Gy equivalent BED for up
to 5 fractions was a safe dose range (Sahgal et al. 2010).
Colleagues from MSKCC allow a maximum point dose
of 14 Gy to the spinal cord, but no radiation-induced
myelopathy was observed (Yamada et al. 2008). Currently, RTOG allows a maximum point dose of 14 Gy
to the spinal cord. Patients who undergo re-irradiation
with SBRT for spinal metastases are at higher risk for
developing radiation myelopathy. Radiation myelopathy has been observed after re-irradiation (prior dose
ranging from 25.2 Gy in 28 fractions to 51.9 Gy in 28
fractions) with SBRT using 14 or 16 Gy in 1 fraction,
20 or 21 Gy in 2 fractions, or 33 Gy in 3 fractions
(Sahgal et al. 2012a). Spinal cord tolerance will be
discussed in detail in later chapters.

5.2

Nerve Injury

Although radiculopathy or lumbar plexopathy has
been reported in the spinal SBRT literature, analysis
of risk of injury to nerve or nerve plexus from SBRT
is lacking. However, there is a study from Indiana
University examining the risk of brachial plexopathy
associated with SBRT for apical lung cancer based on
a 3–4 fraction regimen. Of the 37 apical tumors
treated, there were 7 cases of brachial plexopathy and

Spinal Metastasis

Fig. 2 The patient developed progressive disease at T9
vertebral body (SUV 6.2 on PET-CT) and new metastasis in
the posterior elements of T6 vertebra (SUV 14.1 on PET-CT)
(c, on the left with blue arrows), which were demonstrated on
MRI (a) 1 year after external beam radiotherapy and received

367

SBRT to the T6 vertebra and the posterior elements of T9
vertebra (b). The prescribed dose to both targets was 20 Gy in 5
fractions. Seven months after SBRT, a near complete metabolic
response was observed on repeat PET-CT (c, on the right)

Fig. 3 The patient
underwent SBRT to T11
surgical bed and a dose of
30 Gy in 5 fractions was
given

a dose of[26 Gy in 3–4 fractions was associated with
significantly increased risk of brachial plexopathy

(Forquer et al. 2009). This will be discussed in more
detail in later chapters.

368

S. S. Lo et al.

Fig. 4 The prescribed dose was 24 Gy in 2 fractions (distribution in middle image of the panel). The patient had no epidural
disease at baseline (left image) but developed anterior epidural

disease progression 12 months later with the rest of the disease
controlled (right image). Middle image is reprinted from Sahgal
et al. (2012b). Copyright (2012), with permission from Elsevier

Fig. 5 The patient was treated with SBRT to a dose of 20 Gy
in 2 fractions (middle image). The epidural disease extended
into the canal (left image) but did not compress the spinal cord

and there was paraspinal disease extension. Follow-up MRI
5 months post-SBRT (right image) showed that his disease
responded markedly within the epidural space

5.3

instability can be selected for consideration of prophylactic kyphoplasty or vertebroplasty.

Vertebral Fracture

Late onset of vertebral fracture has been reported after
SBRT. Colleagues from MSKCC analyzed the risk
factors associated with vertebral fractures after single
fraction SBRT for spinal metastases and discovered
that location between T10 and the sacrum, lytic
appearance, and [40% of the vertebra involved by
tumor were risk factors for fracture (Rose et al. 2009).
Patient who developed fractures had significantly
higher narcotic use, worsening of Karnofsky Performance Score, and higher pain scores. This underscores the importance of an interdisciplinary
evaluation, incorporating a spine neurosurgeon’s
opinion, so that patients at risk for a post-SBRT
vertebral fracture that will result in mechanical

6

Case Examples

Case 1
A 48-year-old female with metastatic breast carcinoma to T9 vertebra, for which she received external
beam radiotherapy to a dose of 40 Gy in 16 fractions.
One year later, she developed progressive disease at T9
vertebral body (SUV 6.2 on PET-CT) and new metastasis in the posterior elements of T6 vertebra (SUV 14.1
on PET-CT), which were demonstrated on MRI
(Fig. 2a, c). She received SBRT to the T6 vertebra and
the posterior elements of T9 vertebra (Fig. 2b). The

Spinal Metastasis

prescribed dose to both targets was 20 Gy in 5 fractions.
Seven months after SBRT, a near complete metabolic
response was observed on repeat PET-CT (Fig. 2c).
Case 2
A 68-year-old male with metastatic renal cell carcinoma with T11 vertebral metastasis causing narrowing of thecal sac. He underwent right sided
transthoracic approach to T11 with T11 vertebrectomy,
T8–9 and T9–10 diskectomy with decompression of the
spinal cord. After the surgery. He underwent SBRT to
T11 surgical bed and a dose of 30 Gy in 5 fractions was
given (Fig. 3). He had no evidence of recurrence after
24 months.
Case 3
This was a patient with metastatic thyroid cancer at
T6 which was prophylactically stabilized percutaneously with hardware due to a baseline compression
fracture and mechanical pain, and subsequently treated
with SBRT (Fig. 4). The prescribed dose was 24 Gy in
2 fractions with the cord plus 1.5 mm margin limited to
14.5 Gy and cord itself to 12.2 Gy (distribution in
middle image of the panel). She had no epidural disease
at baseline (left image) but developed anterior epidural
disease progression 12 months later with the rest of the
disease controlled (right image).
Case 4
This was a 64-year-old male who presented with a
T3–4 metastatic renal cell tumor with imaging-based
progression and pain despite chemotherapy (Fig. 5). He
had no prior radiation and was treated with SBRT to a
dose of 20 Gy in 2 fractions (middle image). The epidural
disease extended into the canal (left image) but did not
compress the spinal cord and there was paraspinal disease
extension. His follow-up MRI 5 months post-SBRT
(right image) showed that his disease responded markedly within the epidural space and clinically the patient
had no pain and was resumed on systemic chemotherapy.

7

Future Directions

SBRT for spinal metastases is an emerging field and
preliminary results are promising. Currently, RTOG has
completed the phase II portion of the trial RTOG-0631,
using SBRT for spinal metastases as primary treatment.
The phase III portion comparing SBRT and external
beam radiotherapy will be open after the analysis of the
phase II data is complete. There are also also other

369

ongoing single institutional trials and interested readers
can go to: http://clinicaltrials.gov/.

References
Amdur RJ, Bennett J, Olivier K, Wallace A, Morris CG, Liu C,
Mendenhall WM (2009) A prospective, phase II study
demonstrating the potential value and limitation of radiosurgery for spine metastases. Am J Clin Oncol doi:
10.1097/COC.0b013e318194f70f
Cai J, Sheng K, Sheehan JP, Benedict SH, Larner JM, Read PW
(2007) Evaluation of thoracic spinal cord motion using
dynamic MRI. Radiother Oncol 84(3):279–282. doi:
S0167-8140(07)00323-4[pii], 10.1016/j.radonc.2007.06.008
Chang EL, Shiu AS, Lii MF, Rhines LD, Mendel E, Mahajan A,
Weinberg JS, Mathews LA, Brown BW, Maor MH, Cox JD
(2004) Phase I clinical evaluation of near-simultaneous
computed tomographic image-guided stereotactic body
radiotherapy for spinal metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 59(5):1288–1294
Chang EL, Shiu AS, Mendel E, Mathews LA, Mahajan A,
Allen PK, Weinberg JS, Brown BW, Wang XS, Woo SY,
Cleeland C, Maor MH, Rhines LD (2007) Phase I/II study
of stereotactic body radiotherapy for spinal metastasis and
its pattern of failure. J Neurosurg Spine 7(2):151–160
Chang Z, Wang Z, Ma J, O’Daniel JC, Kirkpatrick J, Yin FF
(2010) 6D image guidance for spinal non-invasive stereotactic body radiation therapy: comparison between ExacTrac X-ray 6D with kilo-voltage cone-beam CT. Radiother
Oncol 95(1):116–121. doi:S0167-8140(10)00013-7[pii],
10.1016/j.radonc.2009.12.036
Chao ST, Koyfman SA, Woody N, Angelov L, Soeder SL,
Reddy CA, Rybicki LA, Djemil T, Suh JH (2011) Recursive
partitioning analysis index is predictive for overall survival
in patients undergoing spine stereotactic body radiation
therapy for spinal metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
doi:S0360-3016(11)00259-8[pii],
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.02.019
Choi CY, Adler JR, Gibbs IC, Chang SD, Jackson PS, Minn AY,
Lieberson RE, Soltys SG (2010) Stereotactic radiosurgery for
treatment of spinal metastases recurring in close proximity to
previously irradiated spinal cord. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
78(2):499–506. doi:S0360-3016(09)02922-8[pii], 10.1016/j.
ijrobp.2009.07.1727
Chuang C, Sahgal A, Lee L, Larson D, Huang K, Petti P, Verhey L,
Ma L (2007) Effects of residual target motion for imagetracked spine radiosurgery. Med Phys 34(11):4484–4490
Damast S, Wright J, Bilsky M, Hsu M, Zhang Z, Lovelock M, Cox B,
Zatcky J, Yamada Y (2011) Impact of dose on local failure rates
after image-guided re-irradiation of recurrent paraspinal metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 81(3):819–826. doi:
S0360-3016(10)00862-X[pii], 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.06.013
Forquer JA, Fakiris AJ, Timmerman RD, Lo SS, Perkins SM,
McGarry RC, Johnstone PA (2009) Brachial plexopathy
from stereotactic body radiotherapy in early-stage NSCLC:
dose-limiting toxicity in apical tumor sites. Radiother Oncol
93:408–413

370
Gagnon GJ, Henderson FC, Gehan EA, Sanford D, Collins BT,
Moulds JC, Dritschilo A (2007) Cyberknife radiosurgery for
breast cancer spine metastases: a matched-pair analysis.
Cancer 110(8):1796–1802. doi:10.1002/cncr.22977
Garg AK, Shiu AS, Yang J, Wang XS, Allen P, Brown BW,
Grossman P, Frija EK, McAleer MF, Azeem S, Brown PD,
Rhines LD, Chang EL (2012) Phase 1/2 trial of singlesession stereotactic body radiotherapy for previously
unirradiated spinal metastases. Cancer. doi:10.1002/cncr.
27530. [Epub ahead of print]
Garg AK, Wang XS, Shiu AS, Allen P, Yang J, McAleer MF,
Azeem S, Rhines LD, Chang EL (2011) Prospective evaluation of spinal re-irradiation by using stereotactic body
radiation therapy: the University of Texas MD Anderson
cancer center experience. Cancer 117(15):3509–3516. doi:
10.1002/cncr.25918
Gerszten PC, Burton SA, Ozhasoglu C, Vogel WJ, Welch WC,
Baar J, Friedland DM (2005a) Stereotactic radiosurgery for
spinal metastases from renal cell carcinoma. J Neurosurg
Spine 3(4):288–295
Gerszten PC, Burton SA, Quinn AE, Agarwala SS, Kirkwood JM
(2005b) Radiosurgery for the treatment of spinal melanoma
metastases. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg 83(5–6):213–221
Gerszten PC, Burton SA, Welch WC, Brufsky AM, Lembersky BC,
Ozhasoglu C, Vogel WJ (2005c) Single-fraction radiosurgery
for the treatment of spinal breast metastases. Cancer 104(10):
2244–2254
Gerszten PC, Germanwala A, Burton SA, Welch WC,
Ozhasoglu C, Vogel WJ (2005d) Combination kyphoplasty
and spinal radiosurgery: a new treatment paradigm for
pathological fractures. J Neurosurg Spine 3(4):296–301
Gerszten PC, Burton SA, Ozhasoglu C, Welch WC (2007)
Radiosurgery for spinal metastases: clinical experience in
500 cases from a single institution. Spine 32(2):193–199
Gerszten PC, Monaco EA III (2009) Complete percutaneous
treatment of vertebral body tumors causing spinal canal
compromise using a transpedicular cavitation, cement
augmentation, and radiosurgical technique. Neurosurg
Focus 27(6):E9. doi:10.3171/2009.9.FOCUS09184
Gibbs IC, Kamnerdsupaphon P, Ryu MR, Dodd R, Kiernan M,
Chang SD, Adler JR Jr (2007) Image-guided robotic radiosurgery for spinal metastases. Radiother Oncol 82(2):185–190
Haley ML, Gerszten PC, Heron DE, Chang YF, Atteberry DS,
Burton SA (2011) Efficacy and cost-effectiveness analysis of
external beam and stereotactic body radiation therapy in the
treatment of spine metastases: a matched-pair analysis. J Neurosurg Spine 14(4):537–542. doi:10.3171/2010.12.SPINE10233
Hamilton AJ, Lulu BA, Fosmire H, Stea B, Cassady JR (1995)
Preliminary clinical experience with linear acceleratorbased spinal stereotactic radiosurgery. Neurosurgery 36(2):
311–319
Jin R, Rock J, Jin JY, Janakiraman N, Kim JH, Movsas B, Ryu S
(2009) Single fraction spine radiosurgery for myeloma epidural spinal cord compression. J Exp Ther Oncol 8(1):35–41
Kim S, Jin H, Yang H, Amdur RJ (2009) A study on target
positioning error and its impact on dose variation in imageguided stereotactic body radiotherapy for the spine. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 73(5):1574–1579. doi:S0360-3016
(08)03919-9[pii], 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.12.023
Kuijper IT, Dahele M, Senan S, Verbakel WF (2010) Volumetric
modulated arc therapy versus conventional intensity

S. S. Lo et al.
modulated radiation therapy for stereotactic spine radiotherapy: a planning study and early clinical data. Radiother
Oncol 94(2):224–228. doi:S0167-8140(10)00004-6[pii],
10.1016/j.radonc.2009.12.027
Lo SS, Chang EL, Yamada Y, Sloan AE, Suh JH, Mendel E
(2007) Stereotactic radiosurgery and radiation therapy for
spinal tumors. Expert Rev Neurother 7(1):85–93
Lo SS, Sahgal A, Wang JZ, Mayr NA, Sloan A, Mendel E,
Chang EL (2010) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for
spinal metastases. Discov Med 9(47):289–296
Lovelock DM, Zhang Z, Jackson A, Keam J, Bekelman J,
Bilsky M, Lis E, Yamada Y (2010) Correlation of local
failure with measures of dose insufficiency in the high-dose
single-fraction treatment of bony metastases. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 77(4):1282–1287. doi:S0360-3016(09)
03336-7[pii], 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.10.003
Lutz S, Berk L, Chang E, Chow E, Hahn C, Hoskin P, Howell D,
Konski A, Kachnic L, Lo S, Sahgal A, Silverman L, von
Gunten C, Mendel E, Vassil A, Bruner DW, Hartsell W
(2011) Palliative radiotherapy for bone metastases: an
ASTRO evidence-based guideline. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 79(4):965–976. doi:S0360-3016(10)03577-7[pii],
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.11.026
Ma L, Sahgal A, Cozzi L, Chang E, Shiu A, Letourneau D, Yin FF,
Fogliata A, Kaissl W, Hyde D, Laperriere NJ, Shrieve DC,
Larson DA (2010) Apparatus-dependent dosimetric differences
in spine stereotactic body radiotherapy. Technol Cancer Res Treat
9(6):563–574.
doi:c4310/Apparatus-Dependent-DosimetricDifferences-in-Spine-Stereotactic-Body-Radiotherapy-563-574p17823.html[pii]
Mahadevan A, Floyd S, Wong E, Jeyapalan S, Groff M, Kasper E
(2010) Stereotactic body radiotherapy re-irradiation for
recurrent epidural spinal metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. doi:S0360-3016(10)03058-0[pii], 10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2010.08.012
Moulding HD, Elder JB, Lis E, Lovelock DM, Zhang Z,
Yamada Y, Bilsky MH (2010) Local disease control after
decompressive surgery and adjuvant high-dose singlefraction radiosurgery for spine metastases. J Neurosurg
Spine 13(1):87–93. doi:10.3171/2010.3.SPINE09639
Nelson JW, Yoo DS, Sampson JH, Isaacs RE, Larrier NA, Marks LB,
Yin FF, Wu QJ, Wang Z,Kirkpatrick JP (2009) Stereotactic body
radiotherapy for lesions of the spine and paraspinal regions. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 73(5):1369–1375. doi:S0360-3016
(08)03102-7[pii], 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.06.1949
Nguyen QN, Shiu AS, Rhines LD, Wang H, Allen PK, Wang XS,
Chang EL (2010) Management of spinal metastases from
renal cell carcinoma using stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 76(4):1185–1192. doi:S0360-3016
(09)00576-8[pii], 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.03.062
Rock JP, Ryu S, Shukairy MS, Yin FF, Sharif A, Schreiber F,
Abdulhak M, Kim JH, Rosenblum ML (2006) Postoperative
radiosurgery for malignant spinal tumors. Neurosurgery
58(5):891–898; discussion 891–898
Rose PS, Laufer I, Boland PJ, Hanover A, Bilsky MH, Yamada J,
Lis E (2009) Risk of fracture after single fraction imageguided intensity-modulated radiation therapy to spinal
metastases. J Clin Oncol 27(30):5075–5079. doi:JCO.2008.
19.3508[pii], 10.1200/JCO.2008.19.3508
Ryu S, Fang Yin F, Rock J, Zhu J, Chu A, Kagan E, Rogers L,
Ajlouni M, Rosenblum M, Kim JH (2003) Image-guided

Spinal Metastasis
and intensity-modulated radiosurgery for patients with
spinal metastasis. Cancer 97(8):2013–2018
Ryu S, Rock J, Rosenblum M, Kim JH (2004) Patterns of
failure after single-dose radiosurgery for spinal metastasis.
J Neurosurg 101(Suppl 3):402–405
Ryu S, Jin JY, Jin R, Rock J, Ajlouni M, Movsas B, Rosenblum M,
Kim JH (2007) Partial volume tolerance of the spinal cord and
complications of single-dose radiosurgery. Cancer 109(3):
628–636
Ryu S, Rock J, Jain R, Lu M, Anderson J, Jin JY, Rosenblum M,
Movsas B, Kim JH (2010) Radiosurgical decompression of
metastatic epidural compression. Cancer 116(9):2250–2257.
doi:10.1002/cncr.24993
Sahgal A, Chuang C, Larson D (2007) Proximity of spinous/
paraspinous radiosurgery metastatic targets to the spinal
cord versus risk of local failure. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 69:S243
Sahgal A, Larson DA, Chang EL (2008) Stereotactic body
radiosurgery for spinal metastases: a critical review. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 71(3):652–665. S03603016(08)00405-7[pii], doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.02.060
Sahgal A, Ames C, Chou D, Ma L, Huang K, Xu W, Chin C,
Weinberg V, Chuang C, Weinstein P, Larson DA (2009)
Stereotactic body radiotherapy is effective salvage therapy
for patients with prior radiation of spinal metastases. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 74(3):723–731. S03603016(08)03500-1[pii], doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.09.020
Sahgal A, Ma L, Gibbs I, Gerszten PC, Ryu S, Soltys S,
Weinberg V, Wong S, Chang E, Fowler J, Larson DA (2010)
Spinal cord tolerance for stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 77(2):548–553. S03603016(09)00772-X[pii], doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.05.023
Sahgal A, Ma L, Weinberg V, Gibbs IC, Chao S, Chang UK,
Werner-Wasik M, Angelov L, Chang EL, Sohn MJ, Soltys
SG, Letourneau D, Ryu S, Gerszten PC, Fowler J, Wong
CS, Larson DA (2012a) Re-irradiation human spinal cord
tolerance for stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 82(1):107–116 S0360-3016(10)030671[pii], doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.08.021
Sahgal A, Roberge D, Schellenberg D, Purdie TG, Swaminath
A, Pantarotto J, Filion E, Gabos Z, Butler J, Letourneau D,
Masucci GL, Mulroy L, Bezjak A, Dawson LA, Parliament
M (2012b) The Canadian Association of Radiation
Oncology Scope of Practice Guidelines for Lung, Liver
and Spine Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy. Clin Oncol (R
Coll Radiol). [Epub ahead of print]
Sahgal A, Bilsky M, Chang EL, Ma L, Yamada Y, Rhines LD,
Letourneau D, Foote M, Yu E, Larson DA, Fehlings MG

371
(2011) Stereotactic body radiotherapy for spinal metastases:
current status, with a focus on its application in the
postoperative patient. J Neurosurg Spine 14(2):151–166. doi:
10.3171/2010.9.SPINE091005
Sheehan JP, Shaffrey CI, Schlesinger D, Williams BJ, Arlet V,
Larner J (2009) Radiosurgery in the treatment of spinal
metastases: tumor control, survival, and quality of life after
helical tomotherapy. Neurosurgery 65(6):1052–1061; discussion 1061–1052. doi:10.1227/01.NEU.0000359315.
20268.7300006123-200912000-00014[pii]
Shiu AS, Chang EL, Ye JS, Lii M, Rhines LD, Mendel E,
Weinberg J, Singh S, Maor MH, Mohan R, Cox JD (2003)
Near simultaneous computed tomography image-guided
stereotactic spinal radiotherapy: an emerging paradigm for
achieving true stereotaxy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
57(3):605–613. doi:S0360301603007922[pii]
Wang XS, Rhines LD, Shiu AS, Yang JN, Selek U, Gning I,
Liu P, Allen PK, Azeem SS, Brown PD, Sharp HJ,
Weksberg DC, Cleeland CS, Chang EL (2012) Stereotactic
body radiation therapy for management of spinal metastases
in patients without spinal cord compression: a phase 1-2
trial. Lancet Oncol 13(4):395–402
Wang H, Shiu A, Wang C, O’Daniel J, Mahajan A, Woo S,
Liengsawangwong P, Mohan R,Chang EL (2008) Dosimetric
effect of translational and rotational errors for patients
undergoing image-guided stereotactic body radiotherapy for
spinal metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
71(4):1261–1271. S0360-3016(08)00529-4[pii], doi: 10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2008.02.074
Wu QJ, Yoo S, Kirkpatrick JP, Thongphiew D,Yin FF (2009)
Volumetric arc intensity-modulated therapy for spine body
radiotherapy: comparison with static intensity-modulated
treatment. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 75(5):1596–1604.
S0360-3016(09)00713-5[pii], doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.05.
005
Yamada Y, Lovelock DM, Yenice KM, Bilsky MH, Hunt MA,
Zatcky J, Leibel SA (2005) Multifractionated image-guided
and stereotactic intensity-modulated radiotherapy of paraspinal tumors: a preliminary report. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 62(1):53–61
Yamada Y, Bilsky MH, Lovelock DM, Venkatraman ES, Toner
S, Johnson J, Zatcky J, Zelefsky MJ, Fuks Z (2008) Highdose, single-fraction image-guided intensity-modulated
radiotherapy for metastatic spinal lesions. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 71(2):484–490

Reported Toxicities Associated
with Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy
Simon S. Lo, Arjun Sahgal, Charles A. Kunos, Bin S. Teh,
Min Yao, Mitchell Machtay, Nina A. Mayr,
Zhibin Huang, and Eric L. Chang

Contents
1

Introduction.............................................................. 374

2

Complications Associated with Head and Neck
SBRT ......................................................................... 374

3
Complications Associated with Chest SBRT........ 375
3.1 Decrease in Pulmonary Reserve and Radiation
Pneumonitis................................................................ 375

S. S. Lo (&)  C. A. Kunos  M. Yao  M. Machtay
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center,
Case Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
e-mail: Simon.Lo@UHhospitals.org
A. Sahgal
Department of Radiation Oncology, Princess Margaret
Hospital and Toronto Sunnybrook Hospital,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
B. S. Teh
Department of Radiation Oncology, Weill Cornell College
of Medicine, The Methodist Hospital, Cancer Center and
Research Institute, Houston, TX, USA
N. A. Mayr
Department of Radiation Oncology, Arthur G. James
Cancer Hospital, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, USA
Z. Huang
Department of Radiation Oncology,
East Carolina University,
Greenville, NC, USA
E. L. Chang
Department of Radiation Oncology, Keck School of
Medicine and Norris Cancer Hospital,
University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA

3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5

Skin Toxicities...........................................................
Collapse of Airway....................................................
Rib Fracture/Chest Wall Pain ...................................
Brachial Plexopathy...................................................

376
376
377
377

4

Complications Associated
with Abdominal SBRT............................................ 378
4.1 Radiation-Induced Liver Disease and Other Liver
Toxicities ................................................................... 378
4.2 Gastric/Duodenal Injury ............................................ 379
5

Complications Associated with Pelvis SBRT ....... 380

6
6.1
6.2
6.3

Complications Associated with Spinal SBRT.......
Radiation Myelopathy and Radiculopathy ...............
Vertebral Fracture......................................................
Pain Flare and Miscellaneous ...................................

7

Case Examples ......................................................... 383

8

Strategies to Avoid Serious Complications .......... 386

9

Future Directions..................................................... 388

380
380
382
383

References.......................................................................... 388

Abstract

Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) or
stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR) entails
the delivery of ablative doses of radiation to
extracranial targets. With the increase in the use of
SBRT to treat extracranial tumors of various sites,
more clinical experience has been gained. Despite
the sharp falloff of the radiation dose beyond the
prescribed isodose line, which is a characteristic of
SBRT, various serious treatment-related complications have been observed, especially when the
target volume is very close to organs-at-risk
(OARs). Knowledge of potential complications
caused by radiation in the ablative dose range will
enhance understanding of tolerance of various

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2011_479, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

373

374

S. S. Lo et al.

OARs and this will facilitate further development
of safer SBRT regimens for different body sites.
This chapter will provide an overview of the severe
toxicities associated with SBRT.

1

Introduction

Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) or stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR) entails delivery of
ablative doses of radiation to extracranial target volumes and this is made possible with the availability of
advanced technology. Tremendous experience has
been accumulated in the past two decades since it was
first started in Karolinska Institute in Sweden and in
Japan (Lo et al. 2010a). Despite the sharp falloff of the
radiation dose beyond the prescribed isodose line,
which is a characteristic of SBRT, various complications, severe in some cases, have been observed,
especially when the target volume is very close to
organs-at-risk (OARs). Dosimetric analyses have been
performed for certain specific complications and
reported in the literature (Andolino et al. 2011a; Barriger et al. 2010; Bongers et al. 2011; Dunlap et al.
2010; Forquer et al. 2009; Sahgal et al. 2010a, b; Stephans et al. 2011; Voroney et al. 2009). These studies
have added to the knowledge of normal tissue toxicities
from radiation in ablative dose range.
In this chapter, complications will be discussed
based on the body region, namely, head and neck,
chest, abdomen, pelvis, and spine, treated with SBRT.

2

Complications Associated
with Head and Neck SBRT

SBRT for head and neck cancer is an emerging field and
is offered to patients mostly in the reirradiation setting
and as expected, there is a significant risk for severe
complications. Studies from University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center (UPMC), despite using aggressive dose
regimens or concurrent cetuximab, did not observe
grade 4 or toxicities (Heron et al. 2011; Siddiqui et al.
2011). However, studies from other centers reported
severe late complications (Siddiqui et al. 2011). In one
series from Japan, 6 of 21 patients who received
CyberKnife-based SBRT for recurrent head and neck
cancer after prior radiotherapy (dose ranging from 54 to
74.8 Gy) developed severe late complications at a

median of 5 months with two dying from massive
hemorrhage from carotid artery (maximum doses to
carotid artery was 30.7 and 31.7 Gy, in 5 fractions for
both patients) (Kodani et al. 2011). The other four
patients developed severe mucositis and hemorrhage,
skin necrosis, chronic ulcer of nasopharynx, and severe
mucositis and dysphagia after 26.2 Gy in 3 fractions,
21.6 Gy in 5 fractions, 40.1 Gy in 5 fractions, and
37.7 Gy in 5 fractions, respectively (Kodani et al. 2011).
Cumulative biologically effective dose ranged from 220
to 298 Gy2 for those six patients. In another study from
Turkey where 46 patients with recurrent head and neck
cancer (with prior radiotherapy to a median dose of
61 Gy) were treated with CyberKnife-based SBRT
to a dose 18–35 Gy (median, 30 Gy) in 1–5 fractions
(median, 5 fractions), 8 (17%) developed a carotid blowout and 7 (15.2%) died of hemorrhage from the carotid
arteries 2–12 months after treatment; all those patients
who developed a carotid blow-out had tumor surrounding carotid arteries C180o and their carotid arteries receiving all prescribed dose (Cengiz et al. 2011).
Another four patients had late grade 2–3 dysphagia and
another 2 had necrosis of mandible or soft tissue.
In a study from Georgetown University, 65 patients
were treated with CyberKnife-based SBRT for recurrent head and neck cancer. Seven patients developed
severe late complications after a dose of 30 Gy in 5
fractions (one received 25 Gy in 5 fractions and
four received concurrent chemotherapy) (Unger et al.
2010). Prior radiation dose ranged from 32.4 to
120.2 Gy (median, 66.6 Gy). Late complications
observed included arterial bleeding (n = 2), dysphagia
(n = 2), soft tissue necrosis (n = 1), pharyngocutaneous fistula formation (n = 1), death from unspecified
cause (n = 1). Colleagues from Henry Ford Hospital
also observed severe toxicities after SBRT for primary,
recurrent or metastatic head and neck tumors
in seven patients, 5 of whom had prior radiotherapy,
2–26 months after SBRT using dose regimens including 18 Gy in 1, 36 Gy in 6, and 48 Gy in 8 fractions
(Siddiqui et al. 2009). Grade 4 toxicities, occurring
only in previously irradiated patients, included formation of fistula in three patients (one with concurrent
mandibular necrosis) and dysphagia and ulceration of
the treated area in one. Grade 3 toxicities included
facial pain, cataract, and swallowing difficulty
(Siddiqui et al. 2009). In studies of SBRT using various
dose regimens for treatment of persistent or recurrent
nasophayngeal carcinoma, observed complications

Reported Toxicities Associated with Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy

included nasopharyngeal necrosis, brainstem necrosis,
fatal hemorrhage, cranial nerve palsies, skull base bone
necrosis, and temporal lobe necrosis (Chua et al. 2001,
2003, 2009; Mitsuhashi et al. 1999; Pai et al. 2002;
Wu et al. 2007). The observation of these complications
is not surprising since nearly all patients had received
high dose radiotherapy, with or without concurrent
chemotherapy, for initial treatment.

3

Complications Associated
with Chest SBRT

There are numerous studies, both retrospective and
prospective, of SBRT for early stage non-small cell lung
carcinoma (NSCLC) and lung metastases, and various
toxicities have been observed and reported (Andolino
et al. 2011a; Barriger et al. 2010; Dunlap et al. 2010;
Forquer et al. 2009; Heron et al. 2011; Hoppe et al. 2008;
Stephans et al. 2011; Voroney et al. 2009). Patient,
disease, and treatment factors all contributed to those
toxicities. Most notably, excessive toxicity was
observed in patients with centrally located tumors when
a 3-fraction regimen was used (Timmerman et al. 2006).
In the Indiana University phase II trial of SBRT for stage
I medically inoperable NSCLC, 70 patients were treated
with SBRT to a dose of 60 (T1 tumors) or 66 Gy (T2
tumors) in 3 fractions. Patients with both peripherally
and centrally located tumors were eligible. There were
14 (20%) patients who developed grade 3–5 toxicities
with six treatment-related deaths. Grade 3–4 toxicities,
including worsening of pulmonary function, pneumonia, pleural effusion, apnea, and skin reaction, occurred
in eight patients 1.1–25 months after SBRT. Among the
six patients who died 0.6, 3.9, 12.1, 12.8, 13.8, and
19.5 months after SBRT, four died of bacterial pneumonia, one of pericardial effusion, and one of massive
hemoptysis in the background of a recurrence close to
the carina. Predictors of grade 3–5 toxicities included
hilar/pericentral location (11-fold higher risk) and tumor
volume [10 ml (eightfold higher risk) (Timmerman
et al. 2006).

3.1

Decrease in Pulmonary Reserve
and Radiation Pneumonitis

Given the fact that most patients with medically
inoperable non-small cell lung cancer have poor

375

pulmonary reserve, there are always concerns about
further decline of pulmonary function after SBRT.
Investigators from Indiana University examined the
effect of baseline forced expiratory volume in 1 s
(FEV1) and diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide
(DLCO) on survival and pulmonary function decrease
after SBRT for medically inoperable non-small cell
lung cancer in 70 patients. They have determined that
poor baseline pulmonary function did not predict
decreased survival or pulmonary function after treatment (Henderson et al. 2008). A statistically significant
decrease in DLCO after SBRT was observed, similar to
decreases seen in conventional radiotherapy.
In a study from Scandinavia, toxicities of
57 patients enrolled in a phase II prospective trial of
SBRT for medically inoperable stage I NSCLC were
analyzed. No significant decline of FEV1 was
observed after SBRT although 18% of patients
developed low grade pneumonitis (no difference
between patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease and those with cardiovascular disease) and
23% and 39% of patients developed pleural effusion
and fibrosis, respectively (Baumann et al. 2008). In a
recent study from Stony Brook University Medical
Center, SBRT did not seem to have an effect on FEV1
and functional vital capacity, but it improved DLCO
in patients without chronic obstructive airway disease
(Bishawi et al. 2011). The study from Cleveland
Clinic also did not show any significant change on
FEV1 or DLCO in patients with medically inoperable
NSCLC treated with SBRT using regimens including
60 Gy in 3 fractions, 50 Gy in 5 fractions, and 50 Gy
in 10 fractions (Stephans et al. 2009).
The overall reported incidence of symptomatic
radiation pneumonitis (RP) was relatively low in
most studies considering the ablative doses given.
However, in a study from Japan, where 25 patients with
stage I non-small cell lung cancer were treated with
SBRT to a dose of 48 Gy in 4 fractions (except in 2
patients), an unusually high rate of grade 2 or higher RP
of 29% at 18 months was observed, with three patients
dying of RP (Yamashita et al. 2007). The conformality
index was found to be predictive of occurrence of RP.
The conformality index was high, indicating that the
plans were less conformal, in the study. Despite the
findings, the investigators did not feel that conformality
index was truly predictive of grade 2 or higher RP
because the mean lung dose, which is a surrogate for
low dose exposure, was not predictive of occurrence of

376

grade 2 or higher RP. Although Krebs von den Lungen6 (KL-6) is demonstrated to be a useful predictive
marker for RP, it was not found to be useful predicting
grade 2 or higher RP in this study (Yamashita et al.
2007). Other studies observed much lower rates of
symptomatic RP. In the phase I study from Indiana
University, where the radiation was escalated from
24 Gy in 3 fractions to 72 Gy in 3 fractions, the rate of
RP was 8.4% (grade 2: 2%; grade 3: 6.4%) (McGarry
et al. 2005). In a pooled analysis from Indiana University based mostly on a 3-fraction regimen, the
incidence of grade 2, 3, and 4 RP was 7, 2, and 0.4%,
respectively. The incidence of grade 2–4 RP was 4.3%
if the mean lung dose was B4 Gy compared to 17.6% if
the mean lung dose was[4 Gy. When V20 was B4%,
the incidence of RP was 4.3% compared to 16.4% when
V20 was [4% (Barriger et al. 2010). In the Radiation
Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) 0236 trial of SBRT
for peripherally located stage I medically inoperable
NSCLC, where a dose of 60 Gy in 3 fractions (54 Gy in
3 fractions with heterogeneity correction) was given,
the incidence of grade 3 RP was only 3.6% (Timmerman et al. 2010). Data from other clinical trials also
reported low incidence of RP (Baumann et al. 2009;
Nagata et al. 2005). Nagata et al. reported a RP incidence of 4% with no grade 3 toxicities observed in
patients treated in a phase I/II SBRT trial for early stage
NSCLC using a regimen of 48 Gy in 4 fractions
(Nagata et al. 2005). Ricardi et al. reported a grade 3 RP
rate of 3.2% in their prospective SBRT trial for early
stage NSCLC using a regimen of 45 Gy in 3 fractions
(Ricardi et al. 2010). Grills et al. reported grade 2 and 3
RP in 9 and 2% of patients enrolled in their phase II
SBRT trial for stage I NSCLC, using 48 Gy in 4 fractions or 60 Gy in 5 fractions (Grills et al. 2010).
There are several factors that may be predictive of
development of radiation pneumonitis after SBRT.
In a study from Japan, serum levels of KL-6 was
found to be a factor for predicting the occurrence of
RP after SBRT for lung tumors (Hara et al. 2004).
In another study from Japan, grades 4–5 RP was
observed in 9 (7.7%) of 117 patients after SBRT (7 of
them had grade 5) (Yamashita et al. 2010). There was
a correlation found between the incidence of RP and
higher serum KL-6 and serum surfactant protein-D
(SP-D) levels. Interstitial pneumonitis shadow in
pretreatment CT was also found to correlate well with
severe RP (Yamashita et al. 2010). One study from
Japan identified latency period, which was defined as

S. S. Lo et al.

the interval between the SBRT start date and the onset
of graphical RP, as a significant factor predicting the
development of grade 3 or higher RP (Takeda et al.
2010).

3.2

Skin Toxicities

The typical non-coplanar and non-opposing beam
arrangement for SBRT render spreading out of radiation dose over the skin surface. As a result, the skin dose
is typically low. However, when the lung tumor is close
to a chest wall which is thin and when there is a significant proportion of beams coming from a very long
distance in a patient with a large body habitus, there is a
possibility that focal areas of the skin can receive a dose
of radiation, high enough to cause toxicities.
Colleagues from Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center (MSKCC) analyzed the risk factors
associated with skin toxicities in 50 patients who
underwent SBRT to a dose of 60 Gy in 3 fractions or
44–48 Gy in 4 fractions for stage I NSCLC. Patients
were treated with 3–7 beams. Seven (14%) patients
developed grade 2–4 skin toxicities (Hoppe et al.
2008). The use of only three beams, distance from the
tumor to the posterior chest wall skin of less than
5 cm, and a maximum skin dose C50% of the prescribed dose are associated with grade 2 or higher
acute skin toxicity (Hoppe et al. 2008). In a study
from M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 104 (39%) of
265 patients with 268 lung tumors within 2.5 cm from
the chest wall developed skin toxicity, which was
predicted by the volume of the chest wall receiving
30 Gy based on a regimen of 50 Gy in 4 fractions
(Welsh et al. 2011).

3.3

Collapse of Airway

Collapse of airway has been observed in patients who
receive SBRT for lung tumors, especially when they
are located centrally in the chest. In the Indiana
University phase I trial of SBRT for stage I medically
inoperable NSCLC, one patient who received 72 Gy
in 3 fractions developed tracheal necrosis (McGarry
et al. 2005). Joyner et al. reported one case of major
airway occlusion among nine patients with centrally
located primary or metastatic lung tumors treated with
SBRT at a median follow-up of 10.6 months. The

Reported Toxicities Associated with Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy

patient had a right hilar lesion and received a dose of
36 Gy in 3 fractions (Joyner et al. 2006). In a study
from South Korea, of 32 patients with stage I medically inoperable NSCLC, there were nine patients
with tumors that were regarded as centrally located.
The prescribed dose was 40–60 Gy in 3–4 fractions.
Eight patients developed partial or complete bronchial
stricture and secondary loss of normal lung volume at
a median follow-up of 26 months (Song et al. 2009).
The authors suggested using a more protracted regimen for centrally located tumors.

3.4

Rib Fracture/Chest Wall Pain

Chest wall toxicities have been observed after SBRT
for lung tumors and there are several studies examining the risk factors associated with rib fracture
and/or chest wall pain. Colleagues from University of
Virginia and University of Colorado performed a
pooled analysis of 60 patients with peripherally
located primary NSCLC or lung oligometastases
treated with SBRT using 3–5 fraction regimens and
found that the chest wall volume receiving 30 Gy best
predicted the risk of severe chest wall pain and/or rib
fracture. The median interval to the onset of severe
pain and/or fracture was 7.1 months. The volume
threshold for severe pain and/or rib fracture for 30 Gy
was 30 cm3 (Dunlap et al. 2010). A 30% risk of
developing severe chest wall toxicity correlated with
a chest wall volume of 35 cm3 receiving 30 Gy. The
threshold volume of chest wall receiving 30 Gy was
tenfold higher than the threshold volume receiving 50
or 60 Gy for severe chest wall toxicities (Dunlap et al.
2010).
Other groups also examined the dose response
for chest wall toxicities. Colleagues from Indiana
University analyzed the data from 347 lesions treated
with SBRT, attempting to examine the risk of chest
wall toxicity associated with treatment. SBRT was
delivered using most 3 fractions (range 3–5). Grade 1
or higher chest wall toxicities occurred in 21 and 4%
of the cases for chest wall and non-chest wall lesions,
respectively. A maximum point dose of 50 Gy was
determined to be the cutoff for chest wall toxicities
(Andolino et al. 2011a). Chest wall volumes of 5 and
15 cc receiving 40 Gy predicted a 10 and 30% risk of
chest wall toxicities, respectively. The group from
Scandinavia examined the risk of rib fractures in 33

377

patients with stage I medically inoperable NSCLC
treated with SBRT to a dose of 45 Gy in 3 fractions.
A total of 13 rib fractures were observed among the
81 ribs (all having received at least 21 Gy) in 26
patients. Based on their analysis, absolute volumes
were found to provide better fits than relative volumes
and dose-response curves were more suitable than
volume-response curves. The cutoff volume was
2 cm3 and the risk of rib fracture was 0, 5 and 50%
if the dose to 2 cm3 of the rib was \21, 27.3,
and 49.8 Gy, respectively (Pettersson et al. 2009).
Colleagues from Cleveland Clinic found that among
the 134 patients who received lung SBRT using a
regimen of 60 Gy in 3 fractions, the most important
factors determining chest wall toxicity were volume
of chest wall receiving 30 Gy (V30) through 60 Gy
(V60) (Stephans et al. 2011). The authors recommended restricting V30 to B30 cm3 and V60
to B3 cm3. In another study from Canada, 9 (21%) of
42 patients treated with SBRT for peripheral NSCLC
to a dose of 54–60 Gy in 3 fractions developed rib
fracture (Voroney et al. 2009). The median dose to the
rib fracture sites was 46–50 Gy. Investigators from
MSKCC identified the chest wall volume receiving
30 Gy as the strongest factor in chest wall toxicity. A
chest wall volume of C70 cm3 receiving 30 Gy is
significantly correlated with Grade 2 or higher chest
wall pain (Mutter et al. 2011). In a study from M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, where 265 patients with 268
tumors located within 2.5 cm from the chest wall was
treated with SBRT to a dose of 50 Gy in 4 fractions,
the incidence of acute (any grade) and chronic (grade
1–3) chest wall pain was 5 and 17% (51% grade 2–3),
respectively (Welsh et al. 2011). The volume of the
chest wall received 30 Gy predicted development of
chest wall pain. Patients with body mass index (BMI)
of 29 or higher had almost twice the risk of chronic
chest wall pain and among patients with BMI [29,
diabetes mellitus was a risk factor to development of
chronic chest wall pain (Welsh et al. 2011).

3.5

Brachial Plexopathy

In the past, contouring of the ipsilateral brachial
plexus was not routinely performed for SBRT planning and therefore, no efforts were made to spare it.
For patients with apical tumors, the delivery of an
ablative dose of radiation to the area can result in

378

S. S. Lo et al.

brachial plexopathy, which has been observed after
SBRT.
Colleagues from Indiana University analyzed the
incidence of brachial plexopathy in 36 patients (with
37 lesions) who received SBRT for stage I NSCLC in
apical locations. Brachial plexus dose was then correlated with incidence of brachial plexopathy. Of
note, the brachial plexus was contoured using axillary/subclavian vessels as surrogate and was not
contoured in its entirety as in head and neck cases.
The median prescribed dose was 57 Gy in 3 fractions
while the maximum brachial plexus dose ranged from
6 to 83 Gy (median, 26 Gy) in 3–4 fractions (Forquer
et al. 2009). Seven (19%) lesions had associated grade
2–4 brachial plexopathy (two had grade 3 and one had
grade 4 brachial plexopathy), with maximum brachial
plexus dose ranging from 18 to 82 Gy (median,
30 Gy) after a median period of 7 months. The 2-year
risk of brachial plexopathy for maximum brachial
plexus dose [26 Gy was 46% compared to 8% for
doses B26 Gy (Forquer et al. 2009). In a study of
SBRT for stage I NSCLC from M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, one patient developed brachial plexopathy after a dose of 40 Gy in 4 fractions delivered
to a significant proportion of the brachial plexus
(Chang et al. 2008). The maximum point dose, based
on estimation from the published dose-volume histogram, was approximately 42 Gy.

4

Complications Associated
with Abdominal SBRT

4.1

Radiation-Induced Liver Disease
and Other Liver Toxicities

Radiation-induced liver disease (RILD) can occur in
patients receiving SBRT for liver tumors and is one of
the most feared complications of the procedure. It is
characterized by rapid weight gain, anicteric ascites,
hepatomegaly, increase in abdominal girth, and elevation in alkaline phosphatase. Several prospective
clinical trials of SBRT for liver metastasis or primary
liver tumors used various different dose regimens and
dose constraints, rendering interpretation more complicated. Overall, the incidence of RILD is low. In a
phase I/II trial of single dose SBRT from Germany,
37 patients with 60 primary or metastatic liver tumors
were treated with a dose of 14 Gy, escalating to

26 Gy. No RILD was observed (Herfarth et al. 2001).
In a multi-institutional phase I/II trial of SBRT for
1–3 liver metastases, where a dose of 36–60 Gy in 3
fractions was delivered, no RILD was observed
(Rusthoven et al. 2009). In that trial, the dose to at
least 700 cc of liver was limited to 15 Gy in 3 fractions. In a study from Germany, 5 patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and 39 patients with
51 liver metastases were treated with SBRT regimens
including 30 Gy in 3 fractions, 28 Gy in 4 fractions,
36–37.5 Gy in 3 fractions, and 26 Gy in 1 fraction.
No RILD was observed (Wulf et al. 2006). In a phase
II trial of SBRT for colorectal metastases, 64 patients
with 141 metastatic lesions were treated to a dose of
45 Gy in 3 fractions. In general, attempts were made
to limit the percentage of liver receiving C10 Gy to
less than 30%. One patient died of hepatic failure
7 weeks after SBRT (Hoyer et al. 2006). In that
patient, 60% of the liver received a dose [10 Gy and
the median dose to the liver was 14.4 Gy.
Most patients with HCC have underlying liver
cirrhosis and it is expected that they are at higher risk
of developing liver toxicities after SBRT (Lo et al.
2010c). RILD was observed in 1 (with Child-Pugh
class B cirrhosis and hepatitis B virus) of 8 patients
with HCC and 2 of 17 patients with liver metastases
after SBRT in a European study. In that study,
patients with liver metastases, HCC B 4 cm and cirrhosis, or HCC without associated cirrhosis received
30 or 37.5 Gy in 3 fractions and other patients with
HCC received 25 Gy in 5 fractions or 30 Gy in 3
fractions. The patient who developed RILD after
SBRT for HCC died of liver failure within 1 month
after treatment (Mendez Romero et al. 2006). Indiana
University conducted a phase I dose escalation trial of
SBRT for HCC and successfully escalated the dose
from 36 to 48 Gy in 3 fractions in Child-Pugh class A
patients without RILD. However, two Child-Pugh
class B patients developed grade 3 liver toxicities
when the dose was escalated to 42 Gy in 3 fractions
(Cardenes et al. 2010). The regimen for Child-Pugh
class B patients was then changed to 40 Gy in 5
fractions and one other patient developed progressive
liver failure. The Child-Pugh score was found to be
the only predictive factor for grade 3 or higher liver
toxicity or death within 6 months. The maximum
tumor diameter was limited to 6 cm in the study. In a
separate study from Indiana University where 60
patients (36 Child-Pugh class A and 24 class B) with

Reported Toxicities Associated with Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy

HCC were treated with SBRT delivering 44 Gy in 3
fractions (Child-Pugh A) or 40 Gy in 5 fractions
(Child-Pugh B). Again, the maximum tumor diameter
was limited to 6 cm. Nine patients developed grade 3
liver enzymes and/or hyperbilirubinemia (Andolino
et al. 2011b). Two and seven patients developed
elevated international normalized ratio (INR) and
grade 3 hypoalbuminemia, respectively. Seven of 36
Child-Pugh class A and 5 of 24 Child-Pugh class B
patients had progression of Child-Pugh class after
treatment. Four patients, all enrolled in the phase I
trial and with a Child-Pugh score C8, developed
progressive liver dysfunction either during or shortly
after SBRT, with two undergoing orthotopic liver
transplantation 3 and 10 months after SBRT and two
dying of progressive liver failure 3.5–4 months after
treatment (Andolino et al. 2011b).
A risk-adapted approach has been used to minimize
the risk of RILD. In a phase I trial of SBRT for primary
liver tumors from University of Toronto, where radiation dose was determined by the volume of liver
irradiated and the estimated risk of liver toxicities
based on a normal tissue complication model, toxicity
risk was escalated from 5 to 10 and 20%. A total of 41
patients (31 with Child-Pugh class A HCC and 10 with
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma) were treated in the
trial and the dose ranged from 24 to 54 Gy in 6 fractions (median, 36 Gy). There was no RILD or grade
4–5 liver toxicities observed within 3 months after
SBRT although seven patients had decline in liver
function from Child-Pugh class A to B within 3 months
after treatment (Tse et al. 2008). Two patients with
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma developed transient
bile duct obstruction after the first few fractions of
SBRT. Grade 3 liver enzymes were observed in five
patients. In another phase I trial of SBRT for liver
metastases, again the prescribed dose was determined
and same methods were used to determine by the
volume of liver irradiated and the estimated risk of
liver toxicities based on a normal tissue complication
model. Sixty-eight patients were treated with a 6fraction regimen with doses ranging from 27.7 to
60 Gy (median, 41.8 Gy). Using this approach, there
were 2 grade 3 enzyme changes but no RILD or other
grade 3–5 liver toxicities were observed (Lee et al.
2009). Grade 1–2 subacute liver pain was seen in six
patients within 3 months after SBRT.
Focal liver reaction after single dose SBRT for
liver tumors in 36 patients has been evaluated and

379

documented using multiphasic CT by the group from
University of Heidelberg (Herfarth et al. 2003).
Radiographically, three types of reactions were
observed on contrast-enhanced CT:
Type 1- Hypodense on portal-venous phase and
isodense on late phase;
Type 2- Hypodense on portal-venous phase and
hyperdense on late phase; and
Type 3- Isodense/hyperdense on portal-venous phase
and hyperdense on late phase.
Types 1 and 2 reaction was observed to occur
significantly earlier than type 3 reaction and the
median threshold dose was lower for type 3 compared
to types 1 and 2 reaction. The reaction typically
decreased with time. A change of reaction to type 3
with longer follow-up was also observed. There was
no associated clinical morbidity (Herfarth et al. 2003).

4.2

Gastric/Duodenal Injury

SBRT to tumors in the liver and the pancreas can
potentially result in injury to the organs that are in the
vicinity, including the stomach and the duodenum. The
toxicity data mostly come from studies on SBRT for
pancreatic cancer. In a phase II study from Denmark, 22
patients with locally advanced and unresectable pancreatic cancer were treated with SBRT, delivering
45 Gy in 3 fractions to the tumor. Four patients developed severe mucositis or ulceration of the stomach
(n = 2) or duodenum (n = 2) and one developed a nonfatal gastric perforation (Hoyer et al. 2005). All those
patients received at least 30 Gy in 3 fractions to part of
the stomach or duodenum. Investigators from Stanford
University combined single dose SBRT (25 Gy) and
neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitibine in a phase II trial and 20 patients were treated. The
duodenal dose was limited such that at least 50% of the
portion of the duodenum close to the planning treatment
volume would receive 12.5 Gy and the volume of duodenum receiving 22.5 Gy was limited to 5%. One patient
developed grade 4 duodenal perforation, two developed
grade 2 gastric ulcer and one developed grade 2 duodenal ulcer (Schellenberg et al. 2008). In a dosimetric
study from Stanford University, where the prescribed
dose of CyberKnife-based SBRT for pancreatic cancer
was 25 Gy in 1 fraction, the median time to grade 2–4
duodenal toxicities was 6.3 months and the 6- and
12-month actuarial rates of toxicities were 11 and 29%,

380

S. S. Lo et al.

respectively. The volume of duodenum that received
10–25 Gy V (10–25) and the maximum dose to the
duodenum all correlated with duodenal toxicities
(Murphy et al. 2010). In particular, V(15) (C9.1
vs. \9.1 cc, 52 vs. 11%) and V(20) (C3.3 vs. \3.3 cc,
52 vs. 11%) and the maximum dose (C23 vs. \23 Gy,
49 vs. 12%) were most predictive.

5

Complications Associated
with Pelvis SBRT

Complications have been observed in the pelvic
region after SBRT for gynecologic malignancies and
prostate cancer. For prostate SBRT, the most common
toxicities observed are genitourinary and rectal
but they are mostly limited to grade 2–3 or below
(Ishiyama et al. 2011). Even in the trial from University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center where
the starting dose was 45 Gy in 5 fractions, which was
then escalated to 50 Gy in 5 fractions in 0.5 Gy per
fraction increment, the incidence of grade 3 or higher
genitourinary and gastrointestinal toxicities was 4 and
2%, respectively (Boike et al. 2011). This is likely
related to the fact that the target volume treated is
confined mostly to the prostate.
On the contrary, toxicities after SBRT for gynecologic malignancies were more commonly observed and
this may be related to the fact that many of those
patients had prior external radiation therapy and were
treated for recurrent disease and the volume of disease
treated was typically larger (Mayr et al. 2011). In a
small case series from Case Western Reserve University, three elderly patients with vulvar cancer, previously treated with external beam radiotherapy to doses
ranging from 45 to 74.6 Gy, were treated with CyberKnife-based SBRT to a dose of 24 Gy in 3 fractions. All
three patients developed soft tissue necrosis, with two
developing vulvar necrosis and one forming a rectovaginal fistula, which were manageable with supportive therapy (Kunos et al. 2008). In another study from
the same institution, five patients who had vaginal apex
relapse from gynecologic cancer received CyberKnifebased SBRT delivering 15–24 Gy in 3 fractions. The
prior external beam radiotherapy dose ranged from
10 Gy in one fraction (intraoperative radiotherapy) in
two patients to 45 Gy in 25 fractions (external beam
radiotherapy) with or without a brachytherapy boost of
21 Gy in 3 fractions or 30 Gy in 1 fraction. The most

significant complication reported was radiationinduced cystitis requiring a suprapubic catheter (Kunos
et al. 2009). Guckenberger et al. reported grade 3 or
higher complications, including intestino-vaginal fistula formation (n = 2), small bowel ileus (n = 1) and
urinary frequency (n = 1), in four patients after SBRT
for 19 patients with pelvic relapse from cervical or
endometrial cancer (Guckenberger et al. 2010). Seven
patients had prior pelvic radiotherapy. Most patients
received 15 Gy in 3 fractions (n = 16) for their SBRT,
with two receiving 30 Gy in 3 fractions and one
receiving 28 Gy in 4 fractions.

6

Complications Associated
with Spinal SBRT

6.1

Radiation Myelopathy
and Radiculopathy

Radiation-induced myelopathy (RIM) is the most
feared and catastrophic complication from SBRT for
spinal tumors. Fortunately, the overall incidence
reported in the literature is low, even in cases where
SBRT was offered for salvage treatment for postradiotherapy recurrence of spinal metastases (Sahgal
et al. 2008, 2009, 2012). Several studies reported RIM
after SBRT for spinal tumors that were either irradiated or not irradiated before (Sahgal et al. 2010,
2012). In a study from Henry Ford Hospital, Ryu et al.
reported a case of RIM in one patient, out of 177
patients with 230 spinal metastases, treated with single dose SBRT (Ryu et al. 2007; Sahgal et al. 2010).
The patient had metastatic breast cancer of the clivus
and C1 vertebra and was treated with a single dose of
16 Gy with a maximum spinal cord point dose of
14.6 Gy, which was lower than the average maximum
cord point dose in patients without RIM. Mild right
lower extremity weakness occurred 13 months after
SBRT and there were corresponding changes seen on
T1 with contrast and T2 sequences of MRI. The right
lower extremity weakness improved after steroid
therapy with dexamethasone. Gibbs et al. from Stanford University reported three cases of RIM after
CyberKnife-based SBRT for spinal metastasis (Gibbs
et al. 2007; Sahgal et al. 2010, 2012). The first patient
developed RIM after CyberKnife-based SBRT for a
T6 spinal metastasis from renal cell carcinoma
10 months after treatment. A dose of 25 Gy in two

Reported Toxicities Associated with Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy

fractions prescribed at 80% was prescribed to the
target volume with a maximum thecal sac dose of
25.6 Gy (Sahgal et al. 2010). Changes on T2-weighted sequence in the area of SBRT were observed. The
patient was able to ambulate with a walker up to the
time of death from disseminated disease. The other
two patients who developed RIM had prior external
beam radiotherapy before SBRT. One was a patient
with metastatic breast cancer at T5 who had received
40 Gy in 22 fractions and then developed progression
at the same level 81 months later (Sahgal et al. 2012).
CyberKnife-based SBRT was used for irradiation and
a dose of 20 Gy in 2 fractions with a maximum dose
of 20.3 Gy to the thecal sac and 19.2 Gy to spinal
cord (Gibbs et al. 2009; Sahgal et al. 2012). The
patient developed RIM 6 months after SBRT and
MRI showed signal changes consistent with RM at
T5. The RIM subsequently progressed to grade 4 with
development of paraplegia, urinary retention, and
sensory loss below T5. The other patient had breast
cancer treated with external beam radiotherapy to the
breast 70 months before the development of a T1
metastasis. The estimated cord dose was 25.2 Gy in
28 fractions. The patient was subsequently treated
with CyberKnife-based SBRT, delivering 21 Gy in 2
fractions with a maximum thecal sac dose of 20.9 Gy,
and developed a grade 4 RIM, manifesting as lower
extremity weakness and bilateral paresthesia,
5 months after treatment (Gibbs et al. 2007, 2009;
Sahgal et al. 2012). MRI showed contrast enhancement and cord edema from C7 to T2. Dodd et al. from
Stanford University documented another case of
grade 4 RIM (motor weakness), progressing from
posterior column dysfunction, 8 months after SBRT
delivering 24 Gy in 3 fractions to a right-sided cervical spine meningioma. The maximum thecal sac
dose was 30.9 Gy (Dodd et al. 2006; Sahgal et al.
2010). Signal changes were seen on T2 sequence of
MRI. The patient was ambulatory with a cane at last
follow-up.
Gerszten et al. from UPMC reported three cases of
RIM after CyberKnife-based single dose SBRT for
benign spinal tumors (Gerszten et al. 2008). The first
patient received 20 Gy in 1 fraction to a recurrent
right-sided C6 Schwannoma with a maximum thecal
sac dose of 13.1 Gy (Sahgal et al. 2010). He developed Brown-Sequard syndrome (grade 4 radiationinduced myelopathy) 13 months after SBRT, which
improved after treatment with steroid, pentoxifylline

381

and vitamin E to a point that only mild lower
extremity paresthesia was present. MRI showed
changes on T1 with contrast and T2 sequences in the
spinal cord at the level where SBRT was given and
resolved after treatment with the above medications.
The second patient received 20 Gy in 1 fraction to a
right-sided C7 neurofibroma with a maximum thecal
sac dose of 10.6 Gy and a maximum cord dose of
10 Gy (Gibbs et al. 2009; Sahgal et al. 2010). The
patient developed Brown-Sequard syndrome (grade 4
radiation-induced myelopathy) 5 months after SBRT,
which improved after treatment with steroid, pentoxifylline, vitamin E, hyperbaric oxygen, gabapentin,
and amitriptylline. MRI showed similar findings as
the first patient. The patient improved clinically and
radiographically after treatment with the above combination of medical therapy. The third patient in this
reported received 20 Gy in 1 fraction to a spinal
meningioma and developed Brown-Sequard syndrome after 12 months (Gerszten et al. 2008). Further
details were not reported in the publication.
A case of RIM was observed at Cleveland Clinic
Foundation after external beam radiotherapy of 20 Gy
in 5 fractions to spinal levels T7-L2, with a maximum
cord dose of 21.2 Gy, 11 months following single
dose SBRT of 14 Gy in 1 fraction to an isolated renal
cell carcinoma spinal metastasis associated with epidural compression at T11/T12. Grade 4 RIM, manifesting as paraplegia and loss of proprioception,
occurred 3 months after external beam radiotherapy
(Sahgal et al. 2012). Colleagues from South Korea
reported a case of grade 3 RIM, which occurred
8 months after reirradiation of a recurrent C1/C2
chordoma with SBRT to a dose of 33 Gy in 3 fractions. RIM presented as new leg paresthesia. MRI
showed spinal cord necrosis at C2 level (Sahgal et al.
2012). The group from Thomas Jefferson University
observed a case of grade 4 RIM 3 months after reirradiation of a T10 spinal metastasis to a dose of
16 Gy in 1 fraction. The patient developed left leg
numbness and paraplegia (Sahgal et al. 2012). MRI
showed enhancement in the anterior aspect of the
spinal cord at T10. Table 1 summarizes the reported
cases of RIM in the literature.
Radiation-induced radiculopathy or nerve toxicities have been observed after SBRT, especially for
reirradiation of spinal tumors. In a study from M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, out of the 59 patients with
63 spinal tumors treated with SBRT to a dose of either

382

S. S. Lo et al.

Table 1 Summary of reported cases of radiation-induced myelopathy from SBRT
Patient

Histology

Level

Prior EBRT dose
to thecal sac

Prescribed dose/
fraction

Maximum dose
to thecal sac

Time to RIM
(months)

1 (Gibbs et al.
2007)

Renal cell
carcinoma

T6

None

25 Gy/2 fxs @ 80%

25.6 Gy/2 fxs

9

2 (Dodd et al.
2006)

Meningioma

C7-T2

None

24 Gy/3 fxs @ 70%

30.9 Gy/3 fxs
(cord: 29.9 Gy)

9

3 (Ryu et al.
2007)

Breast cancer

Clivus-C1

None

16 Gy/1 fx @ 90%

14.8 Gy/1 fx
(cord: 14.6 Gy)

13

4 (Gerszten et al.
2008)

Schwannoma

C6

None

20 Gy/1 fx @ 80%

13.1 Gy/1 fx
(cord: 8.5 Gy)

13

5 (Gerszten et al.
2008)

Neurofibroma

C7

None

20 Gy/1 fx @ 80%

10.6 Gy/1 fx
(cord: 10 Gy)

5

6 (Gerszten et al.
2008)

Meningioma

Cervical spine
(level not
specified)

None

20 Gy/1 fx

Not specified

12

7 (Gibbs et al.
2007)

Breast cancer

T5

40 Gy/22 fxs

20 Gy/2 fxs @ 80%

20.3 Gy/2 fxs
(cord: 19.2 Gy)

6

8 (Gibbs et al.
2007)

Breast cancer

T1

25.2 Gy/28 fxs

21 Gy/2 fxs @69%

20.9 Gy/2 fxs
(cord: 13.9 Gy)

5

9 (Sahgal et al.
2012)

Renal cell
carcinoma

T11-T12

21.2 Gy/5 fxsa

14 Gy/1 fx @ 100%

12.3 Gy/1 fx

3

10 (Sahgal et al.
2012)

Chordoma

C1/C2

51.9 Gy/28 fxs

33 Gy/3 fxs @ 83%

32.6 Gy/3 fxs

8

11 (Sahgal et al.
2012)

Renal cell
carcinoma

T10

43.2 Gy/15 fxs

16 Gy/1 fx @ 88%

14.7 Gy/1 fx

3

EBRT external beam radiation therapy, fx, fraction
SBRT was given before EBRT

a

30 Gy in 5 fractions or 27 Gy in 3 fractions, with cord
dose limited to 10 Gy in 5 fractions or 9 Gy in 3
fractions, two developed grade 3 neurologic toxicities
caused by injury to the lumbar plexus (Garg et al.
2011). One patient with a recurrent L4 and L5 paraspinal metastasis from renal cell carcinoma developed persistent grade 3 toxicities manifesting as
neuropathic pain, paresthesia, and ipsilateral footdrop
20 months after reirradiation with SBRT to a dose of
27 Gy in 3 fractions. Prior radiotherapy dose was
30 Gy in 10 fractions to levels L4 to S1. Another
patient developed grade 3 toxicities manifesting as
ipsilateral footdrop 18 months after reirradiation with
SBRT to a dose of 30 Gy in 5 fractions to a L5
metastasis. Prior radiotherapy dose was 50 Gy in 25
fractions. Both remained functional despite the
complications and there was no evidence of local
progression. Grade 1–2 transient numbness and
tingling was observed in nine patients (Garg et al.
2011). In a study from Harvard University, where
reirradiation with SBRT was given for recurrent

epidural spinal metastases in 60 patients using a dose
regimen of either 24 Gy in 3 fractions or 25–30 Gy in
5 fractions, there were three patients who developed
persistent radicular pain and one who developed new
onset of lower extremity weakness (Mahadevan et al.
2010). All four had corresponding radiologic
progression.

6.2

Vertebral Fracture

Post-SBRT vertebral fractures have been reported
from various institutions and are a known complication of SBRT for spinal metastasis. Investigators from
MSKCC examined the risk of vertebral fracture in 62
patients with spinal metastases after single dose
SBRT delivering 18–24 Gy. Fracture progression was
observed in 27 patients (39%) (Rose et al. 2009).
Factors predicting fracture included CT appearance,
lesion location, and percent vertebral body involvement. Lytic lesions were 6.8 times more likely to

Reported Toxicities Associated with Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy

develop fractures compared to sclerotic and mixed
lesions. Lesions located at or below T10 were 4.6
times more likely to develop fractures compared to
lesions above T10. The risk of vertebral fracture
increased with a higher percentage of vertebral body
involvement. Lytic disease involving 40% of the
vertebral body carried a high risk of fracture (Rose
et al. 2009). A higher prescribed dose, obesity, presence of kyphosis, and use of biphosphonates did not
increase the risk of fracture. Patients with fracture
progression had significantly more narcotic use,
worse Karnofsky Performance Status, and higher pain
scores.

6.3

Pain Flare and Miscellaneous

Acute pain can occur shortly after SBRT for spinal
metastasis although it is not commonly reported in the
literature. In a study from MSKCC, where patients
were treated with single dose SBRT to 18–24 Gy.
One of the 93 patients treated developed acute pain
after treatment, requiring hospitalization (Yamada
et al. 2008). Currently, the University of Toronto is
conducting a prospective study examining pain
flare after spinal SBRT (Personal communication
with Dr. Arjun Sahgal, M.D., University of Toronto).
Grade 2 or higher esophageal toxicity has been
observed in seven patients (out of 114 patients with
119 spinal metastases) in a study from MSKCC.
One developed grade 3 and one grade 4 toxicities.
The median hottest doses to 1 cc of the esophagus
were 22.88 and 24.31 Gy, respectively (Gomez et al.
2009). Other minor complications reported included
dysphagia, esophagitis, mucositis, diarrhea, nausea,
vomiting, trismus, non-cardiac chest pain, wound
dehiscence, hyperpigmentation of skin, transient
laryngitis, idiopathic vasculitis, and lethargy (Sahgal
et al. 2008).

7

Case Examples

Case 1 (Rib Fracture: Contributed by Professor
Robert D. Timmerman from University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center)
A 55-year-old female presented with Stage IV
inflammatory breast cancer with metastasis to the liver.
She had complete response to all sites of gross disease

383

with induction chemotherapy. She had surgical treatment to the breast primary but no local therapy to the
liver. Approximately 3 years later, she relapsed in the
liver and completed a course of SBRT in 3 fractions to a
total dose of 60 Gy (Fig. 1a). She continued on Herceptin Q3 weeks after treating the liver. Ten months
later, she began to experience right-sided chest wall
discomfort. A bone scan suggested new metastatic
disease to right anterio-lateral sixth and seventh ribs
(Fig. 1b). However, comparison of dose plan for radiation showed that these ribs were in proximity to the
liver target. CT was suggestive of rib fracture likely
related to radiation-induced osteoporosis (Fig. 1c). The
patient was treated with analgesics and pain improved
over the months. Repeat bone scan 6 months later
shows continued inflammatory level uptake.
Case 2 (Osteonecrosis: Contributed by Professor Robert D. Timmerman from University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center)
A 75-year-old male who originally presented with
localized prostate cancer, status post-radical prostatectomy, had persistent hormonal and chemotherapy
refractory metastatic prostate cancer in a solitary
para-aortic lymph node around L2 with no evidence
or history of bone metastases. He underwent SBRT to
a dose of 40 Gy in 5 fractions (Fig. 2a). He developed
more extensive adenopathy around the treated site in
2 years, for which he was treated with conventional
radiation therapy, including previously treated site, to
a dose of 40 Gy in 20 fractions. The total dose to the
lymph node anterior to L2 was 80 Gy. He developed
lower back pain refractory to analgesics 26 months
later. Bone scan indicated new bone metastasis at L2.
MRI showed extensive cortical bone loss on the
anterior aspect of the L2 vertebra (Fig. 2b). Comparison to the PTV target from SBRT 5 years previously showed correlation of the bone loss to the high
dose region. A diagnosis of osteoradionecrosis was
entertained. The patient underwent vertebroplasty at
that level with excellent relief of pain.
Case 3 (Liver Inflammation: Contributed by Professor Robert D. Timmerman from University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center)
A 78-year-old male with colorectal cancer was
found to have a solitary liver metastasis 4 years after
treatment of the primary disease (Fig. 3a). She was
treated on a phase I SBRT trial for liver metastases.
Treatment dose was 48 Gy in 3 fraction, which is

384

S. S. Lo et al.

Fig. 1 SBRT to liver
metastasis to a total dose of
60 Gy in 3 fractions (a);
she began to experience rightsided chest wall discomfort
after 10 months and a bone
scan suggested new metastatic
disease to right antero-lateral
6th and 7th ribs (b);
CT suggested rib fracture
likely related to radiationinduced osteoporosis (c).
(Courtesy of Professor
Robert D. Timmerman
from University of Texas
Southwestern Medical
Center)

currently considered a very low dose, with good tolerance (Fig. 3b). At 6 months post-SBRT, liver tumor
was shown to have responded dramatically, but there
was a large, new hypointense demarcated area within
the liver on CT (Fig. 3c). This hypodense region
corresponded nearly perfectly with the distribution of
the 18 Gy isodose line (Fig. 3d). Liver enzymes
were normal and there was no evidence of biliary
obstruction. This has been described as a Herfarth

Type III reaction. It resolved slowly over subsequent
scans.
Case 4 (Radiation Dermatitis: Contributed by
Professor Robert D. Timmerman from University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center)
A 60-year-old male with non-small cell lung cancer was treated with SBRT on a phase I study. The
patient was treated with seven beams. The dose to the

Reported Toxicities Associated with Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy

385

Fig. 2 SBRT to para-aortic
adenopathy from prostate
cancer to a dose of 40 Gy
in 5 fractions (a); MRI
showed extensive cortical
bone loss on the anterior
aspect of the L2 vertebra (b).
(Courtesy of Professor
Robert D. Timmerman
from University of Texas
Southwestern Medical
Center)

skin was over 24 Gy in 3 fractions. Six weeks after
therapy, he presented with focal areas of redness and
dry as well as focally wet desquamation that was

tender (Fig. 4a and b). He was treated with local
therapies including hydrating lotions. The reaction
gradually resolved 3 months after SBRT (Fig. 4c).

386

S. S. Lo et al.

Fig. 3 A solitary liver metastasis developed 4 years after
treatment of primary colorectal cancer (a); patient was treated
on a phase I SBRT trial for liver metastases and a dose of 48 Gy
in 3 fraction was delivered (b); at 6 months post-SBRT, the
liver tumor was shown to have responded dramatically, but

there was a new large hypointense demarcated area within the
liver on CT (c); this hypodense region corresponded nearly
perfectly with the distribution of the 18 Gy isodose line (d).
(Courtesy of Professor Robert D. Timmerman from University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center)

Subsequent patients were treated with ten or more
beams on the trial to limit the skin dose for 3 fractions
to under 18–24 Gy total dose.

contoured and toxicities were observed in some of
those OARs. For instance, skin was not routinely contoured in the past, even in a clinical trial setting, and
skin toxicity was observed in some cases (Hoppe et al.
2008). In SBRT, multiple non-opposing and noncoplanar beams aim at the target volume or PTV from
multiple different directions. The skin can inadvertently
receive a very high dose of radiation when the distance
between the skin and the isocenter is very long for a
particular beam and this may be unnoticed if the skin is
not contoured (Lo et al. 2009a). If the skin is contoured,
usually as a 5 mm concentric ring beneath the skin

8

Strategies to Avoid Serious
Complications

With the gain of knowledge about potential toxicities
associated with SBRT for various organ sites, strategies
can be formulated to avoid serious complications
caused by SBRT. In the past, some OARs were not

Reported Toxicities Associated with Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy

Fig. 4 A 60-year-old male with non-small cell lung cancer
was treated with SBRT using seven beams on a phase I study
and the dose to the skin was over 24 Gy in 3 fractions. Six
weeks after therapy, he presented with focal areas of redness,
and dry and focally wet desquamation (a and b). He was treated
with topical therapy and the reaction gradually resolved 3
months after SBRT (c). (Courtesy of Professor Robert D.
Timmerman from University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center)

387

surface, hotspots on the skin can be readily detected and
various measures, such as using a different beam
direction, a higher energy beam, or a more protracted
regimen, can be made to avoid serious complications
(Lo et al. 2009a). Similarly, the brachial plexus was not
routinely contoured for patients receiving SBRT for
lung cancer and it could receive unintentionally high
dose of radiation. In the study from Indiana University,
where patients with apical lung cancer were treated with
SBRT, some of them received a dose close to the prescribed dose to the brachial plexus and developed brachial plexopathy (Forquer et al. 2009). If the ipsilateral
brachial plexus is contoured, it is possible to manipulate
the beam angles and the multileaf collimator to facilitate blockage of the brachial plexus, thereby limiting the
radiation dose to below its tolerance. If intensity modulated radiation therapy or CyberKnife treatment
planning is used, constraints can be set to limit the
radiation dose exposure to the brachial plexus.
As demonstrated in the Indiana University phase II
trial of SBRT for medically inoperable stage I
NSCLC, patients with centrally located tumors are at
much higher risk of serious complications when a
3-fraction regimen is used (Timmerman et al. 2006).
Therefore, a more protracted regimen is recommended for centrally located lung tumors to minimize
the risk of serious complications and this is the
strategy used by RTOG and various institutions.
For parallel OARs such as the lungs, the liver and
the kidneys, it is crucial to spare a critical volume,
which is the minimum volume required to sustain
normal organ function, of each OAR from a dose of
radiation exceeding the tolerance threshold (Lo et al.
2008). Patients with impaired organ function, such as
those with cirrhosis, will likely need a larger critical
volume to sustain acceptable organ function and this
should be kept in mind during treatment planning to
avoid organ failure. The University of Toronto group
uses a risk-adapted approach based on LymanKutcher-Burman normal tissue complication probability model for the treatment of liver tumors with
SBRT and they have not observed RILD or grade 4–5
liver toxicities even in patients with cirrhosis (ChildPugh class A) (Lee et al. 2009; Tse et al. 2008).
For serial OARs, such as the spinal cord, esophagus,
and bronchus, it is crucial to limit the maximum
point dose to below the tolerance and to keep the

388

volume receiving a dose below but close to the tolerance to a minimum. Intensity modulated radiation
therapy or CyberKnife treatment planning may be used
to steer the dose away from serial OARs. Despite robust
immobilization, intrafractional movement can still
occur and this may result in overdosing of serial OARS.
This is particularly problematic in spinal SBRT, where
the spinal cord is in very close proximity to the PTV and
a shift of 2–3 mm can result in significant increase in
the dose delivered to the spinal cord (Lo et al. 2010b).
To overcome this problem, a margin around each serial
OAR is created to generate a planning OAR volume
(PRV), providing a safety margin. For the spinal cord,
the PRV can either be a volume created by a margin
expansion around the cord or simply the thecal sac (Lo
et al. 2010b). Intrafractional monitoring of position is
also recommended. Treatment devices like CyberKnife
(Accuray) and Novalis TX allows for intrafractional
monitoring of the target position (Lo et al. 2010a, b).
If such feature is not available, it is advisable to
perform a mid-treatment cone beam CT to detect any
intrafractional shift in position of the target. If a
TomoTherapy unit is used, each fraction can be separated into 2–3 equal subfractions and an MV CT can be
performed prior to delivery of each subfraction, thereby
serving the purpose of intrafractional positional
monitoring.
For patients who receive SBRT to multiple sites, it
is crucial to generate a composite plan in order to
ascertain that a critical volume of each parallel organ,
such as lung and liver, is spared of a radiation dose
above the threshold; for serial organs or structures like
the spinal cord and the bronchus, efforts are to be made
to ascertain that the maximum point dose to each OAR
does not exceed the tolerance (Lo et al. 2009b).
Colleagues from MSKCC have utilized a novel
method of temporary organ displacement in an attempt
to decrease the risk of complications of SBRT. By
infusion of 100–300 cc of Omnipaque and normal
saline solution into a potential space, the distance
between the target volume and OAR was increased.
The temporary organ displacement was 9 mm (range
7–13 mm) for kidney and 40 mm (range 27–54 mm)
for rectum/bowel (Housman et al. 2011). The maximum dose, the median hottest dose to 5 cc, and the
mean dose to the kidney and rectum/bowel were
decreased significantly with this maneuver. Further
testing is needed to determine the general applicability
of this method for patients receiving SBRT.

S. S. Lo et al.

9

Future Directions

With the accumulation of experience of SBRT/SABR
for various body sites in the past 15–20 years, there is
better understanding of the toxicities associated with
ablative radiotherapy, which in turn leads to modifications of treatment strategies to minimize toxicities.
While the dose tolerance limits for most OARs are well
established for conventional fractionation, much less is
known about those for the ablative dose range. It is
tempting for radiation oncologists to extrapolate data
from conventional fractionation to hypofractionation
or ablative dose range using the linear-quadratic (LQ)
model or other new alternative radiobiologic models.
However, until the dose tolerance limits estimated
using these radiobiologic models are validated by
clinical data, they should be used with caution because
the actual in vivo event is dependent on various factors
that cannot be accounted for by those models. The
safest approach is to use the dose tolerance limits
determined from well conducted prospective trials.
Currently, nearly all SBRT trials require extensive
contouring of the OARs and the dose delivered to
each OAR and the dose-volume histogram of each
OAR are recorded. As the results of those trials,
including those of large-scale cooperative group trials, become more mature, the toxicity profiles of
SBRT for various body sites and the dose tolerance
limits should be better understood. Normal tissue
constraints will be discussed in the next chapter.

References
Andolino DL, Forquer JA, Henderson MA, Barriger RB,
Shapiro RH, Brabham JG, Johnstone PA, Cardenes HR,
Fakiris AJ (2011a) Chest wall toxicity after stereotactic
body radiotherapy for malignant lesions of the lung and
liver. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 80(3):692–697. doi:
S0360-3016(10)00455-4[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.03.020
Andolino DL, Johnson CS, Maluccio M, Kwo P, Tector AJ,
Zook J, Johnstone PA, Cardenes HR (2011b) Stereotactic
body radiotherapy for primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 81(4):e447–e453. doi:S03603016(11)00527-X[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.04.011
Barriger RB, Forquer JA, Brabham JG, Andolino DL, Shapiro RH,
Henderson MA, Johnstone PA, Fakiris AJ (2010) A dosevolume analysis of radiation pneumonitis in non-small cell
lung cancer patients treated with stereotactic body radiation
therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. doi: S0360-3016(10)
03263-3[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.08.056

Reported Toxicities Associated with Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy
Baumann P, Nyman J, Hoyer M, Gagliardi G, Lax I, Wennberg B,
Drugge N, Ekberg L, Friesland S, Johansson KA, Lund JS,
Morhed E, Nilsson K, Levin N, Paludan M, Sederholm C,
Traberg A, Wittgren L, Lewensohn R (2008) Stereotactic
body radiotherapy for medically inoperable patients with
stage I non-small cell lung cancer—a first report of toxicity
related to COPD/CVD in a non-randomized prospective
phase II study. Radiother Oncol 88(3):359–367. doi:S01678140(08)00384-8[pii]10.1016/j.radonc.2008.07.019
Baumann P, Nyman J, Hoyer M, Wennberg B, Gagliardi G,
Lax I, Drugge N, Ekberg L, Friesland S, Johansson KA,
Lund JA, Morhed E, Nilsson K, Levin N, Paludan M,
Sederholm C, Traberg A, Wittgren L, Lewensohn R (2009)
Outcome in a prospective phase II trial of medically
inoperable stage I non-small-cell lung cancer patients
treated with stereotactic body radiotherapy. J Clin Oncol
27:3290–3296
Bishawi M, Kim B, Moore WH, Bilfinger TV (2011)
Pulmonary function testing after stereotactic body radiotherapy to the lung. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. doi:
S0360-3016(11)00204-5[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.01.037
Boike TP, Lotan Y, Cho LC, Brindle J, DeRose P, Xie XJ,
Yan J, Foster R, Pistenmaa D, Perkins A, Cooley S,
Timmerman R (2011) Phase I dose-escalation study of
stereotactic body radiation therapy for low- and intermediate-risk prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 29(15):2020–2026.
doi:JCO.2010.31.4377[pii]10.1200/JCO.2010.31.4377
Bongers EM, Haasbeek CJ, Lagerwaard FJ, Slotman BJ, Senan S
(2011) Incidence and risk factors for chest wall toxicity after
risk-adapted stereotactic radiotherapy for early-stage lung
cancer. J Thorac Oncol. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3182307e74
Cardenes HR, Price TR, Perkins SM, Maluccio M, Kwo P,
Breen TE, Henderson MA, Schefter TE, Tudor K, Deluca J,
Johnstone PA (2010) Phase I feasibility trial of stereotactic
body radiation therapy for primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Transl Oncol 12(3):218–225
Cengiz M, Ozyigit G, Yazici G, Dogan A, Yildiz F, Zorlu F,
Gurkaynak M, Gullu IH, Hosal S, Akyol F (2011) Salvage
reirradiaton with stereotactic body radiotherapy for locally
recurrent head-and-neck tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
81(1):104–109. doi:S0360-3016(10)00603-6[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2010.04.027
Chang JY, Balter PA, Dong L, Yang Q, Liao Z, Jeter M,
Bucci MK, McAleer MF, Mehran RJ, Roth JA, Komaki R
(2008) Stereotactic body radiation therapy in centrally and
superiorly located stage I or isolated recurrent non-small-cell
lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 72(4):967–971
Chua DT, Sham JS, Hung KN, Leung LH, Cheng PW, Kwong PW
(2001) Salvage treatment for persistent and recurrent T1–2
nasopharyngeal carcinoma by stereotactic radiosurgery. Head
Neck 23(9):791–798. doi:10.1002/hed.1113[pii]
Chua DT, Sham JS, Kwong PW, Hung KN, Leung LH (2003)
Linear accelerator-based stereotactic radiosurgery for limited, locally persistent, and recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma: efficacy and complications. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 56(1):177–183. doi:S0360301603000749[pii]
Chua DT, Wu SX, Lee V, Tsang J (2009) Comparison of single
versus fractionated dose of stereotactic radiotherapy for
salvaging local failures of nasopharyngeal carcinoma: a
matched-cohort analysis. Head Neck Oncol 1:13. doi:17583284-1-13[pii]10.1186/1758-3284-1-13

389

Dodd RL, Ryu MR, Kamnerdsupaphon P, Gibbs IC, Chang SD Jr,
Adler JR Jr (2006) CyberKnife radiosurgery for benign
intradural extramedullary spinal tumors. Neurosurgery 58(4):
674–685 (discussion pp 674–685)
Dunlap NE, Cai J, Biedermann GB, Yang W, Benedict SH,
Sheng K, Schefter TE, Kavanagh BD, Larner JM (2010)
Chest wall volume receiving [30 Gy predicts risk of severe
pain and/or rib fracture after lung stereotactic body
radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 76(3):796–801
Forquer JA, Fakiris AJ, Timmerman RD, Lo SS, Perkins SM,
McGarry RC, Johnstone PA (2009) Brachial plexopathy
from stereotactic body radiotherapy in early-stage NSCLC:
dose-limiting toxicity in apical tumor sites. Radiother Oncol
93:408–413
Garg AK, Wang XS, Shiu AS, Allen P, Yang J, McAleer MF,
Azeem S, Rhines LD, Chang EL (2011) Prospective
evaluation of spinal reirradiation by using stereotactic body
radiation therapy: The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center experience. Cancer 117(15):3509–3516. doi:
10.1002/cncr.25918
Gerszten PC, Burton SA, Ozhasoglu C, McCue KJ, Quinn AE
(2008) Radiosurgery for benign intradural spinal tumors.
Neurosurgery 62(4): 887–895 (discussion pp 895–886)
Gibbs IC, Kamnerdsupaphon P, Ryu MR, Dodd R, Kiernan M,
Chang SD, Adler JR Jr (2007) Image-guided robotic radiosurgery for spinal metastases. Radiother Oncol 82(2):185–190
Gibbs IC, Patil C, Gerszten PC, Adler JR Jr, Burton SA (2009)
Delayed radiation-induced myelopathy after spinal radiosurgery. Neurosurgery 64(2Suppl):A67–A72. doi:10.1227/01.
NEU.0000341628.98141.B600006123-200902001-00011[pii]
Gomez DR, Hunt MA, Jackson A, O’Meara WP, Bukanova EN,
Zelefsky MJ, Yamada Y, Rosenzweig KE (2009) Low rate of
thoracic toxicity in palliative paraspinal single-fraction
stereotactic body radiation therapy. Radiother Oncol
93(3):414–418. doi:S0167-8140(09)00611-2[pii]10.1016/
j.radonc.2009.10.017
Grills IS, Mangona VS, Welsh R, Chmielewski G, McInerney E,
Martin S, Wloch J, Ye H, Kestin LL (2010) Outcomes after
stereotactic lung radiotherapy or wedge resection for stage I
non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 28(6):928–935.
doi:JCO.2009.25.0928[pii]10.1200/JCO.2009.25.0928
Guckenberger M, Bachmann J, Wulf J, Mueller G, Krieger T,
Baier K, Richter A, Wilbert J, Flentje M (2010) Stereotactic
body radiotherapy for local boost irradiation in unfavourable locally recurrent gynaecological cancer. Radiother
Oncol94(1):53–59. doi:S0167-8140(09)00662-8[pii]10.1016/
j.radonc.2009.12.004
Hara R, Itami J, Komiyama T, Katoh D, Kondo T (2004) Serum
levels of KL-6 for predicting the occurrence of radiation
pneumonitis after stereotactic radiotherapy for lung tumors.
Chest 125(1):340–344
Henderson M, McGarry R, Yiannoutsos C, Fakiris A,
Hoopes D, Williams M, Timmerman R (2008) Baseline
pulmonary function as a predictor for survival and decline
in pulmonary function over time in patients undergoing
stereotactic body radiotherapy for the treatment of stage I
non-small-cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
72(2):404–409. doi:S0360-3016(08)00045-X[pii]10.1016/
j.ijrobp.2007.12.051
Herfarth KK, Debus J, Lohr F, Bahner ML, Rhein B, Fritz P,
Hoss A, Schlegel W, Wannenmacher MF (2001) Stereotactic

390
single-dose radiation therapy of liver tumors: results of a phase
I/II trial. J Clin Oncol 19(1):164–170
Herfarth KK, Hof H, Bahner ML, Lohr F, Hoss A, van Kaick G,
Wannenmacher M, Debus J (2003) Assessment of focal
liver reaction by multiphasic CT after stereotactic singledose radiotherapy of liver tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 57(2):444–451. doi:S0360301603005868[pii]
Heron DE, Rwigema JC, Gibson MK, Burton SA, Quinn AE,
Ferris RL (2011) Concurrent cetuximab with stereotactic
body radiotherapy for recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of
the head and neck: a single institution matched case-control
study. Am J Clin Oncol 34(2):165–172. doi:10.1097/
COC.0b013e3181dbb73e
Hoppe BS, Laser B, Kowalski AV, Fontenla SC,
Pena-Greenberg E, Yorke ED, Lovelock DM, Hunt MA,
Rosenzweig KE (2008) Acute skin toxicity following
stereotactic body radiation therapy for stage I non-smallcell lung cancer: who’s at risk? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
72(5):1283–1286
Housman DM, Solomon S, Maybody M, Thornton RH,
Zatcky JM, Lovelock M, Mechalakos JG, Yamada Y
(2011) Temporary organ displacement for stereotactic body
radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 81(2): S30
Hoyer M, Roed H, Sengelov L, Traberg A, Ohlhuis L, Pedersen J,
Nellemann H, Kiil Berthelsen A, Eberholst F, Engelholm SA,
von der Maase H (2005) Phase-II study on stereotactic
radiotherapy of locally advanced pancreatic carcinoma.
Radiother Oncol 76(1):48–53
Hoyer M, Roed H, Traberg Hansen A, Ohlhuis L, Petersen J,
Nellemann H, Kiil Berthelsen A, Grau C, Aage Engelholm S,
Von der Maase H (2006) Phase II study on stereotactic body
radiotherapy of colorectal metastases. Acta Oncol 45(7):
823–830
Ishiyama H, Teh BS, Lo SS, Mathews T, Blanco A, Amato R,
Ellis RJ, Mayr NA, Paulino AC, Xu B, Butler BE (2011)
Stereotactic body radiation therapy for prostate cancer.
Future Oncol 7(9):1077–1086. doi:10.2217/fon.11.86
Joyner M, Salter BJ, Papanikolaou N, Fuss M (2006) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for centrally located lung lesions.
Acta Oncol 45(7):802–807. doi:LK25X1R353386184[pii]10.
1080/02841860600915322
Kodani N, Yamazaki H, Tsubokura T, Shiomi H, Kobayashi K,
Nishimura T, Aibe N, Ikeno H (2011) Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for head and neck tumor: disease control
and morbidity outcomes. J Radiat Res (Tokyo) 52(1):24–31.
doi:JST.JSTAGE/jrr/10086[pii]
Kunos C, von Gruenigen V, Waggoner S, Brindle J, Zhang Y,
Myers B, Funkhouser G, Wessels B, Einstein D (2008)
Cyberknife radiosurgery for squamous cell carcinoma of
vulva after prior pelvic radiation therapy. Technol Cancer
Res Treat 7(5):375–380. doi:d=3032&c=4269&p=16829&
do=detail[pii]
Kunos C, Chen W, DeBernardo R, Waggoner S, Brindle J,
Zhang Y, Williams J, Einstein D (2009) Stereotactic body
radiosurgery for pelvic relapse of gynecologic malignancies. Technol Cancer Res Treat 8(5):393–400. doi:d=3036
&c=4295&p=17751&do=detail[pii]
Lee MT, Kim JJ, Dinniwell R, Brierley J, Lockwood G, Wong R,
Cummings B, Ringash J, Tse RV, Knox JJ, Dawson LA (2009)
Phase I study of individualized stereotactic body radiotherapy
of liver metastases. J Clin Oncol 27(10):1585–1591

S. S. Lo et al.
Lo SS, Fakiris AJ, Papiez L, Abdulrahman R, McGarry RC,
Henderson MA, Forquer JA, Hoopes D, Timmerman RD
(2008) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for early-stage
non-small-cell lung cancer. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther
8(1):87–98. doi:10.1586/14737140.8.1.87
Lo SS, Fakiris AJ, Wang JZ, Mayr NA (2009a) In regard to Hoppe
et al. (Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2008;72:1283–1286). Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 74(3):977; author reply978. doi:
S0360-3016(09)00343-5[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.02.046
Lo SS, Fakiris AJ, Teh BS, Cardenes HR, Henderson MA,
Forquer JA, Papiez L, McGarry RC, Wang JZ, Li K,
Mayr NA, Timmerman RD (2009b) Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for oligometastases. Expert Rev Anticancer
Ther 9(5):621–635
Lo SS, Fakiris AJ, Chang EL, Mayr NA, Wang JZ, Papiez L,
Teh BS, McGarry RC, Cardenes HR, Timmerman RD
(2010a) Stereotactic body radiation therapy: a novel treatment modality. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 7(1):44–54
Lo SS, Sahgal A, Wang JZ, Mayr NA, Sloan A, Mendel E,
Chang EL (2010b) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for
spinal metastases. Discov Med 9(47):289–296
Lo SS, Dawson LA, Kim EY, Mayr NA, Wang JZ, Huang Z,
Cardenes HR (2010c) Stereotactic body radiation therapy
for hepatocellular carcinoma. Discov Med 9(48):404–410
Mahadevan A, Floyd S, Wong E, Jeyapalan S, Groff M, Kasper E
(2010) Stereotactic body radiotherapy reirradiation for recurrent epidural spinal metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
doi:S0360-3016(10)03058-0[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.08.012
Mayr NA, Huang Z, Sohn JW, Lo SS, Teh BS, Lu JJ,
Grecula JC, Kunos C (2011) Emerging application of
stereotactic body radiation therapy for gynecologic malignancies. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 11(7):1069–1075. doi:
10.1586/era.11.81
McGarry RC, Papiez L, Williams M, Whitford T, Timmerman RD
(2005) Stereotactic body radiation therapy of early-stage
non-small-cell lung carcinoma: phase I study. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 63(4):1010–1015
Mendez Romero A, Wunderink W, Hussain SM, De Pooter JA,
Heijmen BJ, Nowak PC, Nuyttens JJ, Brandwijk RP,
Verhoef C, Ijzermans JN, Levendag PC (2006) Stereotactic
body radiation therapy for primary and metastatic liver
tumors: a single institution phase i-ii study. Acta Oncol
45(7):831–837
Mitsuhashi N, Sakurai H, Katano S, Kurosaki H, Hasegawa M,
Akimoto T, Nozaki M, Hayakawa K, Niibe H (1999)
Stereotactic radiotherapy for locally recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Laryngoscope 109(5):805–809
Murphy JD, Christman-Skieller C, Kim J, Dieterich S,
Chang DT, Koong AC (2010) A dosimetric model of
duodenal toxicity after stereotactic body radiotherapy for
pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 78(5):
1420–1426. doi:S0360-3016(09)03522-6[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2009.09.075
Mutter RW, Liu F, Abreu A, Yorke E, Jackson A, Rosenzweig KE
(2011) Dose-volume parameters predict for the development
of chest wall pain after stereotactic body radiation for lung
cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. doi: S0360-3016
(11)00519-0[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.03.053
Nagata Y, Takayama K, Matsuo Y, Norihisa Y, Mizowaki T,
Sakamoto T, Sakamoto M, Mitsumori M, Shibuya K,
Araki N, Yano S, Hiraoka M (2005) Clinical outcomes of a

Reported Toxicities Associated with Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy
phase I/II study of 48 Gy of stereotactic body radiotherapy
in 4 fractions for primary lung cancer using a stereotactic
body frame. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 63(5):1427–1431
Pai PC, Chuang CC, Wei KC, Tsang NM, Tseng CK,
Chang CN (2002) Stereotactic radiosurgery for locally
recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Head Neck 24(8):
748–753. doi:10.1002/hed.10116
Pettersson N, Nyman J, Johansson KA (2009) Radiationinduced rib fractures after hypofractionated stereotactic
body radiation therapy of non-small cell lung cancer:
a dose- and volume-response analysis. Radiother Oncol
91(3):360–368
Ricardi U, Filippi AR, Guarneri A, Giglioli FR, Ciammella P,
Franco P, Mantovani C, Borasio P, Scagliotti GV, Ragona R
(2010) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for early
stage non-small cell lung cancer: results of a prospective trial.
LungCancer68(1):72–77. doi:S0169-5002(09)00310-9[pii]10.
1016/j.lungcan.2009.05.007
Rose PS, Laufer I, Boland PJ, Hanover A, Bilsky MH,
Yamada J, Lis E (2009) Risk of fracture after single
fraction image-guided intensity-modulated radiation therapy
to spinal metastases. J Clin Oncol 27(30):5075–5079. doi:
JCO.2008.19.3508[pii]10.1200/JCO.2008.19.3508
Rusthoven KE, Kavanagh BD, Cardenes H, Stieber VW,
Burri SH, Feigenberg SJ, Chidel MA, Pugh TJ, Franklin W,
Kane M, Gaspar LE, Schefter TE (2009) Multi-institutional
phase I/II trial of stereotactic body radiation therapy for
liver metastases. J Clin Oncol 27(10):1572–1578
Ryu S, Jin JY, Jin R, Rock J, Ajlouni M, Movsas B, Rosenblum M,
Kim JH (2007) Partial volume tolerance of the spinal cord and
complications of single-dose radiosurgery. Cancer 109(3):
628–636
Sahgal A, Larson DA, Chang EL (2008) Stereotactic body
radiosurgery for spinal metastases: a critical review. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 71(3):652–665. doi:S0360-3016
(08)00405-7[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.02.060
Sahgal A, Ames C, Chou D, Ma L, Huang K, Xu W, Chin C,
Weinberg V, Chuang C, Weinstein P, Larson DA (2009)
Stereotactic body radiotherapy is effective salvage therapy for
patients with prior radiation of spinal metastases. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 74(3):723–731. doi:S0360-3016(08)035001[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.09.020
Sahgal A, Ma L, Weinberg V, Gibbs IC, Chao S, Chang UK,
Werner-Wasik M, Angelov L, Chang EL, Sohn MJ, Soltys
SG, Letourneau D, Ryu S, Gerszten PC, Fowler J, Wong
CS, Larson DA (2012) Reirradiation human spinal cord
tolerance for stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 82(1)107–116 S0360-3016(10)030671[pii], doi: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.08.021
Sahgal A, Ma L, Gibbs I, Gerszten PC, Ryu S, Soltys S,
Weinberg V, Wong S, Chang E, Fowler J, Larson DA
(2010) Spinal cord tolerance for stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 77(2):548–553.
S0360-3016(09)00772-X[pii], doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.05.
023
Schellenberg D, Goodman KA, Lee F, Chang S, Kuo T,
Ford JM, Fisher GA, Quon A, Desser TS, Norton J,
Greco R, Yang GP, Koong AC (2008) Gemcitabine
chemotherapy and single-fraction stereotactic body radiotherapy for locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 72(3):678–686

391

Siddiqui F, Patel M, Khan M, McLean S, Dragovic J, Jin JY,
Movsas B, Ryu S (2009) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for
primary, recurrent, and metastatic tumors in the head-and-neck
region. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 74(4):1047–1053. doi:
S0360-3016(08)03498-6[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.09.022
Siddiqui F, Raben D, Lu JJ, Grecula JC, Lo SS, Huang Z,
Mayr NA, Teh BS, Yao M (2011) Emerging applications
of stereotactic body radiation therapy for head and neck
cancer. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 11(9):1429–1436. doi:
10.1586/era.11.110
Song SY, Choi W, Shin SS, Lee SW, Ahn SD, Kim JH, Je HU,
Park CI, Lee JS, Choi EK (2009) Fractionated stereotactic
body radiation therapy for medically inoperable stage I lung
cancer adjacent to central large bronchus. Lung Cancer 66(1):
89–93. doi:S0169-5002(08)00678-8[pii]10.1016/j.lungcan.
2008.12.016
Stephans KL, Djemil T, Reddy CA, Gajdos SM, Kolar M,
Machuzak M, Mazzone P, Videtic GM (2009) Comprehensive analysis of pulmonary function test (PFT) changes after
stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for stage I lung
cancer in medically inoperable patients. J Thorac Oncol
4(7):838–844. doi:10.1097/JTO.0b013e3181a99ff6
Stephans KL, Djemil T, Tendulkar RD, Robinson CG,
Reddy CA, Videtic GM (2011) Prediction of chest wall
toxicity from lung stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT).
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. doi:S0360-3016(10)03634-5
[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.12.002
Takeda A, Ohashi T, Kunieda E, Enomoto T, Sanuki N,
Takeda T, Shigematsu N (2010) Early graphical appearance
of radiation pneumonitis correlates with the severity of
radiation pneumonitis after stereotactic body radiotherapy
(SBRT) in patients with lung tumors. Int J Radiat Oncol
BiolPhys 77(3):685–690. doi:S0360-3016(09)00836-0[pii]
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.06.001
Timmerman R, McGarry R, Yiannoutsos C, Papiez L, Tudor K,
DeLuca J, Ewing M, Abdulrahman R, DesRosiers C,
Williams M, Fletcher J (2006) Excessive toxicity when
treating central tumors in a phase II study of stereotactic
body radiation therapy for medically inoperable early-stage
lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 24(30):4833–4839. doi:24/30/
4833[pii]10.1200/JCO.2006.07.5937
Timmerman R, Paulus R, Galvin J, Michalski J, Straube W,
Bradley J, Fakiris A, Bezjak A, Videtic G, Johnstone D,
Fowler J, Gore E, Choy H (2010) Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for inoperable early stage lung cancer.
JAMA303(11):1070–1076. doi:303/11/1070[pii]10.1001/
jama.2010.261
Tse RV, Hawkins M, Lockwood G, Kim JJ, Cummings B,
Knox J, Sherman M, Dawson LA (2008) Phase I study of
individualized stereotactic body radiotherapy for hepatocellular carcinoma and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. J Clin
Oncol 26(4):657–664
Unger KR, Lominska CE, Deeken JF, Davidson BJ, Newkirk KA,
Gagnon GJ, Hwang J, Slack RS, Noone AM, Harter KW
(2010) Fractionated stereotactic radiosurgery for reirradiation
of head-and-neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 77(5):
1411–1419. doi:S0360-3016(09)02779-5[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2009.06.070
Voroney JP, Hope A, Dahele MR, Purdie TG, Franks KN,
Pearson S, Cho JB, Sun A, Payne DG, Bissonnette JP,
Bezjak A, Brade AM (2009) Chest wall pain and rib fracture

392
after stereotactic radiotherapy for peripheral non-small cell lung
cancer. J Thorac Oncol 4(8):1035–1037. doi:10.1097/JTO.
0b013e3181ae296201243894-200908000-00019[pii]
Welsh J, Thomas J, Shah D, Allen PK, Wei X, Mitchell K, Gao S,
Balter P, Komaki R, Chang JY (2011) Obesity increases the
risk of chest wall pain from thoracic stereotactic body radiation
therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 81(1):91–96. doi:
S0360-3016(10)00598-5[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.04.022
Wu SX, Chua DT, Deng ML, Zhao C, Li FY, Sham JS,
Wang HY, Bao Y, Gao YH, Zeng ZF (2007) Outcome of
fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy for 90 patients with
locally persistent and recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 69(3):761–769. doi:S03603016(07)00556-1[pii]10.1016/j.ijrobp.2007.03.037
Wulf J, Guckenberger M, Haedinger U, Oppitz U, Mueller G,
Baier K, Flentje M (2006) Stereotactic radiotherapy of
primary liver cancer and hepatic metastases. Acta Oncol
45(7):838–847

S. S. Lo et al.
Yamada Y, Bilsky MH, Lovelock DM, Venkatraman ES,
Toner S, Johnson J, Zatcky J, Zelefsky MJ, Fuks Z (2008)
High-dose, single-fraction image-guided intensity-modulated radiotherapy for metastatic spinal lesions. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 71(2):484–490
Yamashita H, Nakagawa K, Nakamura N, Koyanagi H, Tago M,
Igaki H, Shiraishi K, Sasano N, Ohtomo K (2007) Exceptionally high incidence of symptomatic grade 2–5 radiation
pneumonitis after stereotactic radiation therapy for lung
tumors. Radiat Oncol 2:21. doi:1748-717X-2-21[pii]10.1186/
1748-717X-2-21
Yamashita H, Kobayashi-Shibata S, Terahara A, Okuma K,
Haga A, Wakui R, Ohtomo K, Nakagawa K (2010)
Prescreening based on the presence of CT-scan abnormalities
and biomarkers (KL-6 and SP-D) may reduce severe radiation
pneumonitis after stereotactic radiotherapy. Radiat Oncol
5:32. doi:1748-717X-5-32[pii]10.1186/1748-717X-5-32

Normal Tissue Constraints
Simon S. Lo, Arjun Sahgal, Lijun Ma, Ben J. Slotman,
Zhibin Huang, Nina A. Mayr, Charles A. Kunos, Bin S. Teh,
Mitchell Machtay, and Eric L. Chang

Contents

4

Skin Tolerance ....................................................... 399

5

Esophageal Tolerance ........................................... 400

1

Introduction ........................................................... 394

6

Bronchial Tolerance.............................................. 400

2

Lung Tolerance...................................................... 394

7

Liver Tolerance ..................................................... 401

3

Chest Wall Tolerance ........................................... 396

8

Duodenal Tolerance .............................................. 402

9

Vertebral Bone Tolerance .................................... 402

10

Central and Peripheral Nervous System
Tissue Tolerance.................................................... 403
Spinal Cord.............................................................. 403
Peripheral Nerves .................................................... 406

S. S. Lo (&)  C. A. Kunos  M. Machtay
Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospitals
Seidman Cancer Center, Case Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
e-mail: Simon.Lo@UHhospitals.org
A. Sahgal
Department of Radiation Oncology, Princess Margaret
Hospital and Toronto Sunnybrook Hospital,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
L. Ma
Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
B. J. Slotman
Department of Radiation Oncology, VU University
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Z. Huang
Department of Radiation Oncology, East Carolina
University, Greenville, NC, USA
N. A. Mayr
Department of Radiation Oncology, Arthur G. James
Cancer Hospital, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, USA
B. S. Teh
Department of Radiation Oncology, Weill Cornell College
of Medicine The Methodist Hospital Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA
E. L. Chang
Department of Radiation Oncology, Keck School of
Medicine and Norris Cancer Hospital, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA

10.1
10.2
11

Normal Tissue Constraints
Used in RTOG Trials ........................................... 407

12

Normal Tissue Constraints Used at Vrije
Universiteit (VU) in Netherlands......................... 408

13

Future Directions................................................... 408

References.......................................................................... 408

Abstract

The use of SBRT for the treatment of various
primary and metastatic tumors has increased
exponentially in the past 10 years. To achieve a
favorable therapeutic ratio, it is crucial to respect
the tolerance of various organs-at-risk (OARs).
There is a fair amount of studies with dosimetric
correlation to toxicities of various organs in the
literature. This chapter will provide an overview
of normal tissue constraints for ablative radiation
dose range based on studies with dosimetric
parameters correlating with toxicities in the literature. The dose constraints used in clinical trials
being conducted in the North America and Europe
will also be reviewed.

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2012_644, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

393

394

1

S. S. Lo et al.

Introduction

With several decades of experience in conventionally
fractionated radiotherapy, the dose tolerance or constraints for most critical structures or organs-at-risk
(OARs) have been well established. With the advent
of advanced technology, it is possible to deliver
individual ablative doses of radiation to a tumor while
sparing the OARs. In the earlier times when stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) or stereotactic
ablative radiotherapy (SABR) was first developed,
little was known about the normal tissue tolerance to
radiation in the ablative dose range and normal tissue
tolerance or constraints were determined using conversions based on linear-quadratic (LQ) model. Furthermore, some structures, such as the skin and the
brachial plexus, were not routinely contoured in the
past and toxicities have been observed in them (Forquer et al. 2009; Hoppe et al. 2008).
In the past 10–15 years, experience with the use of
SBRT to treat various organ sites has been accumulated
and knowledge has been gained on dose constraints for
some OARs based on dosimetric correlations with
specific complications. This chapter will provide an
overview of normal tissue constraints for ablative
radiation dose range based on studies with dosimetric
parameters correlating with toxicities in the literature.
The dose constraints used in clinical trials being conducted in the North America and Europe will also be
reviewed.

2

Lung Tolerance

Despite the ablative doses delivered in SBRT, the
reported incidence of radiation pneumonitis (RP) and
pulmonary dysfunction is low (Barriger et al. 2012;
Baumann et al. 2009; Lo et al. 2008, 2009a; Nagata
et al. 2005; Okunieff et al. 2006; Ricardi et al. 2007;
Rusthoven et al. 2009a; Timmerman et al. 2010).
Although the dose constraints and fractionation regimen used for lung SBRT varied across various trials,
the reported rates of pulmonary complications were
similarly low (Lo et al. 2008, 2009a).
There is very limited data concerning dosimetric
correlation with pulmonary dysfunction after lung
SBRT but there is a fair amount of data in the literature
correlating dosimetric parameters with incidence of

RP. In a study from University of Würzburg, using
2 Gy equivalent normalized total dose, the mean lung
dose (MLD) and V2.5–50 (Vn was defined as the volume
of lung parenchyma receiving n Gy or higher) to the
ipsilateral lung were found to correlate with the incidence of RP (Guckenberger et al. 2010). Investigators
from Netherlands observed that all patients with total
lung V5 [ 37 % and contralateral lung V5 [ 26 %
developed grade 2–3 RP (Ong et al. 2010). Borst et al.
(2009) from the Netherlands evaluated the relationship
between MLD, using 2 Gy equivalent normalized total
dose, and risk of grade 2 or higher RP and observed a
7 % risk of grade 2 or higher RP for an MLD of 4–8 Gy.
Details of the results are listed in Table 1. Takeda et al.
evaluated factors associated with RP in 128 patients
with 133 lung tumors treated with SBRT using mainly a
five fraction regimen. Dosimetric factors including
MLD and V5–30 were predictive risk factors when
comparing grade 0–1 and 2 RP. V15–30 were predictive
risk factors when comparing grade 2 and 3 RP. However, none of the dosimetric factors were predictive risk
factors when comparing grade 0–1 and 3 RP. Multivariate analysis showed that V15 was a predictive factor
for grade 2 RP. The risk of grade 2 RP was also determined for V5–25, with volume thresholds obtained
based on findings of B5 % and B15 % risk of grade 2
RP in the low volume group (Takeda et al. 2012). The
results are presented in Table 1. In another study from
Japan, Matsuo et al. determined the dose-volume
metrics associated with RP after SBRT for lung cancer.
V20 and V25 were found to be the most significant
metrics for predicting grade 2–3 RP, with V25 being a
stronger predictor (Table 1). They also found that
patients with planning treatment volume (PTV)
C37.7 cc was an independent predictive factor for
grade 2 or higher RP, with a risk of 50 % if V25 was
4.2 % or higher (Matsuo et al. 2012). In one of the
largest studies, investigators from Indiana University
examined 251 stage I–IIB non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients treated with SBRT. A majority of
patients were treated with 3 fractions and the remaining with 4–5 fractions. At a median follow-up of
17 months, RP was observed in 42 lesions (17 %), with
19, 17, 5, and 1 patients developing grade 1, 2, 3, and 4
RP. Grade 1 and 2–4 RP developed at a median time of
8.4 and 3.5 months, respectively (Barriger et al. 2012).
Complete dosimetric data was available in 143 patients
and MLD, V5, V10, and V20 were analyzed and correlated with incidence of RP. The most significant factors

Normal Tissue Constraints

395

Table 1 Summary of selected studies correlating dosimetric parameters and risk of radiation pneumonitis (RP)
Study

Number of
patients/
lesions

Dose regimen used

Dosimetric parameters examined

Risk of RP

Barriger et al.
(2012)

251 (143
evaluable)/
same

14–22 Gy 9 3 for
the majority of
patients, 10–14 Gy
9 4, and 9–10 Gy 9
5

MLD, V5, V10, V20

MLD: B4 Gy, 4.3 %; [4 Gy,
17.6 %/V5: B20 %, 4.7 %;
[20 %, 8.9 %/V10: B12 %,
5.7 %; [12 %, 15 %/V20: B4 %,
4.3 %; [4 %, 16.4 % for G 2-4

Ong et al.
(2010)

18/18

11 Gy 9 5 or
7.5 Gy 9 8

MLD, V5, V10, V15, V20

All patients with total lung
V5 [ 37 % and contralateral lung
V5 [ 26 % developed G2-3 RP

Guckenberger
et al. (2010)

59/75

12.5 Gy 9 3 (40
lesions) and 26 Gy
(29 lesions) 9 1 for
most lesions

MLD and V2.5–50 for ipsilateral
lung (Doses all converted to 2 Gy
equivalent normalized total dose
using an a/b ratio of 3 Gy for RP)

Average MLD to ipsilateral lung:
12.5 versus 9.9 Gy for patients
with and without G2 RP

Takeda et al.
(2012)

128/133

8–12 Gy (mostly
10 Gy) 9 5 for most
patients

MLD and V5-30 (5 Gy
increment)

V5 B 18 % versus [18 %: 5.5 %
versus 32.3 %/V5 B 24 % versus
[24 %: 13 % versus 45.4 %/
V10 B 10.5 % versus [10.5 %:
5.8 % versus 38.5 %/
V10 B 15.8 % versus [15.8 %:
13.6 % versus 61.9 %/
V15 B 6 % versus [6%: 5.4 %
versus 32.2 %/V15 B 9.8 %
versus [9.8 %: 15 % versus
50 %/V20 B 3.6 % versus
[3.6 %: 5 % versus 37.2 %/
V20 B 6.5 % versus [6.5 %:
14 % versus 46.8 %/
V25 B 2.5 % versus [2.5 %:
4.2 % versus 29.9 %/
V25 B 5.2 % versus [5.2 %:
4.8 % versus 65 % for G2 RP

Matsuo et al.
(2012)

74/74

12 Gy 9 4

MLD and V5-40

MLD \ 4.7 Gy versus C4.7 Gy:
17.2 % versus 40 %/
V5 \ 26.8 % versus C 26.8 %:
17.9 % versus 42.9 %/
V10 \ 10.1 % versus C10.1 %:
11.4 % versus 28.2 %/
V15 \ 4.9 % versus C4.9 %:
5.3 % versus 25.5 %/
V20 \ 5.8 % versus C5.8 %:
15 % versus 42.9 % (p = 0.03)/
V25 \ 4.2 % versus C4.2 %:
14.8 % versus 46.2 %
(p = 0.019)/V30 \ 2.8 % versus
C2.8 %: 15.3 % versus 40 %/
V35 \ 1.9 % versus C1.9 %:
15.3 % versus 40 %/
V40 \ 1.6 % versus C1.6 %:
17.6 % versus 50 %

Borst et al.
(2009)

128/Not
mentioned

8.75–12 Gy 9 4
fractions in the
majority of patients,
6–7.5 Gy 9 8

MLD (Doses all converted to
2 Gy equivalent normalized total
dose using an a/b ratio of 3 Gy
for RP)

G C 2 RP-MLD 0–4 Gy: 0/
4–8 Gy: 7 %/8–12 Gy: 14 %/
12–16 Gy: 13 %/16–20 Gy:
57 %/20–28 Gy: 50 %

Abbreviations: MLD, mean lung dose; G, grade

396

correlating with the risk of grade 2–4 RP were MLD
(4.3 % for MLD B 4 Gy vs. 17.6 % for MLD[4 Gy)
and V20 (4.3 % for V20 B 4 % vs. 16.4 % for
V20 [ 4 %). There were no deaths resulting from acute
or chronic pulmonary toxicities (Barriger et al. 2012).
In the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG)
0236 trial, according to the protocol, V20 was limited to
\10 %, which was much higher than the cutoff of 4 %
in this study, and the reported incidence of grade 3 RP
was only 3.6 % (Timmerman et al. 2010). However, the
actual V20 was likely to be much lower than 10 % since
minimization of low dose spillage was required in the
protocol. When 10 % was used as a cutoff in this study,
there was no significant difference observed for V20
(Barriger et al. 2012). The authors suggested that the
use of 10 % as a cutoff for V20 would likely result in an
acceptable risk of grade 2 or higher RP, although it
would be desirable to keep V20 as low as possible and
the treating physician would have to balance the risks
and benefits for each patient. Table 1 summarizes
results of selected studies correlating dosimetric
parameters and risk of RP. Table 2 shows the dosimetric details of the analysis from Indiana University.
The most current RTOG trials are using the critical
volume model for lung constraints. The critical volumes for basic lung function and RP are 1,500 and
1,000 cc, respectively. Dose limits depend on the
number of fractions used (Table 3). Given the variable results observed among different studies using
different dose regimens and dosimetric parameters, it
is very difficult to draw a conclusion regarding what
parameters are the best predicting grade 2 or higher
RP. The study from Indiana University seems to
validate V20, as used in RTOG 0236 and 0618 trials,
to be a reasonable lung constraint parameter predicting grade 2 or higher RP. Although a V20 of up to
10 % was allowed in RTOG 0236 and 0618 trials, it is
prudent to attempt to keep it below 5 %, if achievable. The cutoff dose for MLD in terms of prediction
of RP is still unclear given the limited data available.
Based on the data from the Indiana University and the
Netherlands studies, it seems to be reasonable to limit
MLD to 4–8 Gy, accepting a less than 10 % risk of
grade 2 or higher RP, and it may be used in conjunction with V20 as a constraint parameter (Barriger
et al. 2012; Borst et al. 2009). Whether the critical
volume model used by RTOG is useful in the prediction of RP and pulmonary dysfunction is yet to be
determined.

S. S. Lo et al.
Table 2 Dosimetric risks for grade 2–4 (symptomatic) pneumonitis
Grade 2–4 pneumonitis (%)

p value

B4 Gy

4.3

0.02

[4 Gy

17.6

MLD

V5
B20 %

4.7

[20 %

8.9

0.67

V10
B12 %

5.7

[12 %

15

0.1

V20
B4 % (Median)

4.3

[4 %

16.4

B10 % (RTOG)

9.6

[10 %

15.8

0.03
0.42

PTV
B48 mL

6.4

[48 mL

13

0.18

Tumor location
Upper lobe

9

Lower/middle lobe

12

0.59

COPD
No

5.7

Yes

12

0.36

Abbreviations: COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease;
MLD, mean lung dose; PTV, planning target volume; RTOG,
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group; Vn, volume of lung
receiving at least n Gy of radiation dose
Reprinted from Barriger et al. (2012), Copyright (2012), with
permission from Elsevier

3

Chest Wall Tolerance

Chest wall toxicities including rib fractures and
chronic chest wall pain have been reported after
SBRT/SABR for peripherally located lung and liver
tumors. Colleagues from University of Virginia,
Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Sweden, Indiana University, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, and Japan
have independently performed dose-volume analysis
for chest wall toxicities (Andolino et al. 2011; Asai
et al. 2012; Bongers et al. 2011; Creach et al. 2012;
Dunlap et al. 2010; Mutter et al. 2012; Stephans et al.

15.4 Gy (max.)
11.9 Gy (\5 cc)
17.5 Gy (max.)
14 Gy (\3 cc)
22 Gy (max.)/
16 Gy (\15 cc)
20.2 Gy (max.)
10.5 Gy (\4 cc)
26 Gy (max.)/
23 Gy (\10 cc)
37 Gy (max.)/
31 Gy (\10 cc)
30 Gy (max.)/
22 Gy (\1 cc)
12.4 Gy (max.)
11.2 Gy (\10 cc)
N/A
7 Gy (1,000 cc)
7.4 Gy (1,500 cc)
N/A

Esophagus

Ipsilateral brachial plexus

Heart/pericardium

Trachea and ipsilateral bronchus

Skin

Great vessels, non-adjacent wall

Rib

Stomach

Colona

Lung (basic pulmonary function)b

Lung (radiation pneumonitis)b

Liverb

Renal cortex (right and left)

RTOG 1021: 14.4 Gy (200 cc)

RTOG 1021: 17.1 Gy (700 cc)

RTOG 0236 and 0618: V20 \10 % RTOG 1021: 10.5 Gy
(1500 cc)

RTOG 0236 and 0618: V20 \ 10 % RTOG 1021: 11.4 Gy
(1,000 cc)

RTOG 0236 and 0618: N/A RTOG 1021: 28.2 Gy (max.)/
24 Gy (\20 cc)

RTOG 0236 and 0618: N/A RTOG 1021: 16.5 Gy (max.)/
22.2 Gy (\10 cc)

RTOG 0236 and 0618: N/A RTOG 1021: 28.8 Gy (max.)/
36.9 Gy (\1 cc)

RTOG 0236 and 0618: N/A RTOG 1021: 45 Gy (max.)/
39 Gy (\10 cc)

RTOG 0236 and 0618: N/A RTOG 1021: 33 Gy (max.)/
30 Gy (\10 cc)

RTOG 0236 and 0618: 30 Gy (max.) RTOG 1021: 30 Gy
(max.)/15 Gy (\4 cc)

RTOG 0236 and 0618: 30 Gy (max.) RTOG 1021: 30 Gy
(max.)/24 Gy (\15 cc)

RTOG 0236 and 0618: 24 Gy (max.) RTOG 1021: 24 Gy
(max.)/20.4 Gy (\3 cc)

RTOG 0236 and 0618: 27 Gy (max.) RTOG 1021: 25.2 Gy
(max.)/17.7 Gy (\ 5 cc)

RTOG 0236 and 0618: 18 Gy (max.) RTOG 1021: 21.9 Gy
(max.)/18 Gy (\0.35 cc)/12.3 Gy (\1.2 cc)

3 fractions (RTOG 0236, 0618 and 1021)

Abbreviations: max., maximum; PTV, planning treatment volume; N/A, not available
Maximum dose defined as the highest dose to a volume of [0.035 cc
a
Avoid circumferential irradiation
b
Critical volumes used

N/A

14 Gy (max.)/
10 Gy (\ 0.35 cc)/
7 Gy (\ 1.2 cc)

Spinal cord

b

1 fraction (RTOG
0915)

Organ

N/A

N/A

12.4 Gy (1,500 cc)

11.6 Gy (1,000 cc)

N/A

27.2 Gy (max.)/17.6 Gy
(\10 cc)

40 Gy (max.)/32 Gy
(\1 cc)

N/A

N/A

13.5 Gy (1,500 cc)

12.5 Gy (1,000 cc)

N/A

N/A

N/A

105 % of PTV prescription
(max.)/47 Gy (\10 cc)

32 Gy (max.)/30 Gy
(\10 cc)

36 Gy (max.)/33.2 Gy
(\10 cc)
49 Gy (max.)/43 Gy
(\10 cc)

105 % of PTV prescription
(max.)/18 Gy (\4 cc)

105 % of PTV prescription
(max.)/32 Gy (\15 cc)

32 Gy (max.)/30 Gy
(\3 cc)

105 % of PTV prescription
(max.)/27.5 Gy (\5 cc)

30 Gy (max.)/22.5 Gy
(\0.25 cc)/13.5 Gy
(\0.5 cc)

5 fractions (RTOG 0813)

34.8 Gy (max.)/15.6 Gy
(\4 cc)

34 Gy (max.)/28 Gy
(\15 cc)

27.2 Gy (max.)/23.6
(\3 cc)

30 Gy (max.)/18.8 Gy
(\5 cc)

26 (max.)/20.8 (\0.35 cc)/
13.6 (\1.2 cc)

4 fractions (RTOG 0915)

Table 3 Dose constraints used by RTOG based on trials 0236, 0618, 0813, 0915, and 1021 (www.rtog.org) (please note that these dose constraints are intended to be used in
patients enrolled in the respective RTOG SBRT protocols and have not been thoroughly tested clinically, and the authors do not assume responsibility for the use of these dose
limits)

Normal Tissue Constraints
397

398

2012; Voroney et al. 2009; Welsh et al. 2011; Woody
et al. 2012). In a study from University of Virginia,
Dunlap et al. found that the chest wall volume
receiving 30 Gy (V30) best predicted chest wall pain
and/or rib fracture although V50 and V60 were also
highly predictive of chest wall toxicities. The
threshold observed for V30 was 30 cc. A V30 of 35 cc
resulted in a 30 % risk of developing sever chest wall
toxicities (Dunlap et al. 2010). Colleagues from
Cleveland Clinic analyzed dosimetric factors predicting chest wall toxicities and found that V30
through V60 were all highly significant predictive
factors for chest wall toxicities. Maximum point dose
(Dmax) trended to significance as a predictor of chest
wall toxicity. Separate analyses were performed for
V30 and V60 and the authors concluded that keeping
V30 and V60 under 30 and 3 cc should result in a
10–15 % or lower risk of late chest wall toxicity
(Stephans et al. 2012). In their separate study focusing
on only chest wall pain, dosimetric data of 102
patients with 106 lesions treated with SBRT using
different fractionation regimens, including 60 Gy in 3
fractions, 48 Gy in 4 fractions, 50 Gy in 5 fractions,
and 50 Gy in 10 fractions, were analyzed. Parameters
studied included modified equivalent uniform dose
(mEUD), V30, and Dmax, which were all predictive of
risk of chest wall pain. mEUD improved prediction of
chest wall pain compared with V30 and its predictive
power was higher with moderate weighting compared
to no weighting (Woody et al. 2012).
In a study from Scandinavia, where patients were
treated with SBRT for NSCLC to a dose of 45 in 3
fractions, absolute volumes were found to be better
fits than relative volumes and dose–response curves
were better than volume-response curves for prediction of radiation-induced rib fractures. The risk of rib
fractures was 0, 5, and 50 % when D2cc values were
\21, 27.3, and 49.8 Gy, respectively (Pettersson et al.
2009). Investigators from Indiana University analyzed
the data of 311 patients with 347 lesions treated with
SBRT using mainly 3–5 fraction regimens and discovered a cutoff dose of 50 Gy for Dmax to chest wall
and ribs, above which there was a significant increase
in the risk of chest wall toxicities. V15–40 were highly
predictive of chest wall toxicities, and V40 values of
5 cc and 15 cc were associated with a 10 and 30 %
risk of chest wall toxicities, respectively (Fig. 1)
(Andolino et al. 2011). Colleagues from Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center discovered that when

S. S. Lo et al.

Fig. 1 Volume–risk analysis based on median effective dose–
response model for development of any severity chest wall
(CW) toxicity at designated dose levels: a risk for 0–400 cc and
b from 0 to 50 cc of CW receiving particular dose. Reprinted
from Andolino et al. (2011), Copyright (2011), with permission
from Elsevier

3–5 fractions were used, V30 C 70 cc had a strong
correlation with grade C2 chest wall pain (Mutter
et al. 2012). Welsh et al. (2011) from M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, using a regimen of 50 Gy in 4 fractions for lung SBRT, also found that V30 was a predictive factor for chest wall pain for patients
undergoing SBRT, although the volume cutoff was
30 cc. Researchers from Washington University
found that percent of chest wall volume receiving 30,
35, and 40 Gy was most predictive of chest wall pain.
The V30 and V40 threshold values of 0.7 and 0.19 %
resulted in a 15 % risk of chest wall pain (Creach
et al. 2012). In a study from Vrije Universiteit (VU),
where 500 patients with 530 early stage lung tumors
were treated with SBRT using regimens including
60 Gy in 3 fractions, 60 Gy in 5 fractions, and 60 Gy
in 8 fractions, dosimetric parameters such as V30–50
and D2cc were examined for patients developing chest
wall pain and rib fractures. Grade 3 chest wall pain
and rib fractures were associated with larger V30–50
and rib fractures specifically with a higher maximum
dose in the chest wall (Bongers et al. 2011).

Normal Tissue Constraints

399

Table 4 Summary of studies on chest wall toxicities with dosimetric correlation
Study

Number of
patients

Dose regimen used

Dosimetric correlation with chest wall toxicities

Dunlap
et al. (2010)

60

21–60 Gy in 3–5
fractions

Chest wall pain and/or rib fractures—Threshold volume for V30:
30 cc/V30 of 35 cc: 30 %

Stephans
et al. (2012)

45 with 48
lesions

20 Gy 9 3

Skin changes, chest wall pain, and/or rib fracture—V30 of 10, 20, 40,
60, 80, and 100 cc: 6, 9, 19, 35, 55, and 74 %/V60 values of 1, 2, 5,
10, 15, and 20 cc: 6, 8, 16, 39, 69, and 88 %

Pettersson
et al. (2009)

68 (33
evaluable)

15 Gy 9 3

Rib fractures—D2cc of \ 21 Gy, 27.3 Gy, and 49.8 Gy: 0 %, 5 %,
and 50 %

Andolino
et al. (2011)

311 with
347 lesions

54 Gy (18–72 Gy) in
2–5 fractions

Chest wall pain and/or rib fractures—Dmax : Cutoff at 50 Gy/V40
values of 5 and 15 cc: 10 and 30 %

Mutter et al.
(2012)

126

40–60 Gy in 3–5
fractions

Chest wall pain—V30 C 70 cc significantly correlated with chest wall
pain

Welsh et al.
(2011)

265 with
268 lesions

12.5 Gy 9 4

Chest wall pain—V30 C 30 cc versus \30 cc: 18 % versus 2.7 %

Creach et al.
(2012)

140 with
146 lesions

54 Gy in 3 fractions or
50 Gy in 5 fractions

Chest wall pain—V30, V35, and V40 were most predictive of chest wall
pain/V30 and V40 threshold values of 0.7 and 0.19 %: 15 %

Asai et al.
(2012)

116 with
374 ribs

12 Gy 9 4

Rib fractures—Dmax C42.4 Gy versus \42.4 Gy: 45.8 %
versus 1.4 %
V40 C 0.29 cc versus \ 0.29 cc: 51.6 % versus 2.0 %
V30 C 1.35 cc versus \1.35 cc: 45.8 % versus 2.2 %
V20 C 3.62 cc versus \3.63 cc: 42 % versus 8.5 %
V10 C 5.03 cc versus \ 5.03 cc: 25.9 % versus 10.5 %

Based on the data available in the literature, V30
along with the maximum dose to the chest wall appear
to be valid dosimetric parameters predicting chest wall
toxicities. It seems to be reasonable to limit V30 to
below 30 cc and the maximum dose to the chest wall to
below 50–60 Gy when a 3–5 fraction regimen is used.
As in any treatment, the treating team will have to
balance the risk of under-dosing a tumor that can
potentially be eradicated, especially for tumors close to
or abutting the chest wall, and the risk of chest wall
toxicities. Table 4 summarizes selected studies of chest
wall toxicities with dosimetric correlations.

4

Skin Tolerance

Skin toxicities have been observed after SBRT but there is
very limited data on dose response for skin complications.
A study from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center
(MSKCC) analyzed acute skin toxicities in 50 patients
with stage I NSCLC treated with SBRT using regimens of
60 Gy in 3 fractions (n = 36) or 44–48 Gy in 4 fractions
(n = 14). They have identified factors associated with
acute skin toxicities, including the use of three beams,

distance from the tumor to the posterior chest wall skin of
less than 5 cm, and a maximum posterior skin dose of
50 % or higher of the prescribed dose (Hoppe et al. 2008).
The analysis using absolute skin dose was not performed.
If only the patients receiving 60 Gy in 3 fractions are
considered, the cutoff dose for posterior chest wall skin
would be \30 Gy in 3 fractions. However, maximum
skin dose was not associated with skin toxicities in
locations other than the back. The author suspected that
the bolus effect of the immobilization system used might
have contributed to the under-estimation of the actual
dose delivered to the skin, which was defined as the
surface of the body contour in that study (Hoppe et al.
2008). In RTOG trials, the skin is defined as a 5 mm
concentric ring from the surface of the body contour (Lo
et al. 2009b). Using the RTOG constraint for skin, which
was 24 Gy in 3 fractions, the dose to the surface of the
skin will be much lower than the maximum point dose to
the deepest aspect of the concentric ring of skin contour.
For single fraction, another study of 24 patients with
29 spinal lesions from MSKCC prospectively examined acute skin toxicity after single fraction SBRT for
spinal metastases by performing in vivo skin dose
measurements using thermoluminescent or optically

400

S. S. Lo et al.

stimulated luminescent dosimeters. The prescribed
dose for treatment was 18–24 Gy in one fraction. The
corresponding measured skin dose range observed for
National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v3.0 Grade 0, 1, 2,
and 3 toxicities were 8.9 Gy (range: 5.1–12.7 Gy),
11.3 Gy (range: 6.9–17.0 Gy), 11.9 Gy (range:
8.0–16.3 Gy), and 13.5 Gy (n = 1), respectively (Pan
et al. 2010b). Since the dose was measured on the skin
surface, the dose is expected to be much higher, 5 mm
beneath the skin surface, which is the inner extent of the
skin contour defined by RTOG. Current RTOG protocols set the constraints of skin, which is defined as a
5 mm concentric ring beneath the body contour surface, for single fraction SBRT at 23 Gy (\10 cc) and
26 Gy (\0.03 cc). The actual dose delivered to the skin
surface is difficult to predict in board terms because it
will be significantly affected by the planning technique
and the material of the immobilization device used.

5

Esophageal Tolerance

Esophageal toxicity can occur after SBRT for lung and
spinal/paraspinal tumors. Although being observed and
reported, dosimetric data in relation to esophageal toxicities
are lacking. In a study from MSKCC, where 114 patients
with 119 sites were treated with single dose SBRT to a dose
ranging from 18 to 24 Gy (median: 24 Gy), seven patients
developed grade 2 or higher esophageal toxicities, with two
developing grade 3 or higher toxicities. The D1 cc (defined
as the dose to the hottest 1 cc of the esophagus) were 22.88
(odynophagia and dysphagia) and 24.31 Gy (ulcer and
necrosis) for the two patients with grade 3 or higher toxicities, respectively (Gomez et al. 2009). The authors
indicated that the doses delivered to the esophagus for those
two patients were above the institutional dose constraints
(Level 1: B 1,500 Gy/2 cc; Level 2: B 2,000 Gy/2 cc).
In another study from MSKCC, esophageal toxicity of 184
patients with 204 spinal metastases undergoing single dose
SBRT was evaluated. Overall, grade 3 or higher toxicity
rate was 5 %. Fisher’s exact test generated significant
median splits for grade 3 or higher esophageal toxicities at
D2.5 cc (14 Gy), V12 (3.78 cc), V15 (1.87 cc), V20 (0.11 cc),
and V22 (0 cc). The risk of esophageal toxicities below the
median split was 1–3 % compared to 11–13 % if above the
median split (Cox et al. 2012). Colleagues from Stanford

University attempted to determine the esophageal tolerance to SBRT and retrospectively evaluated 31 patients
treated with SBRT for lung or spinal tumors \1 cm
from the esophagus. Treatment regimens included
16–25 Gy 9 1, 8–12 Gy 9 2, 8 Gy 9 3, 6–12.5 Gy 9
4, and 5–10 Gy 9 5. Three patients developed esophageal toxicities, with two of them dying of either tracheoesophageal fistula or esophageal perforation (grade 5).
Dosimetric parameters examined included D5cc, D2cc, D1cc,
and Dmax. Utilizing both linear-quadratic (LQ) and Universal Survival Curve (USC) models, dose parameters
were converted to single fraction biologically effective
dose (SFBED), assuming a/b = 3 Gy for late effects. The
D5cc, D2cc, D1cc, and Dmax for the three patients ranged
between 10.7–16.5 Gy, 13.7–18.2 Gy, 15.7–19 Gy, and
18.5–22.8 Gy, respectively, if LQ model is used (Abelson
et al. 2011). Corresponding values were 11.9–16.5 Gy,
17.4–18.2 Gy, 19–22.5 Gy, and 21–37.3 Gy when USC
model is used. The authors recommended the use of conservative parameters.
Given the paucity of data, it is prudent to take a
more conservative approach. The esophageal constraints used by RTOG trials and VU trials are listed
in Tables 3 and 5, respectively.

6

Bronchial Tolerance

Bronchial complications have been reported after chest
SBRT. However, dosimetric analysis is lacking. In a
study from MSKCC, where 114 patients with 119 paraspinal sites were treated with single dose SBRT to a
dose of 18–24 Gy, two cases of grade 2 or 3 bronchial
toxicity were observed. The D1 cc were 11.01 Gy
(cough) and 22.11 Gy (bronchial stenosis), respectively
(Gomez et al. 2009). Recently, colleagues from University of Pennsylvania reported a case of fatal central
airway necrosis after SBRT to a centrally located lung
cancer, using a regimen of 50 Gy in 5 fractions (Corradetti et al. 2012). The maximum airway dose was
limited to not higher than 52.5 Gy in 5 fractions.
Currently, the tolerance of the airway to ablative
radiation dose regimens is not well established. It is
prudent to use a more protracted fractionation (4, 5, 8
or even 10–12 fractions) when the lung tumor is
centrally located. Tables 3 and 5 show the dose
constraints used by RTOG and VU, respectively.

Normal Tissue Constraints

401

Table 5 Normal tissue constraints for lung SBRT at VU (please note that these dose constraints have not been thoroughly tested
clinically and the authors do not assume responsibility for the use of these recommended dose limits) (Courtesy of Dr. Ben
Slotman)
Regimen

18 Gy 9 3

11 Gy 9 5

7.5 Gy 9 8

5 Gy 9 12b

Equivalent 2 Gy fx

Spinal cord (a/b = 2)

6 Gy 9 3

4.5 Gy 9 5

3.5 Gy 9 8

2.7 Gy 9 12

36

Esophagus (a/b = 3)

9 Gy 9 3

6.5 Gy 9 5

5.0 Gy 9 8

4.0 Gy 9 12

66

Brachial plexus (a/b = 3)

8 Gy 9 3

6.0 Gy 9 5

4.5 Gy 9 8

3.5 Gy 9 12

54

Heart/trachea/main bronchus (a/b = 3)a

10 Gy 9 3

7.5 Gy 9 5

5.5 Gy 9 8

4.5 Gy 9 12

78

fx, fraction
If PTV partially overlaps with heart/trachea/bronchus: underdose in PTV is not accepted
b
Only used for very large tumors
a

7

Liver Tolerance

Most of data on liver tolerance to radiation come from
conventional radiotherapy. Radiation-induced liver
disease (RILD) is the most feared complication from
radiotherapy to the liver because it can be potentially
life-threatening (Pan et al. 2010a). The group from
University of Michigan modeled normal tissue complication probabilities (NTCPs) for RILD within 4 months
of three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy for
treatment of primary or metastatic liver tumors and
observed a strong volume effect, with mean dose to liver
and NTCP the most significant parameters predicting the
occurrence of RILD on multivariate analysis. No RILD
was observed when mean liver dose was kept below
31 Gy based on a dose fractionation of 1.5–1.65 Gy BID
with a minimum of 4–6 h between the two fractions
(Dawson et al. 2002). The group from University of
Toronto conducted a phase I dose escalation trial of 6fraction SBRT for primary liver cancer utilizing LymanKutcher-Burman (LKB) NTCP model to estimate risk of
RILD and allocate prescribed dose. LQ model was used
for dose conversion using an a/b ratio of 2.5. The mean
liver dose was 17.5 Gy (range 5.2–25.2 Gy). There was
no dose-limiting RILD observed (Tse et al. 2008). Eight
of 31 patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and
2 of 10 patients with intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma
developed grade 3 liver enzymes within the first
3 months. Seven of 31 patients with HCC progressed
from Child-Pugh A to B classification. Compared to
patients with progression of Child-Pugh classification,
those with progression had lower median prescription
doses, higher median liver Veff (defined as the normal
liver volume, which, if irradiated uniformly to the

reference dose, would be associated with the same
NTCP as the nonuniform dose distribution actually
delivered), and higher mean liver doses (16.0 vs.
18.0 Gy), and tended to have larger tumors (Tse et al.
2008). Using a similar approach for allocation of prescribed dose, the same group conducted a phase I trial of
6-fraction SBRT for liver metastasis and a total of 68
patients. The prescribed doses were similar to those in
the phase I trial for primary liver cancer. The highest
RILD risk level investigated was found to be safe, with
no dose-limiting RILD observed. There were two grade
3 liver enzyme, but no RILD or other grade 3–5 liver
toxicity was observed. The mean dose received by
700 cc of uninvolved liver was 14.1 Gy in 6 fractions
(Lee et al. 2009).
Other trials have utilized empirical dose-volume
constraints. Herfarth et al. from German Cancer
Research Center conducted a phase I/II trial of single
fraction SBRT for liver tumors and the dose to 30 % of
the liver was increased from 6 to 12 Gy while the
maximum dose to 50 % of the liver was escalated from 4
to 7 Gy. No RILD was observed in 37 patients with 60
liver tumors enrolled in the trial (Herfarth et al. 2001). In
a phase I/II trial from Netherlands, 25 patients (11 with
HCC and 14 with liver metastases) were treated with
SBRT. Patients with liver metastases, HCC without
associated cirrhosis, or HCC \4 cm with associated
cirrhosis received 37.5 Gy in 3 fractions; those with
HCC C4 cm with associated cirrhosis received 30 Gy in
3 fractions or 25 Gy in 5 fractions. For dose constraints,
doses to 33 % and 50 % of the liver were limited to
\21 Gy and \15 Gy, respectively. One patient with
HCC associated with hepatitis B virus and Child-Pugh B
cirrhosis developed grade 5 RILD (Mendez Romero
et al. 2006). The V30Gy for uninvolved liver was only 6 %

402

and the mean and the median liver dose were only 8.6
and 3.4 Gy (converted to 2 Gy per fraction with a/
b = 2). Two patients treated for liver metastases
developed grade 3 RILD. A dose of B15 Gy in 3 fractions was delivered to 638 and 639 cc of the uninvolved
liver (Mendez Romero et al. 2006). In the phase I/II
study of 3-fraction SBRT for liver metastases from
University of Colorado utilizing 3 fractions, where a
critical volume model was used, the radiation dose to at
least 700 cc of liver was limited to not higher than 15 Gy
in 3 fractions. No RILD was observed (Rusthoven et al.
2009b). In an Indiana University phase I dose escalation
trial of SBRT for HCC, Child-Pugh A and B patients
received 36–48 Gy in 3 fractions and 40 Gy in 5 fractions, respectively. Initial dose constraint would require
at least 700 cc of liver to receive \15 Gy. It was later
altered based on Child-Pugh class. For class A and B
patients, at least 1/3 of the uninvolved liver could receive
B10 Gy in 3 fractions and B15 Gy in 5 fractions. There
were three cases of RILD, all in Child-Pugh B patients
with score of[7. Two of the 3 patients with RILD were
treated to 42 Gy in 3 fractions and one to 40 Gy in 5
fractions. None of the Child-Pugh A patients developed
RILD (Cardenes et al. 2010).
Based on the data available so far, it appears that
setting liver dose constraints by using NTCP modeling, as in the University of Toronto trials, may result
in a low risk of RILD for both HCC and liver
metastases (Lee et al. 2009; Tse et al. 2008). However, only Child-Pugh A patients were included in the
primary liver cancer trial (Tse et al. 2008). Alternatively, the critical volume model used in the University of Colorado trial of SBRT appears to be safe in
the liver metastasis setting (Rusthoven et al. 2009b).
However, using the same model and constraint (original constraint before modification), investigators
from Indiana University observed two cases of RILD
in Child-Pugh B patients (Cardenes et al. 2010). This
observation suggests that the liver constraint used for
Child-Pugh B patients should be more conservative.
Quantitative Analyses of Normal Tissue Effects in the
Clinic (QUANTEC) suggested that mean normal liver
dose (liver minus gross tumor volume) should be
limited to \13 Gy in 3 fractions, \18 Gy in 6 fractions, or \6 Gy in 4–6 Gy per fraction for classic or
nonclassic RILD in Child-Pugh B patients. When
critical volume model is used, C700 ml of normal
liver should receive B15 Gy in 3–5 fractions (Pan
et al. 2010a). Based on the results from the Indiana

S. S. Lo et al.

University trial, the dose to at least 1/3 of the uninvolved liver should be limited to 15 Gy in 5 fractions
or less and treatment of HCC patients with a ChildPugh score of 8 or higher should be avoided (Cardenes et al. 2010).

8

Duodenal Tolerance

In a dosimetric study from Stanford University, data
from 73 patients treated with single dose SBRT to a
dose of 25 Gy for locally advanced pancreatic cancer
were analyzed (Murphy et al. 2010). Dosimetric
parameters analyzed included V5–25 (Vn was defined
as volume of duodenum in cc receiving n Gy) and the
maximum dose to 1 cc of the duodenum. The constraints used by the group were as follows:
1. five percent of duodenal volume should receive
\22.5 Gy;
2. fifty percent of duodenum should receive
\12.5 Gy; and
3. the 50 % isodose line should not reach the distal
wall of duodenal lumen on CT.
On analysis, V10–25 were strongly predictive of
duodenal toxicity, with strongest correlation observed
with V15 and V20. When V15 and V20 were kept under
9.1 cc and 3.3 cc, respectively, the 12-month toxicity
rate was decreased from 52 to 11 %. The maximum
dose to 1 cc of duodenum was also predictive of
duodenal toxicity in that when it was kept under
23 Gy, the 12-month toxicity rate was decreased from
49 to 12 % (Murphy et al. 2010). Lyman normal
tissue complication probability (NTCP) model was
also found to be predictive of duodenal toxicity in that
no toxicity occurred in patients with NTCP of \6 and
83 % of duodenal toxicities were associated with an
NTCP of [15 % (Murphy et al. 2010).
Currently, data on the duodenal tolerance to ablative radiation delivered in 2–5 fractions are lacking.

9

Vertebral Bone Tolerance

Vertebral fractures have been reported after spinal
SBRT and are difficult to prevent since the whole vertebral body and the pedicles are frequently the clinical
target volume (CTV) and will be encompassed in the
prescribed isodose line its entirety. Furthermore,
depending on the percentage isodose line the dose is

Normal Tissue Constraints

prescribed to, significant hotspots are mostly likely
present inside the vertebral body. The mechanical
weakening of the vertebral bone, which is a weightbearing structure, from tumor involvement further
increases the risk of a compression fracture. Based on a
study from MSKCC, where patients received a single
SBRT dose of 18–24 Gy to the vertebral body, no
association was observed between the SBRT dose and
the risk of vertebral fracture (Rose et al. 2009). Other
factors such as lytic appearance on CT, location
between T10 and sacrum, and increasing tumor
involvement of vertebral body are associated with a
higher risk of fracture progression (Rose et al. 2009).
In a study from M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
where 93 patients with 123 vertebral metastases were
treated with SBRT to either 18 Gy in 1 fraction, 27 Gy
in 3 fractions, or 30 Gy in 5 fractions, vertebral fractures were observed in 20 % of the treated vertebral
bodies. Risk factors included age older than 55 years, a
preexisting fracture, and baseline pain. Despite the
different dose regimens used, there was no analysis of
the effect of dose regimen on risk of fracture (Boehling
et al. 2012). In a prospective phase II trial of SBRT for
spinal tumors from University of Florida, where 21
patients with 25 spinal tumors were treated with a
single SBRT dose of 15 Gy, three vertebral fractures
were observed (Amdur et al. 2009). Investigators from
University of Toronto observed that patients treated
with C20 Gy in a single fraction were at higher risk of
developing vertebral compression fracture (Cunha
et al. 2012).
At this time, it is uncertain whether there is an
effect of dose regimen of SBRT used on the risk of
vertebral fracture. For single fraction treatment, vertebral fractures were still observed at a peripheral
dose of 15 Gy and there does not appear to be a dose
response between 18 and 24 Gy, as demonstrated in
the MSKCC study, although investigators from University of Toronto observed a higher risk of vertebral
fracture in patients treated to C20 Gy in a single
fraction (Cunha et al. 2012). Other factors, as mentioned above, are likely to be more important in
determining the risk of vertebral fracture. Therefore,
the prescribed dose should be determined by the
amount needed to achieve local control, spinal cord or
cauda equina tolerance permitting. For patients
deemed to be at a high risk of developing vertebral
fracture, prophylactic vertebral stabilization or augmentation procedures should be considered.

403

10

Central and Peripheral Nervous
System Tissue Tolerance

10.1

Spinal Cord

The predominant central nervous system tissue pertinent to the safe practice of spine SBRT, and any
tumor to be irradiated with high dose per fraction
conformal radiation near the spine, is the spinal cord.
The feared toxicity is radiation myelopathy (RM),
which is a late effect of overdosing the spinal cord.
RM is an unacceptable complication in any patient as
it can leave a patient paralyzed, and seriously impair a
patient’s quality of life. If RM occurs in the upper
cervical spine, then it can cause death. Certainly, in
patients with metastatic spine disease, and under the
competing risk of disease progression rendering the
patient neurologically impaired anyway, certain risks
can be justified but should still be within limits.
The issue with spinal cord tolerance, specific to
SBRT high dose fractionation, is that there has been
almost no data to guide safe practice. It is only
recently that spinal cord dose tolerance guidelines
have been reported specific to SBRT and, moreover,
for both patients with no history of prior radiation
exposure (de novo) and for those previously irradiated
(Sahgal et al. 2010, 2012). However, there are several
factors to first comprehend specific SBRT practice in
order to gain a full understanding of how to interpret
the recently published SBRT spinal cord tolerance
guidelines.

10.1.1 Impact on Spinal Cord Tolerance
Secondary to the Inhomogeneity
of the Dose Distribution
Spine SBRT distributions are intended to maximize
the dose gradient adjacent to the spinal cord to be
spared. One can see from Fig. 2 that the dose gradient
is steepest adjacent to the cord to be spared, with the
dose falling rapidly as illustrated by the 2,500, 2,200,
1,600, and 1,550 cGy isodose lines. Therefore, there
is inhomogeneity of the dose distribution within both
the target and spinal cord. This is also evident when
examining the dose-volume-histogram (DVH) in
Fig. 2, where we can see that only small volumes of
spinal cord are actually exposed to a potentially
harmful dose while the majority is exposed to a very
safe dose. Fundamentally the question then arises

404

whether or not there is a clinical impact of partial
volume irradiation within the spinal cord that impacts
spinal cord tolerance.
Recent experimental data using grazing proton
irradiation in rat spinal cord suggested a partial volume effect on spinal cord tolerance such that small
volumes of spinal cord could receive a higher dose
than would otherwise be considered tolerant, as long
as the majority of the cord received a sub-toxic dose
(Bijl et al. 2005, 2006). However, when SBRT
treatments were delivered in pigs, there was no effect
attributable to the inhomogeneity of the dose distribution as compared to homogeneously radiated pigs
(Medin et al. 2010). Given that the physiology of pigs
approximates closest to humans, then we should not
extrapolate the work in rodents to humans. Human
data have been lacking until recently and these data
will be subsequently discussed.

10.1.2 Susceptibility of the Spinal Cord Dose
Delivered to Positional Variations
The physical reality of the steep dose gradient placed
intentionally adjacent to the spinal cord is the susceptibility of minor positional variations on the true
dose delivered, as opposed to what we would expect
based on the static dose distribution alone. Fundamentally, positional variations can arise from the
organ itself and from the patient during treatment
(intra-fraction motion).
With respect to spinal cord motion, based on MRI
motion sequences, it has been reported that on average
the spinal cord moves *0.5 mm in the axial plane (Cai
et al. 2007). However, the more significant component
of motion arises from intra-fraction motion (Chuang
et al. 2007). It has been reported with Cyberknife
technology, that tracks the position of the target with
near-real time positioning adjustments of the linear
accelerator itself to compensate for intra-fraction
positional variations in six-degrees of freedom, that the
residual error is typically within 1 mm and 1 degree
with sometimes non-random motions up to even 2 mm
and 2 degrees (Chuang et al. 2007). However, frequent
imaging and online corrections can overcome these
motions (Ma et al. 2009). The more common technology for spine SBRT is based on non-robotic linear
accelerators that incorporate multi-leaf collimators,
intensity modulated radiotherapy, CT image guidance,
robotic couch technology to correct the residual errors
in all six-degrees of freedom and near-rigid body

S. S. Lo et al.

immobilization (Foote et al. 2011; Sahgal et al. 2011).
Precision analysis indicates that intra-fractional motion
occurs within 1.5 mm and 1° with 95 % confidence for
a typical treatment of 15–30 min, however, there is
potential for up to 2 mm and 2° of error (Hyde et al.
2011).
The dosimetric impact of these minor variations has
been studied (Chuang et al. 2007). Based on adjusting
the static dose distribution, it has been observed that the
spinal cord dose distribution is more susceptible to
change secondary to translations as opposed to rotations
(Wang et al. 2008). Chang et al. noted that a 3 mm
translational positioning error can result in a doubling of
the spinal cord dose delivered (Chang et al. 2004). From
the same group, based on an extensive dosimetric analysis, they reported that a 2 mm error in translational
positioning can result in a 25 % maximal dose increase
to the organ at risk (Wang et al. 2008). Rotations seemed
to be less of an issue in isolation, except at the more
extreme of the range. However, when incorporating
actual translational and rotational residual positional
errors for treated cases, clinically significant increases in
the true spinal cord dose delivered were observed despite
minor residual errors (Chuang et al. 2007). When
quantifying the impact of dose on the target volume, the
esophagus (tends to be several millimeters beyond the
target volume) and the spinal cord, it was only the latter
where clinically significant dosimetric changes were
observed. The cord dose increased from 1 to 4.5 %
beyond that what was intended (Chuang et al. 2007).
Given that the aim of spine SBRT is to maintain the dose
just at tolerance, to ensure safety to the cord and efficacy,
then a 4 % increase in the true dose delivered could
seriously impact the patient’s risk of RM.
The above discussion highlights that there is variation in the true spinal cord dose beyond that what is
expected from the static dose distribution. Therefore,
applying a dose tolerance to the spinal cord itself may
not reflect the actual dose delivered, and should be
considered when setting a tolerance to the cord.

10.1.3 Spinal Cord Contouring Practice
With respect to contouring the spinal cord a CT alone is
insufficient. A thin slice axial MR imaging sequence
with both T1 and T2 sequences are recommended to be
fused with the thin slice planning CT in order to obtain
the anatomic integrity to contour the spinal cord
(Sahgal et al. 2011, 2008). Alternatively, myelogram
dye inserted prior to the treatment planning CT allows

Normal Tissue Constraints

405

Fig. 2 The dose gradient is steepest adjacent to the cord to be
spared, with the dose falling rapidly as illustrated by the 2,500,
2,200, 1,600, and 1,550 cGy isodose lines. The DVH shows

that only small volumes of spinal cord are actually exposed to a
potentially harmful dose while the majority is exposed to a very
safe dose

the cord to be delineated accurately. In particular, for
certain post-operative cases the MR images may be
distorted due to the metallic hardware such that a
myelogram is necessary (Sahgal et al. 2011).
With respect to what contour is most representative of
the true dose delivered to the spinal cord, practice varies.
Some apply the tolerance to the spinal cord itself and
consider the issues of organ motion and intra-fraction
motion as part of the dose limit applied (Sahgal et al.
2008). Alternatively, others apply the threshold dose to a
margin beyond the spinal cord (typically 1.5–2 mm)
which represents the planning organ at risk volume
(PRV) (Foote et al. 2011). The concept is similar to a
planning treatment volume (PTV) where we prescribe
our dose to the PTV to ensure that the CTV is treated
with the appropriate intent. Lastly some apply the margin to the thecal sac (Sahgal et al. 2009). The thecal sac
represents an anatomic margin beyond the spinal cord
that incorporates issues such as organ motion and intrafraction motion and contourable on MRI and in most
cases CT. It is roughly equivalent to a 1.5 mm PRV
beyond the spinal cord. Human dose limits based on
dose-volume histogram (DVH) analysis have been
published according to thecal sac contours (Sahgal et al.

2010, 2012). It is simply safer to apply what you think the
cord can tolerate to the thecal sac and/or cord PRV as
otherwise there is no margin for uncertainty.

10.1.4 Human Spinal Cord Dose Limits
Two landmark papers have been published on spinal
cord tolerance specific to spine SBRT, and the spinal
cords were contoured according to the thecal sac. The
first paper investigated the DVH profile of five patients
with RM and compared the data to a series of controls
from the University of California San Francisco
(UCSF) with no RM (Sahgal et al. 2010). No patient
had prior radiation. The investigators observed that the
significant difference in the dose within the investigated volumes between the two cohorts (the point
maximum volume, 0.1, 1, 2 and 5 cc) occurred only
within the point maximum volume. This implies that
the spinal cord is in fact an organ in series, and that high
dose to small volumes of spinal cord matters. Using a
normalized biologically equivalent (nBED) dose
model to equate the doses in 2-Gy equivalent fractions
(similar to the EQD2 concept), the investigators concluded that 30 Gy2/2 in a single fraction, and up to
35 Gy2/2 for 2–5 fractions, is safe (i.e. basically a\1 %

406

S. S. Lo et al.

Table 6 Recommended dose limit to the spinal cord contoured per the thecal sac for patients with no prior radiation and for
patients previously irradiated with common conventional radiation dose fractionation practice (please note that these spinal cord
constraints have not been thoroughly tested clinically and the authors do not assume responsibility for the use of these recommended dose limits) (Courtesy of Dr. Arjun Sahgal)
Common
Previous Conventional
Radiotherapy
(nBED)

1 fraction
SBRT Pmax
Thecal Sac

2 fractions
SBRT Pmax
Thecal Sac

3 fractions
SBRT Pmax
Thecal Sac

4 fractions
SBRT Pmax
Thecal Sac

5 fractions
SBRT Pmax
Thecal Sac

No prior radiation

10 Gy

14.5 Gy

17.5 Gy

20 Gy

22 Gy

20 Gy in 5 fx/30 Gy in 10 fx/
45 Gy in 25 fx
(30 Gy2/2 to \50Gy2/2)

9 Gy

12.2 Gy

14.5 Gy

16.2 Gy

17.7 Gy

50 Gy in 25 fx
(50 Gy2/2)

N/A

11 Gy

13 Gy

14 Gy

15.5 Gy

Abbreviations: fx, fractions; Pmax, maximum point dose

risk of RM). The relevant absolute doses in Gy are
summarized in Table 1. These data support the recent
pig animal data which also did not find a partial volume
effect (Medin et al. 2010).
With respect to re-irradiation spinal cord tolerance, in
general, this has been an area we have lacked evidencebased guidelines for safe practice. In particular, there
have been no data specific to hyopfractionated re-irradiation with DVH analysis. In 2010, the same group
published the first re-irradiation spinal cord guidelines
specific to spine SBRT practice (Sahgal et al. 2012). They
based the analysis on 5 re-irradiation RM cases postSBRT, and compared the DVH data to re-irradiation
SBRT controls from UCSF. This analysis was more
complex as the prior course of radiation had to be added
to the SBRT re-irradiation spinal cord dose (contoured
per the thecal sac). The authors concluded that a cumulative nBED to the maximum point volume of 70 Gy2/2
would be safe. However, this is provided that the SBRT
re-irradiation thecal sac dose is restricted to no more than
25 Gy2/2, the data are applicable to a prior conventional
course of radiation such that the spinal canal was exposed
to a nBED ranging from 30 to 50 Gy2/2, the time interval
between courses was at least 5 months, and the ratio of
the re-irradiation thecal sac point maximum volume
nBED to the thecal sac point maximum volume cumulative nBED is no more than 50 %. In the analysis of dose
and volume for the point maximum, 0.1, 1, and 2 cc
volumes, significance was observed up to 1 cc and not at
the 2 cc volume. However, the most significant result
occurred at the point maximum and 0.1 cc volume.

Therefore, the dose delivered to small volumes of
spinal cord matters. A summary of the dose guidelines is
provided in Table 6.
Although the thresholds could be considered conservative they are safe and based on a near zero risk of
RM. Importantly, they are based on DVH analysis, and
this quality of data have yet to be reported for the spinal
cord. Furthermore, the dose limit is applied to the thecal
sac as a surrogate contour for the true spinal cord and,
therefore, reflects what the cord dose likely is if you
could account for all the uncertainties in delivery.

10.2

Peripheral Nerves

10.2.1 Brachial Plexus
Based on an analysis of 36 apical post lung SBRT
patients, brachial plexopathy was identified in seven
patients (Grade 2–4) (Forquer et al. 2009). Patients had
been treated with either three or four fraction SBRT.
The ipsilateral brachial plexus was contoured using the
subclavian/axillary vessels as a surrogate for the major
trunks of the brachial plexus per directions described in
RTOG protocol 0236. Using the BED model and an a/
b = 3, the median maximum point volume BED for the
plexopathy cases was 123 Gy3 with a range of 45–839
Gy3. They also equated dose according to a single
fraction equivalent dose, and report a 2-year risk of
brachial plexopathy of 42 % when the dose to the
brachial plexus exceeds 15 Gy as compared to 8 %
when the dose is less than or equal to 15 Gy.

Normal Tissue Constraints

407

Table 7 Normal tissue constraints for liver SBRT at VU (please note that these dose constraints have not been thoroughly tested
clinically and the authors do not assume responsibility for the use of these recommended dose limits) (Courtesy of Dr. Ben
Slotman)
Regimen

18 Gy 9 3

7.5 Gy 9 8

5 Gy 9 12

Equivalent 2 Gy fx

Liver (a/ß=3)
[700 ml

5 Gy 9 3 = 15 Gy

2.7 Gy 9 8 = 21.6 Gy

2 Gy 9 12 = 24 Gy

24 Gy

Right kidney (a/ß=3)
[67 % volume

5 Gy 9 3 = 15 Gy

2.7 Gy 9 8 = 21.6 Gy

2 Gy 9 12 = 24 Gy

24 Gy

Kidneys (a/ß=3)
[65 % Total volume

5 Gy 9 3 = 15 Gy

2.7 Gy 9 8 = 21.6 Gy

2 Gy 9 12 = 24 Gy

24 Gy

Spinal cord (a/ß=2)

6 Gy 9 3 = 18 Gy

3.5 Gy 9 8 = 28 Gy

2.7 Gy 9 12 = 32 Gy

36 Gy

Bowel/Stomach(a/ß=3)

10 Gy 9 3 = 30 Gy

5.5 Gy 9 8= 44 Gy

4.4 Gy 9 12 = 53 Gy

78 Gy

Esophagus (a/ß=3)

9 Gy 9 3 = 27 Gy

5.5 Gy 9 8 = 44 Gy

4 Gy 9 12 = 48 Gy

66 Gy

Abbreviation: fx, fraction
Table 8 Normal tissue constraints for spinal SBRT at VU (please note that these dose constraints have not been thoroughly tested
clinically and the authors do not assume responsibility for the use of these recommended dose limits) (Courtesy of Dr. Ben
Slotman)
Prognostic
group

Dose prescription

Spinal cord/Cauda Equina Ring
(5 mm) Dose (No previous
radiotherapy)

Spinal cord/Cauda Equina
Dose (No previous
radiotherapy)

PS 0–2, Life
Expectancy
[ 12 months

9 Gy 9 3 (= 100 %)
Dmin C 27 Gy to C 90 % of PTV
Aim to deliver C34 Gy (125 %) to as
much as possible of the GTV
Dmax B 40 Gy (150 %, located
inside GTV)

Dmax = 24 Gy

Dmax = 18 Gy (\ 10 % of
volume), as much as possible
\15 Gy

PS 0-2, Life
Expectancy
\ 12 months

16 Gy 9 1 (=100 %)
Dmin C16 Gy to C 90 % of PTV
Aim to deliver C20 Gy (125 %) to as
much as possible of the GTV
Dmax B24 Gy (150 %, located
inside GTV)

Dmax = 14 Gy

Dmax = 10 Gy (\10 % of
volume), as much as possible
\8 Gy

10.2.2 Spinal Nerves
The re-irradiation series from the MD Anderson
Cancer Center reported non-spinal cord neurologic
toxicity (Garg et al. 2011) secondary to peripheral
nerve dysfunction. Two patients developed grade 3
toxicity manifesting as drop foot. The first patient had
been treated with 50 Gy in 25 fractions followed by
SBRT to a L5 tumor. The SBRT treatment consisted
of 30 Gy in 5 fractions. The second patient had been
treated with 30 Gy in 10 fractions for a L5 tumor
followed by SBRT with 27 Gy in 3 fractions. It is
difficult to know what the etiology is without electro-

myography as in both these cases tumor infiltration of
the nerve was present, and based on the images in the
paper the nerves where exposed to at least the prescribed dose. No dosimetric analysis of the peripheral
nerves was reported.

11

Normal Tissue Constraints Used
in RTOG Trials

The normal tissue constraints used in RTOG trials are
listed in Table 3.

408

12

S. S. Lo et al.

Normal Tissue Constraints Used
at Vrije Universiteit (VU)
in Netherlands

For lung and liver tumors, the fractionation schemes are
chosen based on tumor size and location. In case of an
increased risk of side effects (larger tumor and/or closer
to organs-at-risk), a more fractionated approach with
lower biologically equivalent dose is selected. The dose
constraints used are listed in the Tables 5 and 7.
For spine SBRT, two fractionation schemes are
used and the selection is based on the life expectancy
of the patient (Table 8).

13

Future Directions

Currently, most data on normal tissue constraints for
SBRT are based upon retrospective studies and are
relatively limited. Although it is very tempting for
SBRT practitioners to extrapolate data from conventional fractionation to the ablative dose range using
various radiobiologic models, there are many factors
that cannot be account for by mathematical calculations. In the meantime, there are several prospective
clinical trials of SBRT being conducted at international, national, and institutional levels, with individual standardized constraints for various OARs.
The toxicity data obtained from these trials can help
establish the tolerance of different OARs. At this
point in time, it is prudent to use normal tissue constraints based on published studies with dosimetric
correlation in the literature when treating patients
outside of a clinical trial setting.

References
Abelson JA, Murphy JD, Loo BW, Jr., Chang DT, Daly ME,
Wiegner EA, Hancock S, Chang SD, Le QT, Soltys SG,
Gibbs IC (2011) Esophageal tolerance to high-dose stereotactic ablative radiotherapy. Dis Esophagus. doi: 10.1111/j.
1442-2050.2011.01295.x
Amdur RJ, Bennett J, Olivier K, Wallace A, Morris CG, Liu C,
Mendenhall WM (2009) A prospective, phase II study
demonstrating the potential value and limitation of radiosurgery for spine metastases. Am J Clin Oncol. doi: 10.1097/
COC.0b013e318194f70f

Andolino DL, Forquer JA, Henderson MA, Barriger RB,
Shapiro RH, Brabham JG, Johnstone PA, Cardenes HR,
Fakiris AJ (2011) Chest wall toxicity after stereotactic body
radiotherapy for malignant lesions of the lung and liver.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 80(3):692–697. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.03.020, S0360-3016(10)00455-4[pii]
Asai K, Shioyama Y, Nakamura K, Sasaki T, Ohga S,
Nonoshita T, Yoshitake T, Ohnishi K, Terashima K,
Matsumoto K, Hirata H, Honda H (2012) Radiation-induced
rib fractures after hypofractionated stereotactic body radiation therapy: risk factors and dose-volume relationship. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2012.01.027,
S0360-3016(12)00071-5[pii]
Barriger RB, Forquer JA, Brabham JG, Andolino DL, Shapiro RH,
Henderson MA, Johnstone PA, Fakiris AJ (2012) A dosevolume analysis of radiation pneumonitis in non-small cell
lung cancer patients treated with stereotactic body radiation
therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 82(1):457–462. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.08.056, S0360-3016(10)03263-3[pii]
Baumann P, Nyman J, Hoyer M, Wennberg B, Gagliardi G,
Lax I, Drugge N, Ekberg L, Friesland S, Johansson KA,
Lund JA, Morhed E, Nilsson K, Levin N, Paludan M,
Sederholm C, Traberg A, Wittgren L, Lewensohn R (2009)
Outcome in a prospective phase II trial of medically
inoperable stage I non-small-cell lung cancer patients
treated with stereotactic body radiotherapy. J Clin Oncol
27(20):3290–3296. doi:10.1200/JCO.2008.21.5681, JCO.
2008.21.5681[pii]
Bijl HP, van Luijk P, Coppes RP, Schippers JM, Konings AW,
van Der Kogel AJ (2005) Regional differences in radiosensitivity across the rat cervical spinal cord. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 61(2):543–551
Bijl HP, van Luijk P, Coppes RP, Schippers JM, Konings AW,
van der Kogel AJ (2006) Influence of adjacent low-dose
fields on tolerance to high doses of protons in rat cervical
spinal cord. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 64(4):1204–1210
Boehling NS, Grosshans DR, Allen PK, McAleer MF, Burton AW,
Azeem S, Rhines LD, Chang EL (2012) Vertebral compression
fracture risk after stereotactic body radiotherapy for spinal
metastases. J Neurosurg Spine 16(4):379–386. doi:10.3171/
2011.11.SPINE116
Bongers EM, Haasbeek CJ, Lagerwaard FJ, Slotman BJ, Senan S
(2011) Incidence and risk factors for chest wall toxicity after
risk-adapted stereotactic radiotherapy for early-stage lung
cancer. J Thorac Oncol 6(12):2052–2057. doi:10.1097/JTO.
0b013e3182307e74
Borst GR, Ishikawa M, Nijkamp J, Hauptmann M, Shirato H,
Onimaru R, van den Heuvel MM, Belderbos J, Lebesque JV,
Sonke JJ (2009) Radiation pneumonitis in patients treated for
malignant pulmonary lesions with hypofractionated radiation
therapy. Radiother Oncol 91(3):307–313
Cai J, Sheng K, Sheehan JP, Benedict SH, Larner JM, Read PW
(2007) Evaluation of thoracic spinal cord motion using
dynamic MRI. Radiother Oncol 84(3):279–282. doi:
10.1016/j.radonc.2007.06.008, S0167-8140(07)00323-4[pii]
Cardenes HR, Price TR, Perkins SM, Maluccio M, Kwo P,
Breen TE, Henderson MA, Schefter TE, Tudor K, Deluca J,
Johnstone PA (2010) Phase I feasibility trial of stereotactic
body radiation therapy for primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Transl Oncol 12(3):218–225

Normal Tissue Constraints
Chang EL, Shiu AS, Lii MF, Rhines LD, Mendel E, Mahajan A,
Weinberg JS, Mathews LA, Brown BW, Maor MH, Cox JD
(2004) Phase I clinical evaluation of near-simultaneous computed
tomographic image-guided stereotactic body radiotherapy for
spinal metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 59(5):1288–1294
Chuang C, Sahgal A, Lee L, Larson D, Huang K, Petti P, Verhey L,
Ma L (2007) Effects of residual target motion for imagetracked spine radiosurgery. Med Phys 34(11):4484–4490
Cox BW, Jackson A, Hunt M, Bilsky M, Yamada Y (2012)
Esophageal toxicity from high-dose single-fraction paraspinal stereotactic radiosurgery. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2012.01.080, S0360-3016(12)00185X[pii]
Corradetti MN, Haas AR, Rengan R (2012) Central-airway
necrosis after stereotactic body-radiation therapy. N Engl J
Med 366(24):2327–2329
Creach KM, El Naqa I, Bradley JD, Olsen JR, Parikh PJ,
Drzymala RE, Bloch C,Robinson CG (2012) Dosimetric
predictors of chest wall pain after lung stereotactic body
radiotherapy. Radiother Oncol. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2012.
01.014, S0167-8140(12)00045-X [pii]
Cunha MV, Al-Omair A, Atenafu EG, Masucci GL, Letourneau D,
Korol R, Yu E, Howard P, Lochray F, da Costa LB,
Fehlings MG, Sahgal A (2012) Vertebral compression fracture
(VCF) after spine stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT):
analysis of predictive factors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
Dawson LA, Normolle D, Balter JM, McGinn CJ, Lawrence TS,
Ten Haken RK (2002) Analysis of radiation-induced liver
disease using the Lyman NTCP model. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 53(4):810–821
Dunlap NE, Cai J, Biedermann GB, Yang W, Benedict SH, Sheng K,
Schefter TE, Kavanagh BD, Larner JM (2010) Chest wall
volume receiving[30 Gy predicts risk of severe pain and/or rib
fracture after lung stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 76(3):796–801. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.
02.027, S0360-3016(09)00252-1[pii]
Foote M, Letourneau D, Hyde D, Massicotte E, Rampersaud R,
Fehlings M, Fisher C, Lewis S, Macchia NL, Yu E,
Laperriere NJ, Sahgal A (2011) Technique for stereotactic
body radiotherapy for spinal metastases. J Clin Neurosci
18(2):276–279. doi:10.1016/j.jocn.2010.04.033, S09675868(10)00393-0[pii]
Forquer JA, Fakiris AJ, Timmerman RD, Lo SS, Perkins SM,
McGarry RC, Johnstone PA (2009) Brachial plexopathy
from stereotactic body radiotherapy in early-stage NSCLC:
dose-limiting toxicity in apical tumor sites. Radiother Oncol
93(3):408–413. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2009.04.018, S01678140(09)00193-5[pii]
Garg AK, Wang XS, Shiu AS, Allen P, Yang J, McAleer MF,
Azeem S, Rhines LD, Chang EL (2011) Prospective
evaluation of spinal reirradiation by using stereotactic body
radiation therapy: The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center experience. Cancer 117(15):3509–3516. doi:
10.1002/cncr.25918
Gomez DR, Hunt MA, Jackson A, O’Meara WP, Bukanova EN,
Zelefsky MJ, Yamada Y, Rosenzweig KE (2009) Low rate of
thoracic toxicity in palliative paraspinal single-fraction stereotactic body radiation therapy. Radiother Oncol 93(3):414–418.
doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2009.10.017, S0167-8140(09)00611-2[pii]
Guckenberger M, Baier K, Polat B, Richter A, Krieger T,
Wilbert J, Mueller G, Flentje M (2010) Dose-response

409
relationship for radiation-induced pneumonitis after pulmonary stereotactic body radiotherapy. Radiother Oncol
97(1):65–70. doi:10.1016/j.radonc.2010.04.027, S01678140(10)00283-5[pii]
Herfarth KK, Debus J, Lohr F, Bahner ML, Rhein B, Fritz P,
Hoss A, Schlegel W, Wannenmacher MF (2001) Stereotactic single-dose radiation therapy of liver tumors: results of a
phase I/II trial. J Clin Oncol 19(1):164–170
Hoppe BS, Laser B, Kowalski AV, Fontenla SC, Pena-Greenberg E,
Yorke ED, Lovelock DM, Hunt MA, Rosenzweig KE (2008)
Acute skin toxicity following stereotactic body radiation
therapy for stage I non-small-cell lung cancer: who’s at risk?
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 72(5):1283–1286
Hyde D, Lochray F, Korol R, Davidson M, Wong C, Ma L,Sahgal A
(2011) Spine stereotactic body radiotherapy utilizing conebeam CT image-guidance with a robotic couch: Intra-Fraction
motion analysis accounting for all six degrees-of-freedom. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys (in press)
Lee MT, Kim JJ, Dinniwell R, Brierley J, Lockwood G, Wong R,
Cummings B, Ringash J, Tse RV, Knox JJ, Dawson LA (2009)
Phase I study of individualized stereotactic body radiotherapy
of liver metastases. J Clin Oncol 27(10):1585–1591
Lo SS, Fakiris AJ, Papiez L, Abdulrahman R, McGarry RC,
Henderson MA, Forquer JA, Hoopes D, Timmerman RD
(2008) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for early-stage
non-small-cell lung cancer. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther
8(1):87–98. doi:10.1586/14737140.8.1.87
Lo SS, Fakiris AJ, Teh BS, Cardenes HR, Henderson MA,
Forquer JA, Papiez L, McGarry RC, Wang JZ, Li K,
Mayr NA, Timmerman RD (2009a) Stereotactic body
radiation therapy for oligometastases. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 9(5):621–635. doi:10.1586/era.09.15
Lo SS, Fakiris AJ, Wang JZ,Mayr NA (2009b) In regard to Hoppe
et al. (Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2008;72:1283-1286). Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 74(3): 977; author reply 978. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.02.046, S0360-3016(09)00343-5[pii]
Ma L, Sahgal A, Hossain S, Chuang C, Descovich M, Huang K,
Gottschalk A, Larson DA (2009) Nonrandom intrafraction
target motions and general strategy for correction of spine
stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
75(4):1261–1265
Matsuo Y, Shibuya K, Nakamura M, Narabayashi M, Sakanaka K,
Ueki N, Miyagi K, Norihisa Y, Mizowaki T, Nagata Y,
Hiraoka M (2012) Dose-Volume Metrics Associated With
Radiation Pneumonitis After Stereotactic Body Radiation
Therapy For Lung Cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2012.01.018, S0360-3016(12)00061-2[pii]
Medin PM, Foster RD, van der Kogel AJ, Sayre JW,
McBride WH, Solberg TD (2010) Spinal cord tolerance to
single-fraction partial-volume irradiation: a swine model.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 79(1):226–232
Mendez Romero A, Wunderink W, Hussain SM, De Pooter JA,
Heijmen BJ, Nowak PC, Nuyttens JJ, Brandwijk RP, Verhoef C,
Ijzermans JN, Levendag PC (2006) Stereotactic body radiation
therapy for primary and metastatic liver tumors: a single
institution phase i-ii study. Acta Oncol 45(7):831–837
Murphy JD, Christman-Skieller C, Kim J, Dieterich S, Chang DT,
Koong AC (2010) A dosimetric model of duodenal toxicity
after stereotactic body radiotherapy for pancreatic cancer. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 78(5):1420–1426. doi:10.1016/j.
ijrobp.2009.09.075, S0360-3016(09)03522-6[pii]

410
Mutter RW, Liu F, Abreu A, Yorke E, Jackson A, Rosenzweig KE
(2012) Dose-volume parameters predict for the development
of chest wall pain after stereotactic body radiation for lung
cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 82(5):1783–1790. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.03.053, S0360-3016(11)00519-0[pii]
Nagata Y, Takayama K, Matsuo Y, Norihisa Y, Mizowaki T,
Sakamoto T, Sakamoto M, Mitsumori M, Shibuya K, Araki N,
Yano S, Hiraoka M (2005) Clinical outcomes of a phase I/II
study of 48 Gy of stereotactic body radiotherapy in 4 fractions
for primary lung cancer using a stereotactic body frame. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 63(5):1427–1431
Okunieff P, Petersen AL, Philip A, Milano MT, Katz AW, Boros L,
Schell MC (2006) Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT)
for lung metastases. Acta Oncol 45(7):808–817
Ong CL, Palma D, Verbakel WF, Slotman BJ, Senan S (2010)
Treatment of large stage I-II lung tumors using stereotactic
body radiotherapy (SBRT): planning considerations and early
toxicity. Radiother Oncol 97(3):431–436. doi:10.1016/j.
radonc.2010.10.003, S0167-8140(10)00597-9[pii]
Pan CC, Kavanagh BD, Dawson LA, Li XA, Das SK, Miften M,
Ten Haken RK (2010a) Radiation-associated liver injury. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 76(3 Suppl):S94–S100
Pan L, Thiagarajan A, Fontenla S, Zatcky J,Yamada Y (2010b)
Acute Skin Toxicity following Radiosurgery for Metastatic
Spine Tumors: A Prospective Study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 78(3 Supplement): S66
Pettersson N, Nyman J, Johansson KA (2009) Radiation-induced
rib fractures after hypofractionated stereotactic body radiation therapy of non-small cell lung cancer: a dose- and
volume-response analysis. Radiother Oncol 91(3):360–368
Ricardi U, Guarneri A, Mantovani C, Ciammella P, Giglioli FR,
Ragona R (2007) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for early
non-small cell lung cancer: experience at the University of
Turin. J Thorac Oncol 2(5 Suppl):S47. doi:10.1097/01.JTO.
0000268645.86568.a4, 01243894-200705001-00016[pii]
Rose PS, Laufer I, Boland PJ, Hanover A, Bilsky MH, Yamada J,
Lis E (2009) Risk of fracture after single fraction imageguided intensity-modulated radiation therapy to spinal
metastases. J Clin Oncol 27(30):5075–5079. doi:10.1200/
JCO.2008.19.3508, JCO.2008.19.3508[pii]
Rusthoven KE, Kavanagh BD, Burri SH, Chen C, Cardenes H,
Chidel MA, Pugh TJ, Kane M, Gaspar LE, Schefter TE (2009a)
Multi-institutional phase I/II trial of stereotactic body radiation
therapy for lung metastases. J Clin Oncol 27(10):1579–1584
Rusthoven KE, Kavanagh BD, Cardenes H, Stieber VW, Burri SH,
Feigenberg SJ, Chidel MA, Pugh TJ, Franklin W, Kane M,
Gaspar LE, Schefter TE (2009b) Multi-institutional phase I/II
trial of stereotactic body radiation therapy for liver metastases.
J Clin Oncol 27(10):1572–1578
Sahgal A, Larson DA, Chang EL (2008) Stereotactic body
radiosurgery for spinal metastases: a critical review. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 71(3):652–665. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.
2008.02.060, S0360-3016(08)00405-7[pii]
Sahgal A, Ames C, Chou D, Ma L, Huang K, Xu W, Chin C,
Weinberg V, Chuang C, Weinstein P, Larson DA (2009)
Stereotactic body radiotherapy is effective salvage therapy
for patients with prior radiation of spinal metastases. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 74(3):723–731. doi:10.1016/j.
ijrobp.2008.09.020, S0360-3016(08)03500-1[pii]
Sahgal A, Ma L, Gibbs I, Gerszten PC, Ryu S, Soltys S, Weinberg
V, Wong S, Chang E, Fowler J, Larson DA (2010) Spinal cord

S. S. Lo et al.
tolerance for stereotactic body radiotherapy. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 77(2):548–553. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.
05.023, S0360-3016(09)00772-X[pii]
Sahgal A, Ma L, Weinberg V, Gibbs IC, Chao S, Chang UK,
Werner-Wasik M, Angelov L, Chang EL, Sohn MJ, Soltys SG,
Letourneau D, Ryu S, Gerszten PC, Fowler J, Wong CS,
Larson DA (2012) Reirradiation human spinal cord tolerance
for stereotactic body radiotherapys. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 82(1):107–116. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.08.021,
S0360-3016(10)03067-1[pii]
Sahgal A, Bilsky M, Chang EL, Ma L, Yamada Y, Rhines LD,
Letourneau D, Foote M, Yu E, Larson DA, Fehlings MG (2011)
Stereotactic body radiotherapy for spinal metastases: current
status, with a focus on its application in the postoperative
patient. J Neurosurg Spine 14(2):151–166. doi:10.3171/2010.
9.SPINE091005
Stephans KL, Djemil T, Tendulkar RD, Robinson CG, Reddy CA,
Videtic GM (2012) Prediction of chest wall toxicity from lung
stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT). Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 82(2):974–980. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.12.002,
S0360-3016(10)03634-5[pii]
Takeda A, Ohashi T, Kunieda E, Sanuki N, Enomoto T, Takeda T,
Oku Y, Shigematsu N (2012) Comparison of clinical, tumourrelated and dosimetric factors in grade 0–1, grade 2 and grade 3
radiation pneumonitis after stereotactic body radiotherapy for
lung tumours. Br J Radiol 85(1013):636–642. doi:10.1259/
bjr/71635286, 71635286[pii]
Timmerman R, Paulus R, Galvin J, Michalski J, Straube W, Bradley J,
Fakiris A, Bezjak A, Videtic G, Johnstone D, Fowler J, Gore E,
Choy H (2010) Stereotactic body radiation therapy for inoperable
early stage lung cancer. JAMA 303(11):1070–1076. doi:10.1001/
jama.2010.261, 303/11/1070[pii]
Tse RV, Hawkins M, Lockwood G, Kim JJ, Cummings B,
Knox J, Sherman M, Dawson LA (2008) Phase I study of
individualized stereotactic body radiotherapy for hepatocellular carcinoma and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. J Clin
Oncol 26(4):657–664
Voroney JP, Hope A, Dahele MR, Purdie TG, Franks KN,
Pearson S, Cho JB, Sun A, Payne DG, Bissonnette JP,
Bezjak A, Brade AM (2009) Chest wall pain and rib fracture
after stereotactic radiotherapy for peripheral non-small cell
lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol 4(8):1035–1037. doi:10.1097/
JTO.0b013e3181ae2962, 01243894-200908000-00019[pii]
Wang H, Shiu A, Wang C, O’Daniel J, Mahajan A, Woo S,
Liengsawangwong P, Mohan R, Chang EL (2008) Dosimetric effect of translational and rotational errors for
patients undergoing image-guided stereotactic body radiotherapy for spinal metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
71(4):1261–1271. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.02.074, S03603016(08)00529-4[pii]
Welsh J, Thomas J, Shah D, Allen PK, Wei X, Mitchell K, Gao S,
Balter P, Komaki R, Chang JY (2011) Obesity increases the
risk of chest wall pain from thoracic stereotactic body
radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 81(1):91–96.
doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.04.022, S0360-3016(10)005985[pii]
Woody NM, Videtic GM, Stephans KL, Djemil T, Kim Y, Xia P
(2012) Predicting chest wall pain from lung stereotactic body
radiotherapy for different fractionation schemes. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 83(1):427–434. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.06.
1971, S0360-3016(11)02859-8[pii]

27

Erratum: Primary Liver Cancer
Higinia R. Cárdenes and Foster Lasley
Erratum to:
Page 171 in S. S. Lo et al., Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy,
Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2012_548

‘‘In line with the previously described studies, our
data further support the safety of SBRT for HCC, with
only 13% of all patients with a CTP score B 7
experiencing an increase of\1 grade in hematologic/
hepatic dysfunction. There was a relationship between
pretreatment CTP score and development of toxicity
in any form (p =0.035) and the occurrence of an
increase in \ 1 grade in hematologic/hepatic
dysfunction (p = 0.008).’’

Should read as
‘‘In line with the previously described studies, our
data further support the safety of SBRT for HCC, with
only 13% of all patients with a CTP score B 7
experiencing an increase of [1 grade in hematologic/
hepatic dysfunction. There was a relationship between
pretreatment CTP score and development of toxicity
in any form (p = 0.035) and the occurrence of an
increase in [1 grade in hematologic/hepatic
dysfunction (p = 0.008).’’

The online version of the original can be found under
10.1007/174_2012_548.
H. R. Cárdenes (&)  F. Lasley
Department of Clinical Radiation Oncology,
Indiana University School of Medicine, 535 Barnhill Dr,
RT 041, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA
e-mail: hcardene@iupui.edu

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-25605-9_9645, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

E1

28

Erratum: Bone Metastasis
Mirna Abboud, Arnold C. Paulino, B. S. Teh,
Simon S. Lo, and Rex Marco
Erratum to:
Page 345 in S. S. Lo et al., Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy,
Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/174_2012_641

The correct order of Authors are Mirna Abboud,
Arnold C. Paulino, Simon S. Lo, Rex Marco and
Bin S. Teh.

The online version of the original can be found under
10.1007/174_2012_641.
M. Abboud  A. C. Paulino  B. S. Teh (&)
Department of Radiation Oncology,
The Methodist Hospital,
Cancer Center and Research Institute,
6565 Fannin, Houston, TX 77030, USA
e-mail: bteh@tmhs.org
S. S. Lo
Department of Radiation Oncology,
University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center,
Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
R. Marco
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
University of Texas Health Science Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-25605-9_9646, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

E3

Index

cH2AX, 132
IV/XRCC4/XLF complex, 131
18F-fluoroazomycin arabinoside, 263
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission
tomography (FDG-PET), 229
18F-fluoroerythronitroimidazole, 263
18F-FMISO, 263
2D kV imaging, 80
2D real-time fluoroscopic imaging, 80
3-aminopyridine-2-carboxaldehyde
thiosemicarbazone (3-AP, TriapineÒ), 222
3D conformal radiation therapy, 203
3D surface tracking, 27
4D computed tomography (CT), 4, 61, 92, 100, 118, 141,
145, 202, 229, 289, 324, 350
4D positioning, 56
5-fluorouracil, 222
6 degree of positional freedom, 39
6-degree-of-freedom HexaPOD RT treatment couch, 88
6D robotic couch, 56, 57
6D skull tracking, 40
53BP1, 132
89-strontium (89 Sr), 346
153-samarium (153 Sm), 346
600 SR unit, 21

A
AAPM task group
101 Report, 116, 120
142 Report, 121
179 report, 121
53 Report, 119
66 Report, 118
75 Report, 43
Abdominal and chest wall injury, 312
Abdominal compression, 4, 61, 85, 100, 101, 106,
202, 287, 324
Abdominal compression device, 25
Ablative, 1, 348
dose range, 394
radiation, 6
therapies, 332
Abscopal, 200

Abscopal effect, 124, 203, 332
Acceptance testing, 117
Accuracy, 58
Active breathing control, 4, 86, 100, 289
AcurosÒ XB, 62
Acute skin reactions, 102
Acute toxicities, 244, 245
Adaptive gating, 146
Adenoid cystic carcinoma, 277
Adhesion formation, 219
Administration, 118
Adrenalectomy, 322, 323
Adrenal
function preservation, 327
insufficiency, 323
metastases from NSCLC, 325
metastases, 321, 324
metastasis from lung cancer, 325
Agent AZD6244 (selumetinib), 222
AgilityTM, 82
Alpha cradle, 229, 240, 356
Amifostine (Ethyol), 127
Amorphous silicon
detector panel, 88
flat panel detectors, 28
panel, 80
Analytical anisotropic algorithm (AAA), 62, 108, 142
Aneurysmal bone cyst, 242
Angiosarcoma, 244
Anthropomorphic phantom images, 70
Anthropomorphic phantoms, 63
Antibody-dependent cytotoxicity, 125
Anti-mutagenic effects, 127
Apoptosis, 124, 313
AQ4N, 131
Arc, 359
Arc therapy, 143
Artemis, 131
Artifacts, 357, 359
ASMase, 3
ASTRO guidelines, 351
ASTRO white paper, 121
ATM, 131
ATM-Chk2 pathway, 132

S. S. Lo et al. (eds.), Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy, Medical Radiology. Radiation Oncology,
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-25605-9, Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

411

412

A (cont.)
ATR, 131
ATR/Chk1/Cdc25 pathway, 132
Automated image registration, 217
Automated isointensity contouring, 255
Automated registration, 28
Automatic fusion, 72
Automatic registration, 71
Axesse, 80, 88

B
Background cutoff method, 255
Balloon kyphoplasty, 364
Base of tongue cancer, 279
Beam, 82
arrangements, 101
modifying devices, 103
modulator, 88
setup, 92
weights, 103
Beamlets, 104
Beam-on time, 55
Biliary stricture, 231
Binary multileaf collimator, 68
Biologically effective dose (BED), 91, 142, 199
Biphasic CTs, 101
Bisphosphonates, 346
Bladder fibrosis, 219
Body cradle, 4
BodyFIX, 85, 88
BodyFIX molds, 216
BodyFIX system, 356
Bolus effect, 399
Bone
tissue technique, 70
metastases, 345, 346
Bone-only metastases, 336
Bone-targeting radioisotopes, 346
Bone technique, 70
Bony landmarks, 146, 356, 359
Boost, 218, 251, 269
Bowel perforation, 230
Bowel stenosis, 219
Bowel toxicity, 312
BRCA-1, 132
BRCA-2, 132
Brachial plexopathy, 155, 406, 366, 406
Brachial plexus, 252
Bragg peak, 148
Brain, 272
Brain-LAB ExacTracÒ_ system, 256
BrainLAB AG, 146
BrainLAB Robotic Patient Alignment system, 56
BrainLAB, 22, 54, 62
Brainstem, 272
Brain stem necrosis, 277
Breast cancer, 333, 336, 363
Breath-hold, 61, 86, 142
Breath-hold CT scanning, 100
Breathholding, 141

Index
Bronchial tolerance, 399, 400
Bronchoscopic implantation, 43
Brown-Roberts-Wells (BRW) coordinate system, 13
BRW ring, 17

C
Camptothecin, 222
Carotid aneurysm, 277
Carotid artery, 272
Carotid artery blowout, 280
Carotid blowout, 257, 259
Case examples, 296, 314
Cauda equina, 241, 357
CBCT, 81, 120, 121
CDK1, 132
Cell cycle dependency, 214
Cellular radiosensitivity, 126
Cerrobend blocks, 103
Chambers, 119
Charged particles, 13
disequilibrium, 106
equilibrium, 107
Checklists, 121
Chemotherapy, 218, 230, 346
Chest wall pain, 155, 398
Chest wall toxicities, 396, 397, 399
Child-Pugh A, 402
Child-Pugh B, 402
Child-Pugh B cirrhosis, 401
Child-Pugh class, 402
Child-Pugh classification, 401
ChK1, 132
Chk2, 132
Chondrosarcoma, 240, 242, 244, 245
Chordoma, 240, 241, 243–245
Chromosomal aberrations, 125
Chronic chest wall pain, 396
Chronic neuropathy, 144
Cine loop, 81
ClarityTM, 81
Clinical
applications, 212
control, 360
trials, 218
Clinical target volume (CTV), 92, 120, 142, 217, 241, 271, 356
Clofarabine, 222
Clonogenic survival rate, 124
Cobalt-Gray equivalents (CGE), 148
Cochlea, 272
Collapsed cone convolution, 108
Collimators, 15
Colorectal cancer, 335
Colorectal cancer metastases, 333
Commissioning, 117
Comorbidities, 139
Complex motion, 228
Complications, 212
Compression fractures, 360, 403
Compton scattering, 69
Computed tomography (CBCT), 80, 302, 307, 308

Index
Concentric ring, 399, 400
Concurrent cetuximab, 257
Concurrent chemotherapy, 257, 337
Cone beam, 80
Cone beam computed tomography, 28, 29, 59, 145,
256, 324, 359
Cone beam imaging, 273
Conformality, 56
Conformation number, 109
Conformity index, 109, 120
Contextual synthetic lethality, 129
Continuous 3D imaging, 28
Continuous intra-fractional image guidance, 39
Continuous tracking, 28
Contrast properties, 72
Contrast resolution, 81
Conventionally fractionated radiotherapy, 140
Convolution method, 107
Convolution-superposition, 119
Convolution/superposition method, 107
Coplanar, 142
Cord dose, 362
Correlation model, 147
Cranial nerve involvement, 269
Cranial neuropathies, 280
CRC oligometastases to any organ site, 335
Critical, 396
Critical volume, 3
Critical volume model, 396, 402
Cryotherapy, 198
CTCAE, 219
CT dose index, 60
CT myelogram, 357
CT slice thicknesses, 100
CT-on-rail, 5, 26, 145, 256, 273, 324, 359
CTV expansion, 271
Custom cradle, 240
Customized body cradles, 271
Cutaneous malignancies, 269
CyberKnife, 4, 5, 21, 28, 37, 50, 146, 203, 212, 228, 242, 244,
256, 257, 270, 307–310, 312–314, 316, 317, 324,
356, 358, 359, 404
Cyclotron, 13
Cylindrical gold markers, 43

D
Dampening, 4
Decompression surgery, 364
Dedifferentiated liposarcoma, 244
Deep inspiration breath-hold, 289
Deep tissue fibrosis, 219
Delayed radioprotective effect, 127
Delineation of the spinal cord, 240
Dental impression, 87
Deoxypyridinoline, 347
Detector response function, 120
Diaphragmatic excursion, 86, 142
Diarrhea, 233
Diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon
monoxide (DLCO), 139

413
Diffusion-limited hypoxia, 128
Digital imaging and communications
in medicine (DICOM), 45
Digitally reconstructed radiograph (DRR), 26, 28, 230,
309, 350
Disease-free interval, 274
Distant metastasis, 151
DNA-end binding Ku complex, 131
DNA double strand breaks (DSBs), 129
DNA free radicals, 129
DNA-PKcs, 131
DNA-radical, 129
Dose
avoidance priorities, 217
calculation, 92
color wash, 75
conformality, 47
constraints, 350, 397
depression, 55
escalation study, 272
fall-off, 47
fractionation schemes, 348
gradients, 116, 403
heterogeneity, 102, 103
painting, 203
Rate Factor, 126
volume histogram, 229
Dose-limiting organ, 233
Dosimetric accuracy test, 121
Dosimetric heterogeneity, 280
Dosimetrist, 117
Dosimetry, 291
Duodenal
perforation, 231
stomach dose, 229
stricture, 231
tolerance, 234, 402
toxicity, 234, 402
ulcers, 230
Duodenitis, 233
Duodenum, 233
Duodenum proximity, 228
During swallowing, 254
Dynamic, 104
arc delivery, 22
conformal arcs (DCA), 69, 102, 326
dose distribution, 147
jaws, 83
micro MLCs, 83
MRI, 254, 357
multileaf collimation, 55
target tracking, 146
tracking, 147

E
Eclipse, 62
Eclipse treatment planning system, 30
Effective path length, 46
Electron affinity, 129
Electronic path length (EPL), 147

414

E (cont.)
Electronic portal imaging device (EPID), 54, 60
Elekta AB, 79
Elekta
extend system, 269
HeadFix, 87
precise TM table, 84
sentinel position monitoring system, 87
synergy, 146
synergy-S, 82, 212, 359
Eligibility criteria, 218, 273, 309, 310, 337, 360
Emphysema, 142
Empiric approach, 125
Endocrinopathies, 280
Endothelial apoptosis, 3
Endothelial cell ASMase, 253
End-to-end alignment, 121
Enhanced cytotoxicity, 222
Enteric fistulas, 219
Entrance dose, 102
Ependymomas, 243
Epidural component, 240
Epidural spinal cord compression, 365
Epilation, 219
Equipment QA, 121
Erythema, 219
Esophageal ulceration, 154
Esophageal toxicity, 245, 399, 400
Esophagus, 272
Esthesio neuroblastoma, 269
e-Stop, 50
Etanidazole, 129
Etoposide, 222
ETX, 57, 58, 60
Evacuated pelvic bean bags, 216
ExacTrac (Novalis Body SystemTM), 146
ExacTrac system, 273
ExacTrac X-ray 6D, 359
ExacTracÒ, 56–58, 60–62
Excessive toxicity, 269
Expiration-hold CT, 45
Extensive necrosis, 261
External
beam radiotherapy, 323
fiducials, 80
markers, 61
External beam radiation therapy (EBRT), 346
Extracranial, 9
Extracranial fiducial tracking, 49
Extracranial organ sites, 1
Extramedullary intradural tumors, 243

F
Fatal hemorrhage, 277
FDG-PET, 100
Feature-point-based method, 45
Fibromyxosarcomas, 244
Fibrosis, 156
Fiducial, 4, 100, 101, 216
gold seeds, 269

Index
marker tracking, 39
markers, 43, 202, 217, 324, 326
migration, 43, 49
tracking, 41
Fiducial-based stereotactic targeting, 29
Field geometry, 103
Field-in-field planning, 103
Fistula, 220, 244
Flattening filter free beams, 54, 55
Flattening-filter-free mode, 143
Flattening filter-free (FFF) photon modes, 29
Floor stand linac radiosurgery systems, 18
Fluoroscopic X-ray imaging system, 146
Fluoroscopy, 121
FOLFIRINOX, 236
Follow-up imaging, 312
Forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), 139
Form-fitting pillows, 271
Forward planning, 103
Four-dimensional, 308
Four-dimensional (4D) CT, 141
Four-dimensional computed tomography, 289
Fractional cell kill, 214
Fractionated SBRT, 294
Fractionated Stereotactic Boost, 277
Fractionation schedules, 347
Frameless SBRT, 212
Frameless SBRT techniques, 254
Frameless stereotactic radiation therapy system, 324
Fraxion system, 87
Free-breathing, 141
Full-body stereotactic frame, 26
Full Width at Half Maximum, 70
Functional subunits (FSUs), 2
Fusion, 357
Future directions, 318

G
G1/S cell cycle, 216
Gamma Knife, 14, 15, 80
Gastric outlet obstruction, 233
Gastritis, 233
Gastroenteritis, 219
Gastrointestinal bleeding, 233
Gated phase, 230
Gated radiographs, 121
Gated RapidArc, 229
Gating, 4, 61
Gemcitabine chemotherapy, 230
Generalized linear quadratic model (gLQ), 3, 126, 212, 254
Geographical radiation miss, 217
Giant cell tumor of bone, 242
Gill-Thomas-Cosman head frame, 277
Goggles, 142
Gold anchor fiducial, 43
Graphics processing unit, 76
Gravity sag effect, 82
Gross tumor volume (GTV), 120, 142, 229, 240, 324, 356
GTV delineation, 271
Gynecologic cancer, 211, 218

Index
H
Head frame (Leksell Stereotactic System
Coordinate Frame), 269
Head rest plate, 44
HeadFix, 88
Helical scanner, 69
Helical Tomotherapy, 203
Hemangioblastomas, 243, 244
Hematuria, 219
Hemibody irradiation, 347
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), 401
Heterogeneity correction, 46, 63, 151
Heterogeneity correction algorithms, 143
Heterogeneity index, 109, 120
Heterotetrameric enzyme, 216
HexaPOD, 84
HexaPOD evo RT couchtop, 88
HexaPOD evo RT tabletop, 84
Hidden target tests, 58, 60
HIF-1a inhibitors, 131
HIF-1a targeting agents, 129
HIFa, 199
High-definition MLC (HD120TM), 55
High-definition multileaf collimator (MLC), 54
High-dose-rate beams, 55
High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU), 198
Histology-specific, 363
Homogeneous, 142
Homologous recombination (HR), 131
Hormonal therapy, 346
Hounsfield units, 143
Hydroxyurea, 222
Hyperbaric oxygen, 220
Hypofractionated, 324
Hypofractionated carbon ion therapy, 244
Hypofractionated proton therapy, 149
Hypofractionation, 332
Hypoxia, 216
Hypoxia-activated pro-drugs, 129
Hypoxia-associated radiation resistance, 131
Hypoxia-associated tumor radioresistance, 133
Hypoxia-Inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), 131
Hypoxia-Inducible factor 1a (HIF-1a), 216
Hypoxic
cell radiosensitizers, 132
cell sensitizers, 129
regions, 263

I
ICRU 50/62, 120
Image fusion, 56, 255
Image fusion capability, 271
Image guidance, 10, 25, 72, 120, 253
Image-guided radiation therapy (IGRT), 68, 80, 200,
253, 292
Image-guided tracking, 146
Imaging, 117, 118
Imaging-based delineation, 255
Imaging protocol, 73
Imaging time, 50

415
Immobilization, 117, 118, 141, 240, 269, 287, 356, 363
Immobilization techniques, 269
Immune modulated effect, 124
Immune modulation, 125
Immunogenic effect, 124
Implantation-related pneumothorax, 146
Implanted fiducials, 25, 230
markers, 37, 146
seeds, 229
IMRT-based treatment planning, 256
Infrared, 28, 54
Infrared-based navigation system, 27
Infrared imaging, 242
Infrared tracking, 84, 271
Inhomogeneity, 126
Integral Doses, 126
Intempo, 40
Intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), 68, 103, 120,
203, 326, 357
Intensity modulation, 138
Intensity modulated proton
therapy (IMPT), 143, 148
Intensity-modulated protons, 326
Interfraction, 253
Interfraction motion assessment, 73
Internal
carotid arteries, 252
fixation, 346
organ motion, 306
Internal gross tumor volume (iGTV), 141
Internal target volume (ITV), 4, 43, 61, 92, 120, 229
Interplay effect, 105
Interstitial fibrosis, 142
Intradural tumors, 242
Intrafraction, 253
Intrafraction motion assessment, 73
Intrafraction target motion, 105
Intrafractional
motion, 103, 254, 359, 404, 405
motion control, 240
patient motion, 273
tumor motion control, 308
variation, 273
Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, 401
Intralesionalresection, 239, 240
Intramedullary spinal cord tumors, 243
Inverse optimization, 146
Inverse planning, 103
Inverse treatment planning, 240, 357
iPlan, 55–56, 62, 63
IRIS, 39
IRIS collimator, 212
Isocentric device, 16
Isocentric treatment planning, 47
Isoeffect plots, 124
Isolated adrenalmetastases, 326
Isotropic, 29
Isotropic fall-off, 4
Iterative edge matching algorithm, 28
Iterative optimization, 48
ITV, 4

416
J
Japanese Clinical Oncology Group (JCOG) 0403 trial, 150, 153
Japanese Clinical Oncology Group (JCOG), 150

K
Kilovoltage cone-beam CT (kVCBCT), 5, 146, 242
kVCT, 359
kV stereoscopic X-ray, 146
kV-stereoscopic images, 350
Kyphoplasty, 360

L
Lamina, 357
Langerhans cell histiocytosis, 242
Laparoscopic adrenalectomy, 323
Lars Leksell, 13
Laryngeal cancer, 279
Larynx, 272
Laserbased systems, 86
Late effects, 348
Late toxicity, 244, 338
Lateral electron equilibrium, 63
Lateral electron scattering, 108
Leaf alignment, 55
Leaf speed, 82
Leaf transmission, 55
LED markers, 218
Leiomyosarcomas, 244
Lenses, 272
Light-emitting diodes (LED), 218
Linac radiosurgery, 17
Linear accelerator, 13
Linac-based delivery systems, 92
Linear accelerator-based stereotactic
body radiation therapy, 7
Linear accelerator-based, 271
Linear algebra method, 48
Linear Boltzman transport equation, 119
Linear Boltzmann transport model, 62
Linear Quadratic model (LQ model), 3, 125, 199, 253
Liver metastases, 310, 314, 335, 401
Lobectomy, 139
Local fusion, 45
Localization, 117
Locally advanced or recurrent head and neck cancer, 263
Locally advanced pancreatic cancer, 230, 232, 402
Low contrast resolution, 72
Low grade chondrosarcomas, 242
Lumbar plexopathy, 364, 366
Lung
fibrosis, 127
metastases, 287
optimized treatment (LOT), 40, 43
window, 142

M
Machine beam-on time, 50
Macroscopic effect, 124

Index
Macroscopic tissue effect, 125
Magnetic resonance imaging, 308
Magnetron, 69
Malignant extradural spinal tumors, 244
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, 242
Mandible, 252, 272
Manual corrections, 71
Manual fusion, 45
Marker migration, 62
Marker-less tracking capability, 147
Match-pair analyses, 6, 362
Mathematical model, 125
Maximum intensity projection (MIP), 100, 142, 350
Maximum tolerated dose, 230, 334
Mean lung dose (MLD), 394
Mechanical accuracy, 53
Mechanical flex, 59
Mechanistic approach, 125
Medical Intelligence BodyFix system, 324
Medical physicist, 117
Medically inoperable, 138
Megavoltage cone-beam CT (MVCBCT), 145
Melanoma, 336, 349, 363
Meningiomas, 242, 243
Meta-analyses, 348
Metabolic targeting, 217
Metachronous metastases, 323, 328
Metastasectomy, 198
Metastases, 38
Metastases to any site, 336
Metastasis-directed therapy, 322, 332–334
Metastatic disease to the head
and neck region, 259
Metastatic epidural compression, 365
Metronidazole, 129
Micro-multileaf collimators, 20
Microwave thermotherapy, 198
Mid-ventilation scans, 100
MIP with visual Modification, 142
Misonidazole, 129
Mitigation, 127
Mitsubishi C-arm Linac, 22
MLC transmission, 83
Modulated arc therapy (VMAT), 102
Modulation, 69
Modulation factor, 69
ModulatorTM, 82
ModuLeaf MLC, 20
Molded intraoral devices, 271
Monte Carlo, 46, 47, 108, 119, 142, 147
Monte Carlo model, 62, 63
Monte Carlo simulations, 107
Motion
due to swallowing and breathing, 254
management, 38, 86, 92, 117, 144
predictive model, 41
suppression, 106
Visualization, 70
MR-CT registration, 255
MRE11, 131
Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1 (MRN) complex, 131

Index
MRI, 101, 255
MU optimization, 145
Mucosal necrosis, 277
Multi-compartmental tumor involvement, 239
Multileaf collimator (MLC), 80, 103
Multi-modality image fusion, 45
Multimodality therapy, 242
Multiplan, 47
Multiplan treatment planning system, 45
Multiple
dynamic conformal arcs, 102
scan average doses, 72
static coplanar beams, 143
static noncoplanar beams, 143
MVCT, 324, 359
Myelogram, 240, 404, 405
Myelography, 241
Myeloma, 365
Myelopathy, 245, 366

N
Nasopharyngeal cancer, 274, 279
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma, 279
nBED, 405
NCIC SC20, 348
Near realtime respiratory tracking, 230
Near real-time tracking, 359
Near-rigid body immobilization, 404
Necrosis, 131
Nerve injury, 366
Neurofibromas, 242, 243
Neurofibromatoses, 242
Neurotron 1000, 21
Nimorazole, 130
Nitroimidazole based drugs, 129
NLCQ-1, 131
Nodes, 46
Noise, 72
Nominal standard dose, 124
Nonadenocarcinoma histology, 334
Non-coplanar, 142
Non-coplanar beams, 62
Non-homologous end-joining repair (NHEJ), 131
Non-invasive head frame, 269
Non-isocentric treatment planning, 47
Non-skull base head and neck cancer, 251, 256
Non-small cell lung cancer, 38, 138, 287, 334
Non-swallowing state, 254
Normal cell depopulation, 213
Normal inspiration-hold CT, 45
Normal tissue complication probabilities (NTCPS), 401
Normal tissue constraints, 229, 401, 407, 408
Normal tissue dose tolerances, 103
Normal tissue tolerance, 212, 394
Normoxia, 216
Novalis, 28, 203, 257
Novalis system, 273
Novalis TxTM, 22, 53, 54, 59, 64
Novalis-shaped beam radiosurgery system, 22
Nucleotide insufficiency, 132

417
O
OARs, 3, 5, 394
OBI, 359
Objectives, 122
Obliquity correction, 46
Obstruction, 219
Off-central ratio (OCR), 46
Oligometastases, 202, 332, 334
Oligometastases from any primary site, 333
Oligometastases from prostate cancer, 337
Oligometastatic breast cancer, 337
oligometastatic disease, 293, 322, 334
Oligometastatic lesions, 333
On-board Imager, 59
On-board Imaging, 54, 80, 92, 217, 273, 324, 359
On-board kV imaging, 80
Optic
camera system, 39
chiasm, 272
image guidance, 38
motion tracking system, 39
nerve and chiasm tolerance, 279
nerves, 272
structures, 272
Optical tracking, 61, 83, 121
Optical tracking system (IR), 41, 146
Optically tracked ultrasound probe, 81
Optimal beam arrangement, 143
Optimization algorithms, 47
Optimized fluence maps, 104
Optimizer, 69
Organ motion, 405
Organs-at-risk (OARs), 46, 68, 80, 91, 138, 240, 256, 272, 274,
287, 356, 394
Organ-specific, 332
Organ-specific oligometastases, 332
O-ring gantry, 29
Osteoblastic metastases, 346
Osteoblastoma, 242
Osteogenic sarcoma, 240, 242
Osteoid osteoma, 242
Output factor (OF), 46
Oxygen, 129
Oxygen enhancement ratio (OER), 129
Oxygen-mimicking agents, 129

P
Paclitaxel, 222
Pain control, 351
Pain Relief, 244, 360
Pancreatic cancer, 38
Para-aortic nodes, 218
Paraspinal region, 242
Particle radiosurgery, 14
Passive-scattering proton therapy (PSPT), 148
Path, 46
Pathologic fracture, 346, 347
Patient alignment, 71
Patient selection, 138, 294
Pattern matching algorithm, 28

418

P (cont.)
Pattern of recurrence, 252
Patterns of Failure, 365
PD98059, 222
Peak motions, 254
Pedicles, 241, 357
Pencil beam, 107
Pencil beam algorithm, 63, 118
Penumbras, 55
Perfexion Gamma Knife, 269
Perfex-IonTM, 15
Perfusion-limited hypoxia, 128
Peripheral lung tumors, 139
Peripheral nerve dysfunction, 407
Persistent pneumonitis, 156
PET/CT, 203, 255
Phase I, 230, 279
dose escalation study, 202
dose escalation trial, 401, 402
study, 279, 334
trial, 272, 401
Phase I/II study, 402
Phase I/II, 363, 366
Phase I/II trial, 6, 401
Phase II, 230, 334, 363, 369
Phase II chemorefractory gynecologic
malignancies, 219
Phase II study, 335
Phase II trail, 357, 403
Phase III, 369
Phase III trials, 6
Photoelectric Effect, 69
Pitch, 69, 70
Plan objectives, 103
Planar kV, 120
Planar MV, 120
Planning organ-at-risk volume (PRV), 357, 405
Planning treatment volume (PTV), 4, 5, 68, 100, 118, 120, 142,
229, 271, 324, 394, 405
Pneumothorax, 44, 62
Poly ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP), 132
Positional Errors, 273
Positional variations, 404
Positioning, 141
Positron emission tomography (PET), 217, 271, 307
Positron emission tomography/computed
tomography, 307, 309
Posterior, 241
Posterior elements, 366
Postoperative pulmonary function, 139
Postoperative treatment, 356
Potential DNA-end processing enzymes, 131
PreciseTM, 82
Preclinical Studies, 200
Primary liver tumors, 38
Primary spinal tumors, 239, 240
Prioritization, 272
Probabilistic models, 46
Process QA, 121
Pro-drugs, 130
Prospective trials, 363

Index
Prostate cancer, 38, 333, 337
Proton therapy, 148
Protons, 13, 326
PRV, 120, 366
PTV margins, 255
Pulmonary dysfunction, 394
Pulse repetition frequency, 69
Pyridinoline, 347

Q
Quality assurance, 5, 118, 144, 356
Quality control program, 117
Quality of life, 349
Quantitative analysis of normal tissue effect
in the clinic, 298, 402

R
R50, 109
RAD50, 131
Radiation
cystitis, 219
dose rate, 214
myelitis, 366
myelopathy, 243, 366, 403
oncologists, 116
pneumonitis, 126, 153, 394
resistance, 214
Radiation therapy and oncology group (RTOG), 142, 236, 357,
396, 397, 400
Radiation-induced Chromosomal Aberrations, 124
Radiation-induced liver disease (RILD), 310, 401, 402
Radiation-related retinopathy, 277
Radiation-sensitive structures, 274
Radical nephrectomy, 198
Radical Scavenger, 127
Radiculopathy, 244, 366
Radiobiological effectiveness, 216
Radiobiological models, 103
Radiobiology, 214
Radio frequency ablation (RFA), 140, 198
Radio frequency tracking, 121
Radio-graphic control, 360
Radiological path-length, 106, 107
Radiological Physics Center, 121
Radio opaque markers, 28, 120
Radioresistant, 199, 336
Radioresistant tumor, 240, 245, 349, 350
Radio sensitizing effect, 129
Rapid Arc, 60, 324, 326
Rapid target motion, 43
Ray-tracing function, 46
Real-time correction, 146
Real-time imaging, 273
Real-time infrared (IR), 146
Real-time localization, 269
Real-time motion tracking, 44
Real-time Position ManagementTM, 62
Real-time tracking, 356
Realtime tumor-tracking, 29, 326

Index
Re-assortment, 124
Receptor activator of nuclear factor j B (RANK), 347
RECIST criteria, 156
Rectal bleeding, 219
Recurrence after radiation therapy, 251
Recurrent
head and neck cancer, 252, 257
nasopharyngeal cancers, 277
spinal metastases, 356, 364
tumors, 269
vulvar cancer, 218
Recursive partitioning analysis (RPA), 365
Reduced bladder capacity, 219
Regional lymph node recurrence, 151
Reichert-Mundinger stereotactic frame, 17
ReiMaging, 72
Re-irradiation, 151, 251, 252, 259, 269, 272, 280, 366
Re-irradiation spinal cord tolerance, 406
Relative biological effectiveness (RBE), 148
Renal cell carcinoma, 198, 333, 336, 349, 350, 363
Renal failure, 233
Reoxygenation, 124, 216
Repositioning, 72
Residual error, 59, 404
Resolution, 71
Respiratory
compression devices, 118
cycle, 141
gated radiation therapy, 292
gating, 14, 106
motion, 118, 218
motion assessment, 121
motion control, 4
motion management, 80
tracking, 229
Respiratory-gated treatment delivery, 64
Respiratory-gated treatment, 229
Retinae, 272
Retreatment, 348
Retreatment of nasopharyngeal cancers, 269
Rib fracture, 144, 155, 396–398
Ribonucleotide reductase (RNR), 132, 216, 221
Rigid anatomical landmarks, 217
Rigid-body adjustment, 70
Risk-adapted dosing, 228
Robo-Couch, 257
Robot traveling time, 50
Robotic, 359
Robotic arm, 269
Robotic couch top, 54, 84
Robotic manipulator, 37, 39, 147
ROSEL, 151
Rotating gamma system, 15
Rotational, 44, 49
Rotational correction, 359
Rotational errors, 58
Rotational treatments, 104
Rotation period, 69
Rotations, 84, 404
RTOG, 369, 396, 397, 399, 400
RTOG 0517, 346

419
RTOG 0631, 351
RTOG 1021, 152
RTOG trials, 120

S
Sacral metastases, 349
Safety margin, 357
Salivary gland, 269, 272
Salvage therapy, 269
Sarcoma, 241, 336, 349
SBRT boost, 230
Scanning beam proton therapy, 148
Schwannomas, 242, 243
Schwannomatosis, 242
Seed migration, 229
Sequential optimization, 48
Severe toxicity, 327
Shoulders, 124
Siemens, 359
Sigmoiditis, 219
Simplex optimization, 48
Single fraction, 248, 347, 362
Single fraction biologically effective
dose (SFBED), 399, 400
Single fraction equivalent dose (SFED), 202
Single-fraction SBRT, 294
Sinonasal malignancies, 269
Six-degree-of-freedom, 84, 359, 404
Six-dimensional skull tracking, 39
Skeletal-related event, 346
Skin dose, 143
Skin toxicities, 399
Skull base, 269
Skull base tumors, 269, 272
Slice width, 69, 70
Slow CT scanning, 100
Small-cell lung cancer, 335
Small-field delivery, 82, 83
Soft tissue necrosis, 280
Soft tissue sarcoma, 242
Solitary adrenal metastasis, 322, 326
Solitary spinal metastases, 360
Source-detector Geometry, 72
Spatial resolution, 72
Spinal cord, 241, 252, 272, 357
compression, 356, 364
contouring, 404
dose constraint, 365
injury, 362
motion, 357
myelopathy, 154
tolerance, 366, 403
Spinal metastases, 202, 350, 355
Spinal radiosurgery, 26
Spinal tracking, 37
SRS 200 system, 19
Standardized uptake value (SUV), 255
STAT RT, 76
STAT1, 199
Static beams, 359

420

S (cont.)
Stationary compensators, 104
Steep dose gradients, 240
Step-and-shoot, 104, 229
Stereophotogrammetry, 27
Stereoscopic imaging systems, 56
Stereoscopic kV X-ray, 324
Stereoscopic X-ray, 5, 28, 22, 256, 273, 359
Stereotactic
body frame, 4, 23, 80, 100, 324, 356
boost, 269
head frame, 15
radiosurgery boost, 274
X-ray imaging system, 39
Stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR), 9, 23, 124, 138,
212, 355, 394
Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT), 1, 23, 38, 50, 53,
67, 71, 79, 91, 116, 124, 198, 200, 202, 212, 228,
239, 248, 251, 252, 269, 285–287, 306, 310, 322,
324, 332, 348–350, 355, 394
Stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS), 9
Stereotactic ultrasound (BAT), 27
Stereotaxis, 11, 13
Stomach, 233
Stomach or small bowel ulcers, 231
Streaking artifacts, 69
Structurally defined, 2
Structurally undefined, 2
Styrofoam casts, 216
Sublethal Lesions, 126
Sublobar, 153
Sublobar (wedge) resection, 139
Submillimeter accuracy, 41
Superoxide dismutase, 128
Surgical decompression, 245, 365
Surgical fixation, 346
Surrogates, 120
Symmetry, 81
Synchrocyclotron, 14
Synchronous metastases, 323, 328
Synchrony, 41, 49, 218, 230
Synchrony respiratory motion tracking, 39, 147
Synergy-S, 80, 88
SynergyTM, 80
Synovial sarcoma, 244
Synthetic lethality, 132
Systemic chemotherapy, 236

T
Target coverage, 109
Target delineation, 203, 229, 255, 290, 307
Target localizing system (TLS), 217
Target tracking, 38
Task Group 101, 64
Task Group Report No 101, 92
T-cell priming, 3
Temporal lobe necrosis, 277, 279
Thecal sac, 357, 366, 405
Therapist, 118
Thermoplastic immobilization masks, 254

Index
Thermoplastic mask, 44
Thoracoscore model, 139
Three polar coordinates, 13
Three-dimensional Conformal
Radiation Therapy, 103
Three-dimensional (3D) frame
of reference, 11
Three-dimensional imaging, 308
Threshold effects, 124, 125
Threshold method, 255
Tight conformality, 4
Time infrared (IR) system, 56
Time-weighted average position, 81
Tirapazamine, 131
Tissue electron density, 143
Tissue phantom ratio (TPR), 46
Tolerance, 252
TomoImages, 69, 75
Tomotherapy HD, 76
Tomotherapy Hi-ArtÒ, 68
TomoTherapy, 5, 212, 257, 359, 362
Tomotherapy-based SBRT, 336
Tonsillar cancer, 279
Toxicity, 6, 203, 295, 311, 351
Toxicity profile, 261
Tracheal or great vessel rupture, 154
Tracheoesophageal fistula, 399, 400
Tracking, 4, 37, 39, 229, 269
Transient pain flare, 245
Translational, 44, 80, 84
Translational positioning error, 404
Translational rotation correction, 216
Transitional, 49
Treatment
delivery, 49, 120
delivery systems, 117
delivery technique, 92
isocenter, 54
parameters, 212
planning, 92
planning constraints, 120
planning system, 118
Trials, 263
TrilogyTM, 230
True-Beam STx, 22, 30, 54, 60, 64
TrueBeamTM, 29, 230
T-shaped bar, 141
Tumor
burden, 335
deformation, 229
hypoxia, 124, 128
markers, 228
motion, 73
radioprotection, 127
sparing, 127
suppressor gene, 199
tracking, 106
volume definition, 255
Tumor-associated osteolysis, 347
Tungsten, 82
Tungsten collimators, 212

Index
U
Ulceration, 234
Ultrasound, 81
Undifferentiated sarcomas, 244
Uniformity, 72
Uniformity index, 72
Universal survival curve (USC), 254
Universal survival curve model, 3, 125, 212
Upper abdominal organs, 228
Ureteral stricture, 219
USC model, 3
User-defined regions-of-interest, 71
User-defined threshold, 147

V
Vac-lok cushion, 44
Vacuum bag, 4
Vacuum bag systems, 100
Vacuum cushion, 356
Vacuum-shaped molds, 101
Varian, 62
EclipseTM, 54
ETR couch, 22
ExactÒ, 56
IsoCal system, 60
Real-Time Position Management system (RPM), 229
Trilogy, 146, 257, 359
Vascular endothelial cell damage, 253
Vascular Injury, 124
Vertebral
body, 241, 357
body fracture, 245
fracture, 366, 402, 403

421
Video stereophotogrammetry, 27
Vinblastine, 222
Vincristine, 222
Visicoil, 43
Visual assessment, 255
Visual feedback, 142
VMAT (RapidArc), 145
Volume model, 396
Volumetric, 330
arcs, 138
images, 256
imaging modalities, 308
kV imaging, 28
Volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT), 5, 88, 143,
358, 359
von Hippel-Lindau syndrome, 242, 244

W
Wedges, 103
Whole Image, 70
Winston Lutz test, 81
Wound complications, 241
Wound toxicity, 241

X
XKnife planning system, 20
XKnife system, 20
X-ray imaging system (ETX), 39, 56
Xsight lung respiratory tracking system, 147
Xsight lung tracking, 39, 42
Xsight spine, 41
Xsight spine tracking, 41

