               AAPM REPORT NO. 116




        An Exposure Indicator
        for Digital Radiography



Report of AAPM Task Group 116


                      July 2009



DISCLAIMER: This publication is based on sources
 and information believed to be reliable, but the
 AAPM and the editors disclaim any warranty or
   liability based on or relating to the contents
                 of this publication.


   The AAPM does not endorse any products,
   manufacturers, or suppliers. Nothing in this
       publication should be interpreted
        as implying such endorsement.


© 2009 by American Association of Physicists in Medicine
 DISCLAIMER: This publication is based on sources and information believed to be reliable, but
the AAPM, the editors, and the publisher disclaim any warranty or liability based on or relating to
                                the contents of this publication.

     The AAPM does not endorse any products, manufacturers, or suppliers. Nothing in this
             publication should be interpreted as implying such endorsement.




                                    ISBN: 978-1-888340-86-0
                                        ISSN: 0271-7344


                   © 2009 by American Association of Physicists in Medicine



All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
 transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
                 otherwise) without the prior written permission of the publisher.



                                         Published by
                         American Association of Physicists in Medicine
                                     One Physics Ellipse
                                College Park, MD 20740-3846
                 AAPM REPORT NO. 116



            An Exposure Indicator
            for Digital Radiography


         Report of AAPM Task Group 116


                          Co-Chairs

                         S. Jeff Shepard
                          Jihong Wang
               Imaging Physics Department #056
                Division of Diagnostic Imaging
      The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
                       Houston, TX 77030


                    Task Group Members:

        Michael Flynn, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI
   Eric Gingold, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA
         Lee Goldman, Hartford Hospital, Hartford, CT
            Kerry Krugh, Toledo Hospital, Toledo OH
      David L. Leong, Analogic Corporation, Peabody, MA
Eugene Mah, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC
  Kent Ogden, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY
         Donald Peck, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI
         Ehsan Samei, Duke University, Chapel Hill, NC
    Charles E. Willis, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson
                  Cancer Center, Houston, TX




                               iii
                              ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


 TG-116 would like to recognize contributions from industry liaisons to the TG effort. This
acknowledgment was inadvertently left out of the original report. Many of these individuals
contributed materially to writing the appendices and all of them participated in meetings and
                     contributed to discussions. These individuals were:

                 Stephen Balter, Columbia Medical Center (IEC Liaison)
                     Patrick C. Brennan, University College, Dublin
                             Martin Darms, Swissray Medical
                               Uri Feldman, ICR Company
                      Bernhard Geiger, Siemens Medical Solutions
                                Kadri Jabri, GE Healthcare
                              David Leong, Analogic Corp.
                      Stephen W. Meyer, Canon Medical Systems
                          Christopher R. Mitchell, ALARA, Inc.
             Ulrich Neitzel, Philips Medical Systems, DIN/NAR, IEC WG43
         Ralph Schaetzing, Agfa Corporation (now with Carestream Health, Inc.)
          Robert A. Uzenoff, Fujifilm Medical Systems USA (Liaison: Fujifilm,
                               MITA CR & DR committee)
                  Rich Van Metter (Formerly Carestream Health, Inc.)
             Stephen Vastagh, National Electrical Manufacturers Association
                 Darren Werner, Konica Minolta Medical Imaging USA
                      Robin Winsor, Imaging Dynamics Company
                         John Yorkston, Carestream Health, Inc.
                        Wei Zhao, State University of New York
                                                             CONTENTS




       Abstract.............................................................................................................................   1
I.      Introduction ....................................................................................................................      1
II.     Definition of Terms..........................................................................................................          4
III. Recommendations...........................................................................................................                7
IV.     Standard Radiation Exposure Conditions ....................................................................                            8
        A.      Standard Beam Spectrum .........................................................................................                8
        B.      Standard Beam Geometry and Calibration Verification Procedure...........................                                       9
V.      Assessment of Indicated Equivalent Air Kerma (KIND) ................................................                                   12
VI. Reporting Deviation Index (DI) .....................................................................................                       14
VII. Clinical Use of the Deviation Index (DI).........................................................................                         15
VIII. Exposure Indicator and Radiographic Techniques ......................................................                                    16
IX. KIND and Automatic Exposure Control (AEC) Systems ...............................................                                          18
X.      Inappropriate Clinical Use of DI....................................................................................                   19
XI. Recommended Optional Features..................................................................................                            19
XII. Application to Dedicated Chest, Mammography,Veterinary,
     and Dental Radiography.................................................................................................                   20
References ................................................................................................................................. 21
Appendices
       A        RQA5 vs.TG-116 Standard Beam Conditions,
                XSPECT 3.5b Computation Simulation ...............................................................                             23
       B        Comparison of Pure Aluminum vs. Commercially Available
                Types 1100 and 1190 Aluminum and a Copper/Aluminum Alternative
                for RQA5 .................................................................................................................     33
       C        Current Status of Exposure Indices.......................................................................                      41
       D        Agfa CR...................................................................................................................     47
       E        Fujifilm FCR ..........................................................................................................        49
       F        Kodak CR (now Carestream Health, Inc.) ............................................................                            51
       G        Konica Minolta CR.................................................................................................             59
       H        Imaging Dynamics .................................................................................................             61
       I        Philips DigitalDiagnost Exposure Index ..............................................................                          63


                                                                        v
                                           CONTENTS (cont.)

J   GE Healthcare ........................................................................................................         67
K   Alara CR .................................................................................................................     69
L   Siemens Medical Systems ......................................................................................                 71
M   iCRco.......................................................................................................................   73
N   Canon Medical Systems .........................................................................................                77
O   SwissVision Dose Indicator....................................................................................                 85




                                                           vi
                                                   Abstract

    Digital radiographic imaging systems, such as those using photostimulable storage phosphor (PSP),
    amorphous selenium, amorphous silicon, charge-coupled device (CCD), and metal oxide semicon-
    ductor-field effect transistor (MOSFET) technology, can produce adequate image quality over a
    much broader range of exposure levels than that of screen/film imaging systems. In screen/film
    imaging, the final image brightness and contrast are indicative of over- and underexposure. In digital
    imaging, brightness and contrast are often determined entirely by digital post-processing of the
    acquired image data. Over- and underexposures are not readily recognizable. As a result, patient dose
    has a tendency to increase gradually over time after a department converts from screen/film-based
    imaging to digital radiographic imaging. The purpose of this report is to recommend a standard indi-
    cator which reflects the radiation exposure that is incident on a detector after every exposure event
    and that reflects the noise levels present in the image data. The intent is to facilitate the production of
    consistent, high-quality digital radiographic images at acceptable patient doses. This should be based
    not on image optical density or brightness, but on feedback regarding the detector exposure provided
    and actively monitored by the imaging system. A standard beam calibration condition is recom-
    mended that is based on RQA5, but uses filtration materials that are commonly available and simple
    to use. Recommendations on clinical implementation of the indices to control image quality and
    patient dose are derived from historical tolerance limits and presented as guidelines.

    Key words: digital radiography, direct digital radiography, indirect digital radiography, computed
    radiography, photostimulable storage phosphor, image quality, image noise, exposure index, quality
    control, quality assurance, acceptance testing.



I. Introduction
The charge of Task Group 116 (TG-116), as approved by the Science Council of the American
Association of Physicists in Medicine (AAPM) was to identify a method of providing feedback, in
the form of a standard index, to operators of digital radiographic systems, which reflects the ade-
quacy of the exposure that has reached the detector after every exposure event. This report is the
answer to that charge and will cover all digital radiographic image detector systems, leaving digital
fluorography or fluoroscopy (radioscopy) for future consideration.
     Unlike screen/film imaging, image display in digital radiography is independent of image acqui-
sition. Inadequate or excessive exposure is manifested as higher or lower image noise levels instead
of as a light or a dark image. The final brightness of the image is controlled not by the exposure to the
detector, but by post-processing applied to the acquired image data. Consequently, overexposed
images may not necessarily be dark, and underexposed images may not appear light. This may be a
new and confusing concept for operators of digital radiographic systems who are accustomed to
screen/film imaging.
     For more than a decade, the phenomenon of “exposure creep” in photostimulable storage phos-
phor (PSP) imaging has been reported.[1,2,3] This is attributed to the fact that digital imaging systems
can produce adequate image contrast over a much broader range of exposure levels than screen/film
imaging systems. This broad dynamic range is one of the benefits of digital detectors. However, if the
detector is underexposed, higher noise levels may obscure the presence of subtle details in the

                                                        1
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


image. Excessive detector exposures may produce high-quality images with improved noise charac-
teristics but at the expense of increased patient dose. In extreme cases, excessive detector exposures
may result in artifacts. As a result, most radiologists tend to complain about underexposed images
but remain silent when images are acquired at higher dose levels unless apparent saturation has
occurred. Technologists quickly learn that they can produce images of better quality if they increase
their exposure techniques, resulting in less noisy images and avoiding radiologist complaints about
noisy images. Average exposure levels tend to creep up over time if a clear indicator of exposure is
not provided and routinely monitored.
     Techniques required to achieve optimal radiographic imaging in Digital Radiography (DR) may
be different from those used for screen/film imaging. In addition, different DR detectors may require
different technique factors due to differences in the energy dependence of the detector materials in
use (see Figure 1).[4] These differences in technique among DR systems may cause confusion and
suboptimal image quality at sites where more than one type of system is in use. Operators need a
clear set of rules to produce consistent, high-quality digital radiographic imaging, based not on
image density but on feedback regarding the detector exposure provided.
     Several manufacturers currently use an exposure indicator that parallels the concept of “speed”
or “speed class” used by film manufacturers. In addition, many manufacturers and users have
become accustomed to characterizing their systems as functioning within a given speed class. This
has created some misunderstandings and scientific inaccuracies, which have been discussed in the
literature.[5]




Figure 1. Energy dependence of common detector materials.

                                                  2
                                                       AN EXPOSURE INDICATOR FOR DIGITAL RADIOGRAPHY


     TG-116 recommends avoiding the concept of “speed class” when referring to DR system per-
formance. The definition of radiographic speed according to ISO 9236-1[6] is based on the radiation
exposure required to achieve a net optical density of 1.0 on the developed film. With DR there is no
fixed relationship between the radiation exposure and the resultant density in the image. With
screen/film detectors a change in speed may also result in a change in the spatial resolution proper-
ties of the detector. This same relationship does not hold true with digital detectors since sharpness is
independent of the amount of exposure used to acquire the digital image.
     The characterization of a digital radiographic system as being in a given speed class may give the
false indication that it should always be operated at a specific exposure level. It may also give the
false impression that the resulting digital image will have the same noise and resolution characteris-
tics as that acquired with an equal speed class screen/film system. The digital system in reality can be
operated over a broad range of sensitivity since the amount of radiation exposure determines only the
level of quantum mottle and not the brightness of the image. From this context the level of radiation
exposure, and thus the so-called “speed class,” should be dependent upon the imaging task and upon
the observer’s tolerance of image noise. As a general rule, the As Low As Reasonably Achievable
(ALARA) concept should prevail in that the minimum amount of exposure, and hence the maximum
tolerable noise content, should be used to achieve the necessary diagnostic information.[7] Using the
speed class characterization for given digital imaging systems may increase the possibility that
ALARA is violated for some imaging tasks.
     An index of detector exposure is appropriate because it is reflective of the noise content, and thus
the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in the image. For DR systems, the appropriate incident exposure is
variable based on the desired SNR rather than on the resulting optical density of a radiograph.
Different digital detectors may require more or less radiation exposure to achieve the same noise
content depending upon the detective quantum efficiency (DQE) of the detector technology in use.
For a given system, the image noise content will track inversely with the detector exposure. As radia-
tion exposure to the detector increases, image noise will decrease and SNR will increase.
     A standardized indicator of the exposure incident on a DR detector that is consistent from manu-
facturer to manufacturer and model to model is needed. This could be used to monitor differences in
exposure between DR systems at a given institution, to compare techniques between institutions, or
to estimate the quality of images from a given radiographic system. It could also provide quality con-
trol (QC) data if software is provided to record and retrospectively analyze exposure data from all
systems.
     A standard indicator that reflects the radiation exposure that is incident on a detector after every
exposure event is appropriate. The detector exposure indicator is intended to reflect the noise levels
present in image data. An adequate exposure is one that results in an appropriate noise level in the
image as determined by the clinic where the system is in use. This report does not make recommen-
dations on exposure adequacy, nor does the indicator represent exposure to the patient.
     TG-116 considers the recommendations in this report to be achievable and important. It recog-
nizes that a parallel standard was recently completed within the International Electrotechnical
Commission (IEC), designated IEC 62494-1 Ed. 1: Medical electrical equipment - Exposure index of
digital x-ray imaging systems - Part 1: Definitions and requirements for general radiography. This
IEC standard specifies the definitions and calibration conditions for the detector exposure indices of
DR systems. The leadership of TG-116 participated in this IEC effort since its inception and served as
U.S. National Committee experts in IEC Working Group 43. The concepts and calibration conditions

                                                   3
AAPM REPORT NO. 116




Figure 2. Essential processes in the acquisition of a digital radiograph. KIND and DI are computed from Q values
using segmentation information.



in the IEC working draft are consistent with those in this report. While the terminology and definitions
in the IEC standard may differ in scale and nomenclature from those in this report, the IEC standard is
completely consistent with this report. Absolute adherence to the nomenclature, symbols, and multi-
plicative factors of scale in this report are inconsequential to achieving the ultimate benefit of these
recommendations as long as all manufacturers adhere to the IEC standard definitions. Users should
be able to rely on a manufacturer’s claim of conformance to the IEC standard to identify equipment
offering a standard exposure index as described in this report.



II. Definition of Terms
DR systems utilize a series of computational processes to transform the raw data of the detector into
an image intended for presentation. These processes include those used to assess the average
response of the detector and its relation to the incident x-ray exposure.
    The image formation process (Figure 2) begins with the extraction of raw data from the detector
immediately following an exposure event. That data must be corrected for imperfections in the
detector array such as the presence of bad pixel elements, dark current corrections, and gain correc-
tions that may be applied on a pixel-by-pixel basis. After these corrections have been applied, the
resulting pixel values are ready to be processed by the system and are referred to as “for-processing”
pixel or “Q” values. The system then attempts to identify which of these pixels contain information
that is of interest to the user, typically those that contain information relevant to the anatomy being
examined. This process is called segmentation. It is from the segmented image values that TG-116

                                                       4
                                                       AN EXPOSURE INDICATOR FOR DIGITAL RADIOGRAPHY


proposes the exposure indicators be determined. The final image for display results from grayscale
transformations, broad area equalization, edge restoration, noise reduction, or other image-related
processes that are performed on the “for-processing” Q values resulting in “for-presentation” QP val-
ues. QP values are typically stored in a Picture Archiving and Communications System (PACS) and
transmitted to a printer or workstation for display. The remainder of this section defines the terms
used in this document that relate to the DR processes just described.

Digital Radiography

   Radiographic imaging technology producing digital projection images such as those using photo-
   stimulable storage phosphor (computed radiography, or CR), amorphous selenium, amorphous sil-
   icon, CCD, or MOSFET technology.

Standardized Radiation Exposure (KSTD)

   The air kerma at the detector of a DR system produced by a uniform field radiation exposure
   using a nominal radiographic kVP and specific added filtration resulting in a specific beam half-
   value layer (HVL). (See section IV. Standard Radiation Exposure Conditions.)

For-Processing Pixel Values (Q)

   For-processing pixel values are the image pixel values produced by a DR system after necessary
   corrections have been applied to the initially recorded raw data to compensate for these types of
   effects [see IEC 62220-1 Ed.1 for a complete description of appropriate correction methods].[7]
   The following corrections may be applied:
      1.   Defective pixels may be replaced by appropriate data.
      2.   Flat-field correction.
      3.   Correction for the gain and offset of single pixels.
      4.   Geometric distortion.

   The relationship between Q and KSTD may vary for different DR systems. Manufacturers are
   expected to provide access to Q data and to provide information on this relationship as a part of nor-
   mal system documentation. Images with Q values would typically be processed by the DR system
   in order to produce images for presentation.

Normalized For-Processing Pixel Values (QK)

   Normalized for-processing pixel values, QK, are for-processing pixel values, Q, which have been
   converted to have a specific relation to a standardized radiation exposure (KSTD). Q values are con-
   verted to QK using the DR system’s relationship between Q and KSTD. After conversion of Q to QK,
   the relationship between air kerma at the input surface of the detector and the QK value is

                                                        ⎡ K STD ⎤
                                  QK = 1000 * log10 ⎢           ⎥                                    (1)
                                                        ⎣ K0 ⎦
   where KSTD is in microgray units, K0 = 0.001 μGy, and KSTD ≥ K0.


                                                   5
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


For-Processing Image Values (QP)

   For-processing pixel values (Q) are typically modified by image processing to produce an image
   with values suitable for display (QP). This processing generally determines the useful values for
   display and applies a grayscale transformation. The processing may also provide broad area equal-
   ization, edge restoration, or noise reduction.

Indicated Equivalent Air Kerma (KIND)

   An indicator of the quantity of radiation that was incident on regions of the detector for each expo-
   sure made. The value reported may be computed from the median for-processing pixel values in
   defined regions of an image that correlate with an exposure to the detector. The median value is then
   converted to the air kerma, KSTD, from a standardized radiation exposure that would produce the
   same detector response, i.e., result in the same median for-processing signal value, Q, in a pre-
   defined region of interest (ROI). The regions from which the median is determined may be defined
   in different ways (see section V. Assessment of Indicated Equivalent Air Kerma, KIND). The value
   should be reported in microgray units with three significant figures of precision.

Image Values of Interest (VOI)

   Pixel values in the original image (Q) that correspond to the region in the recorded image area for a
   particular body part and anatomical view. KIND may be calculated from a subset of pixels within the
   VOI.
        Not all pixel values in an image are associated with objects that are of interest to the viewer
   for the purposes of diagnosis. Those that are of interest are referred to as the “values of interest”
   (or VOI). The pixels that are associated with the VOI are typically identified based on their phys-
   ical location and their relative signal strength characteristics. This identification process is
   referred to as segmentation. Specification of a standard method to be used for segmentation is
   not within the charge of this task group. Further, to recommend one standard method above all
   others may impede the development of more sophisticated methods that yield more stable results
   in the future.
        Detector values suitable for presentation (QP) are typically sent to display devices (printers or
   workstations) or image archives. Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM)
   standards, including DICOM PS3.14, define these as presentation values, or P-values.[8]

Target Equivalent Air Kerma Value (KTGT)

   The optimum KIND value that should result from any image when the detector is properly exposed.
   KTGT values will typically be established by the user and/or DR system manufacturer and stored as
   a table within the DR system. The table is referred to in this document as KTGT(b,v) where b and v
   are table indices for specific body parts and views.

Deviation Index (DI)

   An indicator as to whether the detector response for a specific image, KIND, agrees with KTGT(b,v).
   Relative exposure indices are to be reported as:

                                                   6
                                                        AN EXPOSURE INDICATOR FOR DIGITAL RADIOGRAPHY


                                                      ⎡ K IND ⎤
                                      DI = 10 * log10 ⎢              ⎥                             (2)
                                                      ⎢⎣ K TGT(b,v) ⎥⎦

   with one significant decimal of precision (i.e., 0.0, 0.6, −1.3, etc.). DI is intended as an indi-
   cator for radiographers and radiologists for whether or not the technique used to acquire a
   radiograph was correct. This definition results in a DI of 0.0 when the reported KIND equals
   KTGT (a perfect exposure). The index changes by ±1.0 for each +25%/−20% change of the
   reported KIND.


III. Recomendations
This report makes the following specific recommendations regarding the indicator of exposure for
DR systems:

   • It is recommended that all DR systems (regardless of detector design) provide an indicator of
       the x-ray beam air kerma (expressed in μGy) that is incident on the digital detector and used to
       create the radiographic image. This indicator shall be called the Indicated Equivalent Air
       Kerma (KIND). It is further recommended that the DICOM standard incorporate a new ele-
       ment for DR that is specifically defined as the Indicated Equivalent Air Kerma. The indicator
       value shall be included in the DICOM header of every image as a floating point value with
       three significant figures.
   •   In addition to the Indicated Equivalent Air Kerma, it is recommended that the relative devia-
       tion from the value targeted by the system for a particular body part and view be reported. This
       index, the Deviation Index (DI), should be prominently displayed to the operator of the DR
       system immediately after every exposure and immediately after any modification of the
       detected image VOI. It is further recommended that the DICOM standard incorporate a new
       element for DR that is specifically defined as the Deviation Index. This indicator value shall
       be included in the DICOM header of every image as a signed decimal string value between −
       9.9 and +9.9 with one significant digit after the decimal.
   •   The Indicated Equivalent Air Kerma and the Deviation Index are determined from the seg-
       mentation image pixels (see section V. Assessment of Indicated Equivalent Air Kerma,
       KIND). It is recommended that systems provide display functions to delineate the segmented
       image pixels optionally as an overlay on the recorded image that is otherwise normally pre-
       sented for approval by the operator. Additionally, this overlay region can be incorporated in
       any images exported for archive or viewing using DICOM services. DICOM Segmentation
       Storage SOP Class (Supplement 111) forms the basis for achieving this functionality.[9]
       Alternatively, this could be accomplished with overlay and annotations that are part of Gray
       Scale Presentation State Storage objects described in DICOM Supplement 33.[10]
   •   Vendors should provide appropriate analytical tools (see section XI. Recommended
       Optional Features) and allow for-processing image data (Q values), or exposure values nor-
       malized to the standard beam conditions (QK), to be displayed and analyzed on the system
       console. It is also important that the vendor allow these data to be exported in DICOM format
       for off-line analysis. To accomplish this, all DR systems should provide access to images

                                                    7
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


        containing for-processing pixel values, Q. This can be provided by support for DICOM
        export services of DX for-processing images containing normalized for-processing values,
        QK. Alternatively, images of either QK or Q can be made available in DICOM PS3.10[11] for-
        mat on a media storage device.
    •   The relationship between QK values and the standardized radiation exposure incident to
        the DR detector is required for tests of system performance. It is recommended that this
        relationship be provided by the system manufacturer over the full range of radiation expo-
        sures that the system is capable of recording.
    •   For tests of system performance, it is useful to view and analyze the for-processing image
        values of acquired test radiographs. It is recommended that systems provide functions to
        display images without image processing (i.e., Q values) and to report the mean, median,
        mode, standard deviation, and pixel count of values within graphically defined regions.
        Interactively drawn circular or rectangular regions are appropriate for this purpose.
    •   For testing of systems, it is recommended that manufacturers provide methods to remove
        the anti-scatter grid without otherwise changing the detectors response or provide grid
        attenuation factors to be used in calibration.


IV. Standard Radiation Exposure Conditions

A. Standard Beam Spectrum

A uniform field radiation exposure made to the detector of a DR system is used to assess the relation
between for-processing image values recorded by the detector (Q) and the quantity of radiation incident
on the detector (KSTD). The radiographic technique used to make the exposure is intended to provide a
beam quality typical of that for most examinations for which the system is used. This is done by using
additional filtration to emulate the beam hardening of a patient. This section recommends standardized
radiation conditions to be used for this purpose and addresses only general radiographic systems.
     The IEC and ISO have previously made recommendations for standard radiation conditions for use
in testing medical diagnostic x-ray systems.[6,12,13] A variety of conditions with different beam quality
are recommended and labeled with “RQA” prefixes. However, these conditions require thick filters
composed of 99.9% aluminum (Al), which is impractical for field measurements. Alloy 1190 falls into
the category of scientific grade (also called ultra pure aluminum) and is available only through spe-
cialty metals companies for a high price, in small quantities, and limited form. Alloy 1100 is a 99.0%
pure Al alloy that is widely available on the market.
     The use of copper (Cu) as a component of the added filtration is recommended in order to reduce
the overall thickness of added material. In prior publications, 0.5 mm of Cu was found to minimize the
variability in the response of a CR system as kVP was varied within 80 kVP±10%.[14,15] The addition of
Al material allows a HVL near the desired nominal to be achieved while keeping the Cu thickness at a
value that is readily available from metal foil suppliers. The added Al material should be on the beam
exit surface of the Cu so that any Cu characteristic radiation is absorbed in the aluminum.
     Typically, clinical tubes in use at modern facilities contain enough inherent+added filtration to
exceed the IEC open beam HVL specification of 2.5 mm Al at 70 kVP (RQR5). If this is the case, the fil-
tration to be added to the beam should be reduced to satisfy RQA5 by removal of all or part of the alu-

                                                   8
                                                         AN EXPOSURE INDICATOR FOR DIGITAL RADIOGRAPHY


minum. If the open beam HVL falls below the specification of 2.5 mm Al at 70 kVP, the filtration to be
added to the beam should be increased to satisfy RQA5 by addition of up to 4 mm Al. If the unfiltered
beam is generated using exotic added filtration, it is recommended that added filtration be replaced
with enough aluminum to meet the requirements of RQR5. The kVP may also be adjusted, if necessary.
      Added filtration with 0.5 mm Cu plus 3−4 mm Al is suitable for x-ray tubes with modest intrinsic
filtration. For an unfiltered x-ray tube spectra with HVL of 2.58 mm Al at 70 kVP (RQR5), computa-
tional simulations (see appendices A and B) indicate that a similar beam quality with HVL = 6.8 mm Al
is obtained using added filtration of either 21 mm of pure aluminum as specified for RQA5, 0.5 mm Cu
plus 3 mm Al (type 1100), or 24 cm of muscle.
      The following types of brass (30%−50% zinc with traces of tin) are also considered acceptable to be
used in place of the copper: admiralty brass (30% zinc and 1% tin), alpha brass (less than 35% zinc),
alpha-beta brass or duplex brass (35%−45% zinc), arsenical brass or DZR brass, beta brass (45%−50%
zinc), cartridge brass (30% zinc), common brass or rivet brass (37% zinc), high brass (35% zinc), low
brass (20% zinc), naval brass (40% zinc brass and 1% tin), red brass (gunmetal), or yellow brass (33%
zinc). Use of leaded brass, aluminum brass, white brass, or gilding metal is not recommended.
      For the first edition of IEC 61267, kVP was to be adjusted to achieve a desired beam HVL.[11] For
the second edition, more stringent constraints were placed on the beam quality before added filtration
rather than allowing kVP adjustments. As a consequence, the conditions recommended in the second
edition are applicable only to laboratory facilities. It has also been reported that CR system response
varies by approximately 10% over a limited a range of kV.[14] Measurements made by task group mem-
bers on a variety of clinical systems (both CR and DR) indicate that system response is very consistent
within the recommended ranges of HVL, kV, and added filtration (see appendix B). System response in
terms of for-processing signal per unit exposure varied by less than or equal to 6% with kVP/filter com-
binations as low as 67 kVP with 0 mm Al (5.93 mm Al HVL) to 73 kVP with 8 mm Al (8.62 mm Al HVL).
Similar results have been found by others and reported in the literature (see Figure 1).[4] For this limited
range of kV, 5% tolerance seems reasonable.
      While use of the RQA5 beam is acceptable for calibration, TG-116 recommends standard beam
conditions using copper foil and highly available type 1100 aluminum with a specified kVP range
whose accuracy has been independently verified to be within 3% of the indicated value (see Table 1).
The target HVL is intended to be reasonably close to RQA5 (6.8±0.25 mm Al). Minor adjustments in
indicated kVP and added filtration are permitted to achieve the target beam quality. While not required,
it is acceptable to vary the kVP by up to ±5% and the amount of added aluminum within the listed range
to achieve a beam quality that is as close as possible to the listed target HVL. The generator used for the
standard beam must be capable of maintaining a constant kV throughout the entire exposure.


B. Standard Beam Geometry and Calibration Verification Procedure

This section describes the measurement geometry to be used to determine KSTD under the standard
radiation exposure conditions shown in Figure 3. The steps to use when making these measurements
are summarized below.

    1. Prior to any measurements verify that the x-ray source has acceptable exposure repro-
       ducibility (coefficient of variation < 0.03) and kV accuracy (±3%) at the standardized


                                                     9
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


Table 1. Standard Beam Radiographic Conditions
                             Added                    Nominal         IEC
kVP                         Filtration                  HVL        Surrogate
66-74                0.5 mm Cu + (0-4) mm Al*         6.8 mm Al*     RQA5
                         or 21 mm pure Al
*Type 1100




Figure 3. Standard beam geometry.




                                                 10
                                                   AN EXPOSURE INDICATOR FOR DIGITAL RADIOGRAPHY


       condition. During any exposure for which an image is not acquired, the image receptor
       should be protected from exposure to the primary beam.
   2. The detector should be placed as far from the x-ray source as is practical, at least 100 cm.
       a. If the detector is a CR plate, the cassette should be separated from any surface that
           may increase backscatter from that surface entering the cassette (see Figure 3), as rec-
           ommended in AAPM Report No. 93.[15]
       b. If present, and if possible, remove the anti-scatter grid and any other system compo-
           nents present between the ion chamber and the image detector without otherwise mod-
           ifying the response of the detector. If any components cannot be removed, obtain the
           attenuation factors from the DR system or component vendor.
       c. If the detector is not square, the long axis of the detector should be perpendicular to
           the x-ray tube anode-cathode axis.
   3. Place a calibrated ion chamber at the center of the beam approximately midway between the
       source and detector (see position A in Figure 3). The distances should be measured to the
       center of the chamber and to the surface to the detector. The distance from the x-ray source
       to the center of the ion chamber and the surface of the detector must be known. If the dis-
       tance from the detector housing surface to the detector is not labeled, consult the manufac-
       turer for this measurement.
   4. Collimate the x-ray beam to only cover the ion chamber with no more than 1 in. margins.
   5. Add 0.5 mm Cu filtration at the face of the collimator.
   6. Cover the detector with a lead apron or similar barrier to preclude exposure to the detector.
       Measure the HVL of the filtered beam and adjust the kVp and/or Al filtration within the
       limits specified in Table 1 to obtain a HVL as close as possible to 6.8 mm Al.
   7. Make an exposure and determine the air kerma at the detector (KSTD) using an inverse
       square correction and applying the grid attenuation factor, if appropriate. Repeat the expo-
       sure at a new mAs setting that will deliver the desired air kerma to the detector. In general,
       the desired air kerma will produce a value of KSTD that is in the middle of the detector
       response range.
   8. Move the ion chamber perpendicular to the tube axis such that it is outside the detector field
       of view (see position B in Figure 3).
   9. Remove the filtration and open the collimator so the x-ray beam will cover the entire detec-
       tor and includes a margin large enough to cover the ion chamber. If the system does not
       allow the collimator to be opened beyond the detector size, open the collimator as large as
       possible and place the ion chamber as close to the edge of the x-ray beam as possible within
       the field of view of the detector. Ensure that the entire ion chamber is in the radiation beam
       and is not shadowed by a collimator blade. Replace the filtration.
   10. Remove the protective lead apron and make an exposure using the mAs found in step 7
       above. Determine the ratio of the air kerma at position A to that at position B.

When making standardized radiation exposures using this geometry, the air kerma recorded by the
ion chamber is converted to KSTD for each exposure using the KA/KB ratio determined and the
inverse square correction.




                                                11
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


    Some manufacturers have specified other requirements in addition to beam quality, such as
readout time delay after exposure with CR systems. These requirements should be adhered to as
long as the standard beam conditions specified in this part are not affected.



V. Assessment of Indicated Equivalent Air Kerma (KIND)
It is expected that manufacturers of DR systems will establish the relationship between for-processing
image values (Q) and standardized radiation exposure (KSTD), i.e., Q as a function of KSTD. This rela-
tionship should be specified over the full range of exposures for which the system is designed to
respond. If individual systems vary in response, information provided with the system should include
the acceptable variation specific to a particular system. As a part of acceptance testing, physicists may
wish to verify this relationship by recording images of a uniform field obtained using standard beam
exposures made with an appropriate set of mAs values.
      For validating Q as a function of KSTD, the incident air kerma should be measured using the
methods described in section IV.B for which KSTD reflects the radiation incident to the central region
of the detector. For each image recorded, either the for-processing image pixel values, Q, or the nor-
malized for-processing image pixel values, QK, should be analyzed to determine the median value
from a central region of interest (<Q> and <QK>).
      For determining the indicated equivalent air kerma from an individual clinical image, KIND is
computed as the KSTD corresponding to the <Q> value in a defined region of a recorded image (see
Figure 4). The median of image values is computed and transformed using the known relationship
between for-processing image pixel values (Q) and exposure. The median is recommended rather
than mean or mode because it is less affected by data extremes and outliers. Rectangular or circular
regions having an area greater than or equal to about 4% of the active detector area should be used.
The median value can be determined using vendor-supplied analysis tools designed specifically for
evaluating the test image or by exporting the test image as a DICOM object to an external work-
station for evaluation. The median Q value and the median KSTD value are thus the same as long as
the transformation is monotonic. Additionally, the median value can be determined from the his-
togram of values within the defined region.
      The region used to compute KIND should be defined such that the indicated equivalent air kerma
reflects the median exposure within the segmentation image pixels in the recorded image. The segmen-
tation image pixels will vary depending on the purpose of the radiograph. For example, the primary
anatomic region of interest in a chest radiograph is the lung parenchyma, whereas the mediastinal and
subdiaphragmatic portions of the image would be secondary regions. However, the mediastinum
would be a primary region for a thoracic spine radiograph. Hence the segmentation image pixels for the
PA Chest exam and for the PA T-Spine, even if collimated identically, would not comprise the same set
of image pixels.
      For some existing systems the segmentation image pixels are defined by the portions of the
image for which body tissue has attenuated the beam. Unattenuated regions of direct exposure are
excluded along with regions outside of the collimated primary beam that receive only scattered and
off-focus radiation. Other systems have used geometric regions (circles, rectangles, etc.) positioned
in the general area of the primary anatomic region. These can be systematically placed in the field
such as for the position of a central Automatic Exposure Control (AEC) cell.

                                                   12
                                                       AN EXPOSURE INDICATOR FOR DIGITAL RADIOGRAPHY




Figure 4. Example of a method to determine KIND from an analysis of the image histogram.




    More robust scene recognition algorithms may be used to identify the segmentation image pix-
els. Robust region definition methods typically require advanced image segmentation algorithms
that have generally not been fully disclosed by manufacturers. In most cases, these methods occa-
sionally fail under certain clinical conditions. To aid users in identifying recordings for which the
segmentation may have failed, it is recommended that systems provide functions to display an over-
lay of the segmentation image pixels. If provided, this overlay should be accurately registered to the
image pixels. Additionally, methods to modify the selection of segmentation of the image pixels after
the automated segmentation algorithm is performed should be provided.
    For many systems, region definition is used to identify that portion of the image that should be
rendered in the mid-portion of the grayscale transformation. In recent reports, it has been suggested
that the “for-presentation” image pixel values (QP) be used to define the region for computation of
KIND.[16] In this work, pixels of the for-presentation image (QP) within a fixed range of presentation
values are used to define the region for computation of KIND (see Figure 5). For example, presenta-
tion values from 45% to 55% of the full range of values are in the mid-gray regions of the image,
which normally correspond to the anatomic regions of highest interest to be rendered with maximum
contrast. The value of KIND is computed from pixels in the for-processing image that correspond to
this range. Regardless of the method used to define the region that is used to compute KIND, its value
should reflect any changes to the segmentation image pixels that are made by the operator.
    This report does not make recommendations as to how the segmentation image pixels are to be
defined. Rather, the scope of recommendations is restricted to recommendations directed at stan-
dardizing the terminology and beam conditions associated with reporting indices of exposure. It is
expected that conformance in these areas can be achieved in the near future. The task group recog-
nizes that the defined region from which KIND is computed has strong influence on the result. A com-
pletely satisfactory solution for this difficult engineering problem remains unidentified. In light of
this, the consensus of the task group is that it would be inappropriate to limit further development of

                                                    13
AAPM REPORT NO. 116




Figure 5. Example of a method to determine KIND from QP of a processed image.[16]




more robust segmentation algorithms by establishing a standard method for defining segmentation
pixels at this time.
    The Indicated Equivalent Air Kerma, KIND, is an indicator of the detector response in regions
where anatomically important tissues have been recorded by a DR detector. KIND is not equal to the
incident exposure for the radiograph recorded. Rather, it is associated with the incident exposure from
a standard reference beam that would have produced the same detector response. For this reason, it is
referred to as an “equivalent” air kerma. For the general radiography standard beam conditions, the
incident exposure required for the same receptor response in a typical DR detector varies modestly for
peak tube potential values in the range from 55 to 90 kVP.[4] In general, the actual incident exposure
required to produce the same detector response will change with varying tube potential for radiographs
of a specific object.


VI. Reporting Deviation Index (DI)
For radiographs of different body parts and/or views, the value of KIND required to obtain acceptable
image quality may vary. Additionally, the purpose and clinical diagnostic indications expected for a
particular procedure may influence what is considered acceptable. For this reason, it is recommended
that manufacturers automatically reference the appropriate standard beam condition (based on body

                                                   14
                                                      AN EXPOSURE INDICATOR FOR DIGITAL RADIOGRAPHY


part and anatomical view) when determining KIND, and deduce the recorded relative exposure from
the appropriate KIND in relation to that targeted for the body part and view of the radiograph.
    The DI is intended to indicate the acceptability of SNR conditions in the segmentation image (as
compared to high or low) to persons performing or interpreting radiographic examinations. How this
index is calculated and the information displayed to these groups has an influence on how it is inter-
preted. Several options were considered by the task group for the nature of this index. Some were of
the opinion that an index that varies linearly with KIND/KTGT(b,v) would be more understandable to
both radiologists and technologists. However, this approach suffers from the fact that such an index
would asymptotically approach 0 as exposures decreased to 0, thus minimizing the apparent impact
that underexposure has on image quality. Another consideration is the fact that image noise is loga-
rithmically related to exposure. For underexposed images, use of a linear indicator would not reflect
the magnitude of the change necessary to bring about a corresponding improvement in noise. It was
decided that a logarithmic scale in base 10 would provide appropriate information in terms of both
direction (over- or underexposure indicated by a positive or negative value, respectively) and magni-
tude (+1 is approximately 125% of the intended exposure, −1 is 80% of the intended exposure) on
needed technique corrections. An exposure resulting in a DI value of +1 would require an adjustment
of −1 step on the density or mAs control of a properly calibrated modern radiographic system.
    Tables of targeted values may be provided by manufacturers with values reflecting typically
acceptable KIND values for the detector technology being used. Typically, these will be lower for
detector technology that has higher DQE. Provisions must be available for imaging centers to adjust
the KTGT values based on an individual facility's criterion for image quality. Systems should provide
a mechanism to export and import tables in a consistent format so that tables could be shared
between imaging facilities using the same DR system. A process for updating the tables of all sys-
tems within a facility that is managed via a network would be extremely valuable so that changes in
KTGT values can be readily disseminated to distributed systems. DR systems should also provide the
means to save the associated KTGT(b,v) for any body part and view as the default target value auto-
matically when invoked by an appropriately privileged operator.



VII. Clinical Use of the Deviation Index (DI)
The clinical use of the DI is essentially the same as that of film optical density: it serves as an indica-
tor of proper radiographic exposure. For screen/film images, the optical density of the image itself is
used to indicate proper exposure according to the clinical preferences of the facility. By de-linking
image appearance (in terms of brightness or contrast) from the amount of radiation exposure used to
produce it, digital imaging alleviates the dynamic range limitation suffered by film. The drawback is
that the direct visual feedback as to proper exposure is also severed. As has been noted before, the
result can be widely varying clinical techniques, with consequences to both image quality and
patient radiation exposure. The primary concern with DR image quality as it relates to detector expo-
sure is with image noise (quantum mottle). DR post-processing and “QC” workstations generally
utilize displays of lower resolution (1024×1024 or less), lower brightness, and capable of rendering
fewer gray levels than those to be used for primary diagnostic interpretation. These “secondary”[17]
workstations are also rarely calibrated to DICOM PS3.14. As a result, it is often the case that image
noise is not well appreciated on such displays. What might appear acceptable on the QC workstation

                                                   15
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


may be diagnostically unacceptable to the radiologist reading on a display calibrated to DICOM
PS3.14. The DI can be used clinically to ensure that the amount of radiation delivered to the detector
and, hence, the noise content in the image, is appropriate for a given imaging task.
     The reader should be cautioned that possible system errors in the segmentation may cause the DI
to incorrectly reflect the adequacy of the exposure. Causes of errors in segmentation will vary by ven-
dor—some examples include the presence of prostheses or gonadal shielding, failure in identification
of collimated area due to scatter or off-focus radiation, and unexpected positioning of a body part in
the field of view. Poorly defined collimation may lower the DI, depending on the exam and projection.
Undercollimation that causes unusually large amounts of the image to be unattenuated by the patient
may increase the DI. Both of these interferences can result in a false DI. If any of these is the case and
the reported DI is out of acceptable range, a repeated exposure may not be necessary. The technolo-
gist should closely scrutinize every image for noise content, using zoom and pan utilities if available.
DI values should be treated more like a guide instead of an absolute measure of image quality. Until
segmentation becomes more robust, the technologist should judge image quality on noise content
and not depend solely on the exposure index value.


VIII. Exposure Indicator and Radiographic Techniques
The KIND indicator serves as a means of establishing appropriate radiographic techniques that might
otherwise drift widely from desired levels. Adhering to target ranges for the particular DI values can
be a valuable tool for standardization and stabilization of manual techniques. For departments
involved in clinical aspects of radiologic technology training programs, DI can also be used as an aid
to instruct students in proper manual technique selection and for evaluation of trainee performance
in this regard.
     DI values are determined for each body part and anatomical view being imaged on an exposure
by exposure basis by comparing the KIND value for a given exposure to the target KTGT(b,v) values
stored on the system. These KTGT(b,v) values are the optimal exposure values determined either by
the vendor or by the site system administrator for each body part and anatomical view being imaged.
The KTGT(b,v) values should be set according to clinical preferences and specific exam needs. This

Table 2. Exposure Indicator DI Control Limits for Clinical Images
                     DI                                                  Range Action
                   > +3.0                                      Excessive patient radiation exposure
                                                               Repeat only if relevant anatomy is clipped
                                                                or “burned out”
                                                               Require immediate management follow-up.

                 +1 to +3.0                                    Overexposure:
                                                               Repeat only if relevant anatomy is clipped
                                                                or “burned out”

                 −0.5 to +0.5                                  Target range

               Less than −1.0                                  Underexposed:
                                                               Consult radiologist for repeat

               Less than −3.0                                  Repeat


                                                      16
                                                       AN EXPOSURE INDICATOR FOR DIGITAL RADIOGRAPHY


approach is consistent with maintaining exposures in a range that is as low as reasonably achievable
(ALARA). The KTGT(b,v) values associated with each body part and view, if present, should auto-
matically be invoked when the body part and view for post-processing are selected by the operator at
the processing system console.
    Once KTGT(b,v) levels are set, it is useful to identify several types of “control limits” on DI: a tar-
get range, a “management trigger” range, or a “repeat” range (see Table 2). The reason for this is that
unlike filmed images, in which inadequate or excessive image optical density is a determinant of
when a repeated film is needed, the reason for repeating a digital image is primarily noise related.
What would be an underexposed film image may be of adequate diagnostic value in digital form.
Similarly, it is never appropriate to repeat overexposed digital images unless analog-to-digital con-
verter saturation has occurred, which may cause relevant parts of the image to be “burned out” or
“clipped” (that is, all pixels in the affected region are forced to the maximum digital value and thus
containing no information) or contrast to be affected in excessively exposed regions of the image.
Since this judgment depends upon the diagnostic task, it is appropriate to seek consultation with a
radiologist for certain ranges of DI-indicated under- and overexposure prior to repeating.
    A properly functioning AEC system will produce optical densities of ±0.15 OD under varying
combinations of kVP and phantom thickness (adjusting mA to result in exposure times greater than
10 ms).[18] For a screen/film combination, optical density in the straight-line portion of the H&D
curve is related to detector exposure (or KIND) as follows:

                                                        ⎛ K IND ⎞
                                       ΔOD = γ log10 ⎜         2
                                                                 ⎟.                                    (3)
                                                        ⎝ K IND1 ⎠


   Combining equations (2) and (3), the range of deviation indices corresponding to a given OD
range would be:
                                                ⎛ 10 ⎞
                                        ΔDI = ⎜        × ΔOD.
                                                ⎝ γ ⎟⎠                                                 (4)

    For a screen/film combination with a gamma of 2.85 (a fairly common gamma in clinical use),
the acceptable DI range would be:
                                               ⎛ 10 ⎞
                                        ΔDI = ⎜          × 0.3
                                               ⎝ 2.85 ⎟⎠
                                             = 1.05                                                   (4a)
                                             = ±0.5.

    The task group recommends the action levels shown in Table 2.
    To be effective, care must be taken to assure that appropriate targets and limits are posted and
the radiographers are educated and periodically re-educated as to their meaning.A substantial devi-
ation from the established target range should require management oversight to determine the cause
for the deviation and to implement appropriate corrective action such as retraining, recalibration of
the equipment, or reassessment of the target value. Operators should be instructed that high DI val-
ues are associated with excessive radiation dose but have good image quality with respect to noise.
Tighter limits on DI may be difficult to achieve in practice due to variations and drifts in CR reader

                                                   17
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


calibration (especially with multiple readers), variations between detectors, as well as traditional
differences between x-ray rooms (generator design, calibration, and tube filtration).


IX. KIND and Automatic Exposure Control (AEC) Systems
In regard to maintaining appropriate image quality and patient exposures, it is clear that AEC systems
are just as important to digital imaging as for screen/film imaging, despite the wide dynamic range of
DR. Regardless of detector type, AEC systems are designed to (and must be appropriately calibrated
to) terminate an x-ray exposure once a predetermined radiation exposure is recorded at the detector.
Like screen/film systems, digital detectors have energy dependence, which in general differs from
that of the AEC sensors (see Figure 1).[4] Depending on design and calibration of the AEC, the result
can be digital image levels that vary from the desired level.
     A well-designed AEC should be capable of modifying required detector exposures based on
exposure conditions (typically selected kVP and mA) to compensate for energy dependence and
exposure rate and thereby maintain a consistent image SNR.[19] Assuming that AEC performance
is evaluated under clinically relevant conditions which can be simulated by various thicknesses of
acrylic and kVP ranging from 60 to 120,[19] the KIND can serve as the indicator of image signal
level for this purpose, just as optical density did for film. Adequate AEC performance with
screen/film is considered to be a density variation of ±0.15 OD on a system using film with a
gamma of 2.5. For equivalent performance on a DR system using AEC, one would expect KIND
to remain constant with varying thickness and kVP (adjusting mA to result in exposure times
greater than 10 ms) within ±7%.
     In using KIND’s during AEC performance evaluation, several caveats must be noted. First, the
KIND may be associated with a different image region from that used by AEC sensors; second, the
size of the area used by KIND determination may introduce different field size and energy-related
effects from those affecting the AEC; and third, many of the conventional radiographic systems
used with DR were designed to compensate for screen/film energy dependencies, and may not be
capable of providing constant response for DR.
     Many radiographic systems in use today incorporate AEC systems designed for use with
screen/film systems and may allow for energy compensation appropriate for screen/film. Such
compensation may be hard-wired and unalterable, or may have insufficient ability to compensate
appropriately for DR. In particular, it is often the case that KIND’s tend to be higher for AEC-
based exposures at lower kV P’s, because the AEC compensation intended for rare-earth
screen/film systems overcorrects for lower kVP’s.[20] If this is the case, KTGT(b,v) values for DI
may need to be adjusted upward to reflect this energy dependence appropriately.
     Appropriate KTGT(b,v) ranges for AEC performance evaluation must therefore take into
account the age and pedigree of the radiographic system. Derived KTGT(b,v) limits for AEC test-
ing are equivalent to those that are used for film (for example, ±0.15 optical density units).[21]
Certainly, the much narrower latitude of screen/film calls for fairly tight AEC performance limits
for reliable clinical results. Although desirable for DR as well, this may not be achievable in prac-
tice at this time.




                                                 18
                                                      AN EXPOSURE INDICATOR FOR DIGITAL RADIOGRAPHY


X. Inappropriate Clinical Use of DI
A final note regarding DIs and clinical techniques: even if images being produced clinically have cor-
responding DIs well with the target range, the clinical techniques used may still not be appropriate.
One can just as readily achieve an acceptable DI for an AP L-Spine view with 65 kVP as with 85 kVP;
evidence of underpenetration and concomitant excess patient exposure with the lower kVP may be
clear from the contrast and underexposure of the spine regions, but may be windowed and leveled out
in a digital image. Similarly, poor collimation, unusual patient body habitus, the presence of pros-
thetic devices, or the presence of gonadal shielding in the image may raise or lower DIs (depending on
the exam and projection) and perhaps hide an inappropriate technique.[22,23,24,25] It is essential that all
aspects of good clinical technique be adhered to and an appropriate DI value should not be interpreted
as proof of good work.


XI. Recommended Optional Features
In addition to implementation of this standardized exposure indicator, there are opportunities for
other useful tools to facilitate presentation of image processing-related information and to improve
the overall quality of the imaging operation.
    For instance, section III calls for an overlay that graphically illustrates the pixels in a given
image that have been used to calculate QK. This is intended to provide a very quick method of
determining that the automated segmentation software performed correctly for any image. A simi-
lar feature would be to create a pop-up display of the Q histogram with the locations of the seg-
mentation image pixels min and max overlaid on it showing the minimum and maximum Q values
used for QK determination. Finally, there are many clever ways to indicate the DI for every image
using a sliding bar or color-coded tool with position and/or color linked to the magnitude of DI.
    Other highly desirable features are logs of the DI values and logs of the reasons for rejected
and repeated images stored on the system. The anatomical view selection and technique factor
information for every rejected image as well as the images themselves should also be stored on
the system. Software to analyze these logs to assist with process improvement by identifying
potential problematic exams, problems with equipment, and technologists in need of continuing
education is also invaluable to the user community.
    As already mentioned in section III, systems should provide a mechanism to export and
import tables in a consistent format so that tables could be shared between imaging facilities using
the same DR system. A process for updating the tables of all systems within a facility that is man-
aged via a network would be extremely valuable so that changes in KTGT values can be readily dis-
seminated to distributed systems.
    For each clinical mode of operation other than general radiography for which a system is
designed, the calibration conditions should be specified by the manufacturer (see section IX). The
manufacturer should also provide the following:

    • filter(s) to be utilized for establishing KSTD for general radiography as well as for other
        modes of operation and should specify which body parts and views are associated with
        each filter (see section XII),



                                                   19
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


    • a means to readily mount/dismount the filter(s) on an x-ray collimator,
    • mA, time/mAs, source-to-image distance (SID), grid or no grid, and system protocol set-
        tings for calibration conditions,
    •   the grid transmission factor associated with each beam condition (if present),
    •   exact specification of how to configure the system to obtain the “for-processing” image
        data,
    •   written, step-by-step calibration protocol and recommended frequency of calibration,
    •   full disclosure of the KTGT values associated with each body part and view,
    •   specification of the accuracy and reproducibility of the KSTD for the standard beam con-
        dition and the expected change in KIND for other beam conditions.

The task group strongly recommends implementation of all of these ideas and anticipates the cre-
ation of many more once the efforts of the equipment manufacturing community are brought to
bear on these issues.


XII. Application to Dedicated Chest, Mammography, Veterinary,
and Dental Radiography
KIND is intended to be used as a measure of image quality with respect to image noise. For low-
energy x-rays, more incident radiation is required to create the same detector response as for high-
energy x-rays. The variation in detector response for kVP values between 55 and 90 is sufficiently
small to make KIND an effective indicator of image quality with respect to the recorded noise in the
image.[4] For higher energies, this may not be the case. To maintain a consistent relationship between
image noise and the indicator, it is possible that two standard beam conditions could be defined: one
for imaging of the chest at tube potential settings above 100 kVP and one for all other radiographic
images. This higher energy standard beam should be reasonably close to RQA9 (see Table 3).
    For a tube with HVL of 5.00 at 120 kVP (RQR9), similar beam quality with HVL = 11.6 mm
is obtained with 40 mm of pure aluminum as specified for RQA9 or with 1.0 mm Cu plus 4 mm
Al (type 1100). If 11.6 mm Al HVL cannot be achieved at 120 kVP with the recommended filtra-
tion, the additional aluminum filtration may be reduced and the kVP adjusted to achieve the
required HVL.
    Digital mammography, veterinary, and dental radiography can all potentially benefit from a
universal exposure indicator for the same reasons discussed in this report. DR in these fields suf-
fers the same problems with manufacturer-specific exposure indices from which DR suffers.
Application to these areas would require modification of the calibration beam conditions to reflect
the differences in typical beam attenuation and beam energies in clinical use.



Table 3. A Standard Beam Condition for Dedicated Chest Imaging Systems
                                                  Added                                   IEC
Application               kVP                    Filtration              Target HVL    Surrogate
Dedicated Chest         114−126          1.0 mm Cu + (0−4.0) mm Al*       11.6 ± 0.3     RQA9
                                              or 40 mm pure Al             mm Al*
* Type 1100


                                                   20
                                                       AN EXPOSURE INDICATOR FOR DIGITAL RADIOGRAPHY


   The conditions for general radiographic systems differ substantially from those for mammo-
graphy systems. Developing a universal exposure indicator for mammography would be useful for
providing technologists feedback about exposure adequacy, especially for institutions with digital
mammography units from different manufacturers.


References
    1. Freedman, M., E. Pe, S.K. Mun, S.-C.B. Lo, and M. Nelson. (1993). “The potential for unnecessary
       patient exposure from the use of storage phosphor imaging systems.” SPIE 1897:472−479 (1993).
    2. Gur, D., C.R. Fuhman, J.H. Feist, R. Slifko, and B. Peace. “Natural Migration to a Higher Dose in CR
       Imaging” in Proceedings of the Eighth European Congress of Radiology, Vienna, Sep 12−17, p. 154,
       1993.
    3. Seibert, J.A., D.K. Shelton, and E.H. Moore. (1996). “Computed radiography x-ray exposure trends.”
       Acad Radiol 4:313−318.
    4. Van Metter, R., and J. Yorkston. “Applying a Proposed Definition for Receptor Dose to Digital
       Projection Images” in Proceedings of SPIE -- Medical Imaging 2006: Physics of Medical Imaging.
       M. J. Flynn and J. Hsieh (eds.). vol. 6142, pp. 426−444, March 2006.
    5. Huda, W. (2005). “The current concept of speed should not be used to describe digital imaging systems.”
       Radiology 234: 345−346.
    6. International Organization for Standardization (ISO). ISO 9236-1:2004. “Photography -
       Sensitometry of Screen/Film Systems for Medical Radiography − Part 1: Determination of sensito-
       metric curve shape, speed and average gradient.” Geneva: ISO, 2004.
    7. Willis, C.E., and T.L. Slovis. (2004). “The ALARA concept in pediatric CR and DR: Dose reduction
       in pediatric radiographic exams - A white paper conference executive summary.” Pediatr Radiol 34
       (Suppl 3):S162−S164.
    8. Digital Imaging Communications in Medicine (DICOM) 3.0, Performance Standard (PS) 3.14,
       Grayscale Standard Display Function. Rosslyn, VA: National Electrical Manufacturers Association
       (NEMA),2007.
    9. Digital Imaging Communications in Medicine (DICOM) 3.0, Supplement 111: Segmentation
       Storage SOP Class. Rosslyn, VA: National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA), 2007.
   10. Digital Imaging Communications in Medicine (DICOM) 3.0, Supplement 33: Grayscale Softcopy
       Presentation State Storage. Rosslyn, VA: National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA),
       2007.
   11. Digital Imaging Communications in Medicine (DICOM) 3.0, Performance Standard (PS) 3.10,
       Media Storage and File Format for Media Interchange. Rosslyn, VA: National Electrical
       Manufacturers Association (NEMA), 2007.
   12. International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). IEC 61267 (2005-11), Medical Diagnostic X-Ray
       Equipment - Radiation Conditions for Use in the Determination of Characteristics. Geneva: IEC,
       2005.
   13. International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). IEC 62220-1 Ed.1 (2003-10), Medical Electrical
       Equipment - Characteristics of Digital X-Ray Imaging Devices - Part 1: Determination of the
       Detective Quantum Efficiency Geneva: IEC, 2003.
   14. Samei, E., J.A. Seibert, C. Willis, M. Flynn, E. Mah, and K. Junck. (2001). “Performance evaluation
       of computed radiography systems.” Med Phys 28:361−371.
   15. Seibert, J.A., T. Bogucki, T. Ciona, W. Huda, A. Karellas, J. Mercier, E. Samei, S.J. Shepard, B.
       Stewart, K. Strauss, O. Suleiman, D. Tucker, R. Uzenoff, J. Weiser, and C. Willis. AAPM Report #93,

                                                    21
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


       Quality Control and Acceptance Testing of Photostimulable Storage Phosphor Imaging Systems,
       American Association of Physicists in Medicine, 2006
   16. Van Metter, R., and J. Yorkston. “Toward a Universal Definition of Speed for Digitally Acquired
       Projection Images.” Proceedings of SPIE -- Medical Imaging 2005: Physics of Medical Imaging.
       M.J. Flynn (ed.). vol 5745, pp. 442-457, April 2005.
   17. Samei, E., A. Badano, D. Chakraborty, K. Compton, C. Cornelius, K. Corrigan, M. Flynn, B.
       Hemminger, N. Hangiandreou, J. Johnson, D. Moxley-Stevens, W. Pavlicek, H. Roehrig, L. Rutz, E.
       Samei, S. J. Shepard, R. Uzenoff, J. Wang, and C. Willis. Assessment of Display Performance for
       Medical Imaging Ssystems, AAPM Report OR-3, American Association of Physicists in Medicine,
       2005.
   18. Hendee, W.R., and R.P. Rossi. Quality Assurance for Radiographic X-ray Units and Associated
       Equipment. DHEW Publications (USFDA) 79-8094, 1979.
   19. Christodoulou, E.G., M.M. Goodsitt, H.-P. Chan, and T. W. Hepburn. (2000). “Phototimer setup for
       CR imaging.” Med Phys 27(12):2652−2658.
   20. Goldman, L.W. “Speed Values, AEC Performance Evaluation and Quality Control with Digital
       Receptors” in Specifications, Performance Evaluations, and Quality Assurance for Radiographic
       and Fluoroscopic Equipment in the Digital Era. L.W. Goldman and M.V. Yester (eds.). AAPM
       Medical Physics Monograph #30. Madison, WI: Medical Physics Publishing, pp. 271−297,2004.
   21. Wilkinson, L.E., and J. C. P. Heggie. (1997). “Determination of correct AEC function with computed
       radiography cassettes.” Australas Phys Eng Sci Med 20(3):186−191.
   22. Willis, C.E., J. C. Weiser, R.G. Leckie, J. Romlein, and G. Norton. “Optimization and Quality Control
       of Computed Radiography,” SPIE Medical Imaging VI: PACS Design and Evaluation, vol. 2164, pp.
       178−185, 1994.
   23. Willis, C.E., R.G. Leckie, J. Carter, M.P. Williamson, S.D. Scotti, and G. Norton. “Objective
       Measures of Quality Assurance in a Computed Radiography-based Radiology Department.” SPIE
       Medical Imaging 1995: Physics of Medical Imaging, vol. 2432, pp. 588−599, 1995.
   24. Chotas, H.G., and C.E. Ravin. (1992). “Digital radiography with photostimulable storage phosphors:
       control of detector latitude in chest imaging,” Invest Radiol 27:823−828.
   25. Arreola, M., and L. Rill. (2004). “Management of pediatric radiation dose using Canon digital radi-
       ography.” Pediatr Radiol 34(Suppl 3):S221−S226 (2004).




                                                   22
                                                    AN EXPOSURE INDICATOR FOR DIGITAL RADIOGRAPHY


                                         Appendix A
               RQA5 vs. TG-116 Standard Beam Conditions,
                 XSPECT 3.5b Computation Simulation

                                   M. Flynn, 15 July 2007


Simulation of Standard Beam Conditions
Computational simulations using the XSPECT toolkit were used to simulate:

   • the x-ray spectrum emitted by typical x-ray tube and collimator assemblies
   • the attenuation of the spectrum by various amounts of added filtration
   • the half-value of the x-ray spectrum
       o incident on the added filtration
       o incident on a detector
   •   the signal and noise of a digital radiography detector.

X-ray Source Conditions
Three x-ray sources were considered based on their HVL at 70 kVP:
   A. IEC RQR5 - 2.58 mm Al, 70 kVP, Al intrinsic filtration
   B. Henry Ford Health System (HFHS) Rm 3 - 3.02 mm Al, 70 kVP, Al/Cu intrinsic filtration
   C. HVL 4 - 4.00 mm Al, 70 kVP, Al/Cu intrinsic filtration

   Source A is a lightly filtered source based on the IEC RQR5 specifications. Source B is based
   on a clinical system at HFHS for which the HVL has been experimentally measured. Source C
   is a hypothetical system with relatively heavy intrinsic filtration.


Added Filtration
Three added filtration configurations were considered:

   A. 21 mm aluminum (99.9%, RQA5).
   B. 0.5 mm copper and 2.8 mm aluminum (99.0% Al).
   C. 24.5 cm muscle (National Bureau of Standards (NBS) muscle composition).[A1]
   Added filtration A is based on the RQA5 standard and filtration B on the TG-116 standard. For
   filtration B, the aluminum thickness is specified as 2.8 mm, based on results indicating that the
   HVL matches at the same kVP. The added aluminum was iteratively changed to determine this
   value. Additionally, the relation between added aluminum and the kVP needed to obtain a HVL
   of 6.8 was determined. Similarly, 24.5 cm of muscle is chosen to match the HVL at the same kVP.




                                                 23
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


    The results are summarized as

    • The three added filtration conditions produce nearly identical spectra at the same kVP when
        the kVP is adjusted to obtain a HVL of 6.8 (see Figure A1)
    •   The HVL increases/decreases by about 0.1 for a 1 kVP change (see Figure A2)
    •   The kVP for which a HVL of 6.8 is produced is related to the HVL of the source with a slope
        of −2.5 kV/mm (73.6 kVP at 2.58, 72.6 at 3.02, 70.1 at 4.00 mm)
    •   The detected signal and SNR in relation to kVP is nearly identical for added filtrations A
        and B above (see Figure A3).




Figure A1a. Using a source with HVL=3.02 mm Al, the spectra for alternative additive filtrations are shown. Both
spectra are for kV=72.59 and both have HVL=6.80. The points have been adjusted as indicated to produce the same
exposure (mR) as the line. The spectral units are in #/mAs-cm2-keV. The spectra for 21 mm added aluminum (type
1090, 99.9%) is shown as a solid curve.




                                                      24
                                                                                                  APPENDIX A




Figure A1b. The spectrum with added filtration of 24.5 cm of muscle (NBS) is shown as points. These values have
been increased by a factor of 43.7 to normalize the exposure.




                                                     25
AAPM REPORT NO. 116




Figure A2a. The points are for 0.5 mm Cu plus 2.8 mm Al (type 1100) added filtration. The HVL of both is 6.8 at
a kV of 72.59. For both, the slope of the relation with kV is 0.094 mm/kV. As a rule of thumb, a 1 kV increase will
produce a 0.1 increase in HVL.




                                                       26
                                                                                                   APPENDIX A




Figure A2b. The points are for 24.5 cm muscle (NBS) added filtration. The sensitivity of HVL in relation to kV is
slightly more compared with that for 21 mm Al added filtration.




                                                      27
AAPM REPORT NO. 116




Figure A3a. Using a source with HVL=3.02 mm Al, the detected NEQ (i.e., SNR2) for alternative additive filtra-
tions are shown in relation to kV. The response for 21 mm added aluminum (type 1090, 99.9%) is shown as a solid
curve. The points are for 0.5 mm Cu plus 2.8 mm Al (1100) added filtration. The two conditions produce nearly iden-
tical response. As expected, there is a slow decrease as kV is increased.




XSPECT Computational Tools
Half-Value Layer (HVL, aluminum) was computed using the XSPECT toolkit for modeling x-ray
transmission imaging. This toolkit contains programs for generating and modifying x-ray spectra
stored in a common format. Utility programs modify the spectra to account for primary beam attenua-
tion, unit conversion, and distance effects. Other programs compute the exposure in mR, the HVL of
the x-ray spectrum, and the response of a detector in terms of the recorded signal and noise in units of
electrons. The toolkit is presently being used in a graduate laboratory course on radiation imaging
(NERS 580, University of Michigan, http://www.engin.umich.edu/class/ners580).




                                                       28
                                                                                                       APPENDIX A




Figure A3b. With similar conditions as for Figure A3a, the detected signal (electrons) per incident mR (scatter free)
is seen to vary slowly with kV.




X-Ray Emission Spectrum (SPECT_GEN)
X-ray emission spectra in units of photons/(keV-sr-mA-s) are obtained from the SPECT_GEN mod-
ule. In generating a spectrum, the user defines the kVP, atomic number, tube angle, voltage waveform,
and spectral increment. The program then generates a spectrum of bremsstrahlung and characteristic
radiations and corrects them for self-absorption. The spectral calculations are based on equations
from Storm[A2,A3] and contain empirical corrections for tube angle and voltage ripple. The results
from XSPECT have been crosschecked for molybdenum and tungsten tubes against Fewell’s data
published by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) through the Bureau of Radiological
Health.[A4].




                                                        29
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


Primary Beam Attenuation (ATTEN)
Attenuation of the emission spectrum by various layers of materials is done using the program ATTEN
that applies Beer’s law to the primary beam based on the material composition of the layer. Material
compositions are stored in material files having a standardized format and maintained in a material
library. Photoelectric cross sections for the elements were obtained from the work of Biggs.[A5] The
coherent and incoherent cross sections were taken from the work of McMaster.[A6] For aluminum
materials, type 1100 was used for 99.0% purity material and type 1090 for 99.9% purity material.
Typical impurities were taken from matweb.[A7]


Entrance Exposure (mR)
After the beam is attenuated, a simple inverse square law is applied to yield the spectrum at the
entrance point to the patient. The mR program then computes the exposure at this point. The computa-
tion of exposure involved summing the product of energy fluence (ergs/cm2/keV) and the air energy
absorption coefficient over the range of spectral energies.[A6] A conversion factor of 87.643
(ergs/gm)/roentgen is used along with the air ionization factor of 33.97 joules/coulomb.



Detector Response (DETECT)
The DETECT routine is used to compute detector signal by a weighted numeric integral of the x-ray
energy spectrum incident on the detector assembly, φd (E) (photons/{keV-cm2-mA-s}):

                       kVP                                       kVP
               S = Ap ∫ ηS ( E ) Eφd ( E ) dE       σ S2 = A p   ∫ (ησ ( E )) E φd ( E ) dE,
                                                                            2   2

                        0                                         0

where Ap is the pixel area in cm2 and S has units of electrons/(pixel-mA-s). The signal transfer effi-
ciency, ηs(E) (electrons/keV), represents the average number of electrons produced in the detector by
an incident x-ray with energy E. If ηs(E) equals 1.0 for all energies, the signal computed is that for an
ideal energy integrating detector, Si.
    The noise variance of the detector signal was computed using a similar integration (see equation
above). The noise variance, σ S2 , has units of electrons2/(pixel-mA-s). The noise transfer efficiency,
(ηs(E))2 (electrons2/keV)2, represents the average contribution to the signal variance of a pixel by an
incident x-ray with energy E. The noise computed for an ideal detector is similarly obtained by setting
ηs(E)=1. The signal-to-noise ratio, S/σS , is seen to be proportional to Ap as expected.
                                                                          12

    The accuracy of the signal and noise estimate computed by the DETECT routine depends on an
accurate knowledge of the transfer efficiencies ηs(E) and σ S2 . For this work, both were determined by
using a Monte Carlo analysis to estimate the detector's signal probability distribution function,
p(q,E)dq, that describes the probability of collecting q electrons when an x-ray of energy E is incident
on the detector. The detector tables for a 500-micron thick selenium direct DR detector were used in
this comparison.



                                                   30
                                                                                             APPENDIX A


References
  A1. Hubbell, J.H. Photon Cross Sections, Attenuation Coefficients, and Energy Absorption Coefficients
      from 10 keV to 100 GeV. NBS 29. Washington, DC: National Bureau of Standards (NBS), 1969.
  A2. Storm, E. (1978). “Calculated bremsstrahlung spectra from thick tungsten targets.” Phys Rev A 5(6):
      2328-2338.
  A3. Storm, E. (1972). “Emission of characteristic L and K radiation from thick tungsten targets.” J Appl
      Phys 43(6):2790-2796.
  A4. Fewell, T.R., and R.E. Shuping. Handbook of Mammographic X-ray Spectra. HEW publication (FDA)
      79-8071, 1978 (Revised data tables obtained from BRH).
  A5. Biggs, F., and R. Lighthill. “Analytical Approximations for X-Ray Cross Sections.” Part II, SC-RR-
      710507. Sandia Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico, 1971.
  A6. McMaster, W.H., N.K. Del Grande, J.H. Mallett, and J.H. Hubbell. “Compilation of X-Ray Cross
      Sections.” Sec. 2, Rev. 1, University of California, Livermore, U. S. Atomic Energy Commission
      Report UCRL-50174, 1969.
  A7. www.matweb.com accessed 25 June 2008.




                                                  31
                                                                                          APPENDIX B


                                         Appendix B

     Comparison of Pure Aluminum vs. Commercially Available
                Types 1100 and 1190 Aluminum
         and a Copper/Aluminum Alternative for RQA5
                       David L. Leong, Wei Zhao, Patrick C. Brennan
                                   November 25, 2007

Introduction
Task Group 116 has recommended 0.5 mm copper (Cu) with 0 to 4 mm of Alloy 1100 aluminum (Al) as
an alternative x-ray beam hardener to obtain the same RQA5 spectrum as specified in IEC
61267:2005.[B1] IEC 61267 requires the use of 99.9% pure aluminum for the RQA5 radiation qualities.
    Alloy 1190 is a 99.9% pure Al alloy that meets the requirements of IEC 61267. In attempts to pur-
chase Alloy 1190, the authors were unsuccessful in finding an off-the-shelf source; alternatively
Alloy 1100 is a 99.0% pure Al alloy that is widely available on the market. Alloy 1190 is registered
with 99.9% purity, which is higher than what is considered the highest purity commercial grade Al
with 99.45%.[B2] Alloy 1190 falls into the category of scientific grade (also called ultra pure alu-
minum) and is available only through specialty metals companies for a high price, in small quantities
and limited form.
    What is currently unknown is the impact of using the widely available Alloy 1100 compared with
the specified Alloy 1190.


Materials and Methods
Since aluminum composition will vary from batch to batch and from the source of the raw materials,
the first goal using simulation is to determine mixture compositions that reflect the maximum, mini-
mum, and median attenuation possible for Alloys 1100 and 1190. Since it is not possible to simulate
all the possible combinations of elements in a specific batch, mixture modeling theory was used to
select a reasonable set of mixtures as input to the simulation model to produce a prediction formula.
     To perform the mixture modeling, the custom design platform in JMP 6 software (SAS Institute,
Cary, NC) was used. A total of 1395 mixtures for each alloy using 30 elements were made in order to
develop an accurate prediction formula.
     Once the mixtures were selected in JMP, radiation quality simulation was performed using IDL
6.4 (IIT Visual Solution, Boulder, CO). The initial beam spectrum was calculated using the method
developed by Boone and Seibert,[B3] and to this beam different filters were applied depending on the
results desired. As the filters were applied, the attenuation was calculated with 1 keV interval from
1 to 70 keV.
     The mass attenuation coefficients used in the simulation were taken from Cullen et al.[B4], with
the exception of vanadium which was from the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST)[B5] mass attenuation coefficients dataset. For a composite material like Alloy 1100, the linear
attenuation coefficient μ was calculated according to the weight fraction of each element.
                                                 33
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


Table B1. Simulated HVL Results from the Various Alloy Batches
              Pure Al          Alloy 1190      Alloy 1100        0.5Cu/1Al     0.5Cu/2Al        0.5Cu/3Al
Mean           6.7638          6.7885           6.8803            6.6567         6.7539          6.8460
Std Dev        --              0.0006293        0.0141664         0.0007604      0.0014424       0.0020562
Mean-Target   −0.0362         −0.0115           0.0803           −0.1433        −0.0461          0.046



    To determine the half-value layer (HVL) for each Al Alloy mixture model, the initial x-ray spec-
trum was hardened to RQR5 with pure Al to achieve a HVL of 2.58 mm Al. Then the composite filter
was added and a new beam spectrum calculated. Last, the HVL was determined for the new beam
using 100% pure Al. For the calculation of Cu/Al filters, pure copper was used first and then the 1100
Alloy.
    Once simulated values were determined for each mixture, JMP 7 software (SAS Institute, Cary,
NC) was used to develop a HVL prediction formula. Next, the HVL for 5000 simulated batches of
each Alloy was generated using the HVL prediction formula.



Results and Discussion
The numeric details of the distribution of the 5000 simulated samples of both Alloys 1100 and 1190
are listed in Table B1. It is important to note that the standard deviation of Alloy 1100 is 22.5 times
greater than that of Alloy 1190, but the ±3 standard deviation is still only ±0.0425 mm Al. The last line
in the table shows the deviation of the mean from the RQA5 target of 6.8 mm Al.
      From the simulation results, we see that the HVL using pure Al is slightly lower than the target of
6.8, but the rounding to one decimal point is 6.8. Out of all alloys tested, 1190 provides a HVL that is
the closest to the target with a mean difference of just 0.01 mm Al. The standard deviation is negligi-
ble, so it can be expected that any batch of Alloy 1190 would produce a HVL value rounded to 6.79
mm Al. HVL for Alloy 1100 had a noticeable shift from the target of 6.8, which may be attributed to
the addition of Cu and iron (Fe) to the alloy. With a range of 6.8803±0.0283 mm Al covering 95% of all
batches, we have a range of 6.8525 to 6.9081 mm Al. The 0.1 mm Al error margin is acceptable for
clinical use and well within the ±0.25 mm Al proposed by TG-116.
     Figure B1 shows the comparison between the mean beam spectrum for Alloy 1100 and that of pure
Al. Alloy 1100 absorbs slightly less radiation, and the beam quality is shifted slightly harder. This can
also be seen in Table B1 with the mean having a difference of 0.1165 mm Al. A normalized plot of the
two spectra makes it easier to see the difference in beam hardness.
     Figure B2 compares the spectrum for 21 mm pure Al to that for Cu/Al combination⎯there is a large
difference in the height of the beam spectra. Using the 0.5 mm Cu and 2 mm Al filter combination, there
are over two times more photons. Figures B3a and B3b show the spectra for different Cu/Al filters nor-
malized to the output of pure Al. It can be seen that there is a left shift with 2 mm Al, and with 3 mm Al,
the spectra are nearly identical. The HVL values in Table B1 show that 2.5 mm Al with 0.5 mm Cu
would have essentially the same HVL as 21 mm pure Al.
     In addition to the investigation by the authors, several TG-116 members performed testing of x-ray
systems at their institutions to determine if the target HVL of 6.8 mm Al can be achieved using 0.5 mm
Cu filter in combination with an Al filter ranging in thickness from 0 to 4 mm. A total of 25 systems

                                                    34
                                                                                              APPENDIX B




Figure B1a. Simulated beam spectrum comparison of 21 mm 100% Al and the mean of 21 mm Alloy 1100 at 70 kVP.




Figure B1b. Simulated beam spectrum comparison of 21 mm 100% Al and the mean of 21 mm Alloy 1100 at
70 kVP normalized to the 100% Al spectrum to allow for better visualization of the differences.


                                                    35
AAPM REPORT NO. 116




Figure B2. Simulated beam spectrum comparison of 0.5 mm Cu & 2.0 mm Alloy 1100 and 21 mm 100% Al at
70 kVP.




Figure B3a. Simulated beam spectrum comparison of 0.5 mm Cu & 2.0 mm Alloy 1100 and 21 mm 100% Al at
70 kVP normalized to the 100% Al spectrum to allow for better visualization of the differences.


                                                36
                                                                                             APPENDIX B




Figure B3b. Simulated beam spectrum comparison of 0.5 mm Cu & 3.0 mm Alloy 1100 and 21 mm 100% Al at
70 kVP normalized to the 100% Al spectrum to allow for better visualization of the differences.




were tested. The initial filtration was measured for all 25 systems and the results are plotted in Figure
B4.[B6] It is important to note that out of the 25 systems only 6 had initial HVLs of less than the maxi-
mum of 2.58 mm Al specified in IEC 61267.




Figure B4. Initial x-ray system HVL at 70 kVP.

                                                   37
AAPM REPORT NO. 116




Figure B5. Approximate Al to add to 0.5 mm Cu for RQA5 at 70 kVP.




        Since it is usually difficult to remove filtration in a clinical setting, it is much more practical
to adjust the added filtration to reach the target HVL of 6.8 mm Al. The AAPM recommendation of
varying the amount of Al in the Cu/Al filter combination is an appropriate method. Figure B5 plots the
amount of additional Al needed to achieve the target HVL of 6.8 mm for different initial HVL values.


Conclusion
We conclude that the IEC 61267 requirement to use 99.9% pure Al is unrealistic and is unnecessary.
While the use of 21 mm of Alloy 1100 Al is a close substitute, a slightly thinner filter would be appro-
priate to achieve the target HVL of 6.8 mm Al.
     The use of a Cu/Al combination filter is an adequate alternative. Our simulation results show that
0.5 mm Cu and 3.0 mm Al provide the same HVL as 21 mm of pure Al. A side benefit of using Cu/Al
combination is that it requires half of the exposure to achieve the same exposure as a 21 mm pure Al
filter.




                                                    38
                                                                                               APPENDIX B


References
  B1. International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). IEC 61267. “Medical Diagnostic X-Ray
      Equipment - Radiation Conditions for Use in the Determination of Characteristics.” Geneva: IEC,
      2005 .
  B2. Mineral Facts and Problems. United States Department of the Interior, Preprint from Bulletin 675,
      Aluminum, pp. 3−4, Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Mines, 1985.
  B3. Boone, J.M., and J.A. Seibert. (1997). “An accurate method for computer-generating tungsten anode
      x-ray spectra from 30 to 140 kV.” Med Phys 24:1661−1670.
  B4. Cullen, D.E., M.H. Chen, J.H. Hubbell, S.T. Perkins, E.F. Plechaty, J.A. Rathkopf, and J. H. Scofield.
      “Tables and Graphs of Photon-Interaction Cross Sections from 10 eV to 100 GeV Derived from the
      LLNL Evaluated Photon Data Library. Part A: Z=1 to 50. Part B: Z=51 to 100.” Lawrence Livermore
      National Laboratory Report No. UCRL-50400, 1989.
  B5. Hubbell, J. H., and S. M. Seltzer. Tables of X-Ray Mass Attenuation Coefficients and Mass Energy-
      Absorption Coefficients (version 1.4). National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), 2004,
      http://physics.nist.gov/xaamdi.
  B6. Shepard, J.S., M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX. Private communication.




                                                   39
                                                                                              APPENDIX C


                                           Appendix C
                        Current Status of Exposure Indices

A variety of exposure indicators have been provided by manufacturers of DR systems. Some of these
are summarized in Table C1, which illustrates the wide variation in terms, units, mathematical forms,
and calibration conditions of these exposure indicators. Inconsistency among manufacturers is the
primary drawback for clinical use of exposure indices at present. Inconsistency creates confusion for
practitioners who work with systems from more than one vendor, or those who have been trained on
one system, but practice using another.
     Appendices D−O present detailed descriptions of the exposure indices provided by some of the
digital radiography vendors.
     The use of exposure indicators began with the cassette-based computed radiography (CR) sys-
tems. Because of the extremely wide dynamic range of the CR detectors and the relatively narrow
dynamic range of exposures in the radiographic projection, the first exposure indicators were devel-
oped to estimate the exposure to the detector in order to modify the gain for harvesting the latent
image. Later cassette-based systems employed the same sort of estimates to re-scale the digitized data
to increase contrast and to compensate for variations in exposure factor. Although not originally
intended by the manufacturers to be used for quality control purposes, practitioners soon recognized
that the exposure indicator was a useful means to evaluate the adequacy of radiation exposure to the
detector and, thus indirectly, the appropriateness of selected technique factors. Not only was this use-
ful to the technologists when setting technique factors, but, from a more global perspective, it allowed
hospitals and clinics to analyze overall exposure trends.[C1] QC programs based on exposure indicator
monitoring have been shown to moderate exposure in actual clinical practice.[C2] This practice has
matured to the point where some manufacturers now offer automated tools to log and report exposure
indicator statistical information for the purposes of QC analysis.
     Exposure indicators for cassette-based CR systems from several manufacturers are presented in
appendices D through G, K, and M.
     Fujifilm’s so-called “Sensitivity” or “S-number” is the oldest exposure indicator. It closely mim-
ics the concept of “speed class” that is familiar to technologists. That is, when operated in Automatic
or Semi-automatic Exposure Data Recognizer (EDR) mode, the index value increases with a decrease
in exposure to the detector and vice versa. In an absolute sense, the numerical value of the indicator
does not correspond exactly with the ISO 9236-1 definition of speed, so there is some confusion with
the nomenclature.[C3] Accurate interpretation of the S-number is limited without knowledge of the
value of “Latitude” or “L-number” for the particular image.[C4] Approximately 2.5 times as much
exposure is required to produce the same S-number on a high resolution (HR) cassette as with a stan-
dard resolution (ST) cassette. The QC value of this indicator is compromised in the vendor’s most
recent software in that the user can retrospectively modify the S-number value. This feature creates
uncertainty in the validity of the S-number in representing exposure trends.
     Kodak CR uses an exposure indicator known as the “Exposure Index,” or “EI,” which represents the
average pixel value of the clinical region of interest. Because of the characteristic function of the digi-
tized image, a change of 300 in the value of EI indicates a change of a factor of 2 in exposure to the


                                                    41
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


Table C1. DR Exposure Indicators, Units, and Calibration Conditions (Adapted from reference [C5])




                                                     42
                                                                                              APPENDIX C


detector. Therefore, EI can be considered to be expressed in units of “mbels.” It is important to note that
the target EI value differs for general purpose (GP) and detail (HR) cassettes for this manufacturer.
     Agfa CR uses an exposure indicator known as “lgM” which represents the logarithm of the
median exposure value within a region of interest (ROI). Each image is assigned a user-selected
speed class that determines the gain at which the image will be processed. Because of this, the actual
radiation exposure required to produce a specific lgM value differs with different speed class setting.
When the numerical value of lgM changes by 0.301 (the logarithm of 2), this indicates a factor of 2
difference in the exposure to the detector. Therefore, lgM can be considered to be expressed in units
of “bels.”
     For the most part cassetteless DR manufacturers have been slow in developing exposure indices.
Several of the vendors did not originally, and some still do not, incorporate a “true” exposure indica-
tor, i.e., a quantity that reports radiation exposure to the detector. Instead, they relied on dose-area
product (DAP), kerma-area product (KAP), or other quantities that represent an estimate of dose to
the patient. These values were straightforward for the manufacturers to implement because the inte-
grated systems allowed for knowledge of the generator settings, collimator field size, etc., which
were used to calculate the value and are now required by IEC (and, hence, National Electrical
Manufacturers Association [NEMA]). While these values may be of some use for calculating patient
dose, they provide no useful information to the technologist with respect to the adequacy of radiation
exposure to the detector.
     Of those cassetteless DR systems utilizing detector exposure indicators, four are presented in the
appendices: Imaging Dynamics; Philips; GE Healthcare; and Siemens Medical Systems. Not to be
confused with the Kodak “EI,” Philips uses an exposure index, “EI,” that is inversely proportional to
the air kerma, so that it somewhat parallels the S-number described above for Fujifilm. Unlike the
Fujifilm approach, Philips conforms to the ISO 9236-1 convention for speed. The Philips EI also dif-
fers from Fujifilm S-number in that the scale used for EI is represented in bigger discrete steps (e.g.,
100, 125, 160, 200, 250, 320, 400, 500, etc.). The EI steps are such that it takes approximately a 25%
change in exposure for a change in EI step to occur, thus smaller changes in technique factor selection
go undetected from an EI standpoint.
     One of the key steps in calculation of any exposure indicator is the segmentation of anatomy or
determination of the ROI. The determination of exposure indicator is oftentimes done with the same
segmentation as that used for data scaling and grayscale processing. Many indices are quite sensitive
to anatomical menu selection because the segmentation process is dependent on anatomical menu
selection. In its more recent versions, Philips has improved upon this by decoupling the EI calculation
from segmentation.
     Imaging Dynamics has introduced a unique index called “f #.” The value of the f # is a dimension-
less scalar providing the technologist with an indication of the direction and magnitude of their tech-
nique selection versus an established target. Negative values represent underexposure and positive
values indicate overexposure. The absolute value represents the deviation from the target exposure by
factors of 2.
     Canon introduced a cassette-based DR system for retrofitting existing x-ray generators. As such,
the detector system had limited knowledge of exposure factors similar to that of cassette-based CR
systems. Canon DR provided an exposure indicator called “Reached Exposure Value” or “REX.” The
numerical value of REX is a function of the “brightness” and “contrast” selected by the operator. For a


                                                   43
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


brightness setting of 16 and a contrast setting of 10, our empirical data at 70 kVP plus 1.5 mm Cu indi-
cates a REX of approximately 100 per mR with a correlation coefficient of 0.998. By admonishing the
technologists against modifying brightness and contrast, REX has been demonstrated to have utility
in oversight of exposure factor.[C6]
     GE delayed introduction of a detector exposure indicator, instead using DAP for patient dose esti-
mates as described above. However, on its most recent announced cassetteless DR product, GE incor-
porates three additional parameters indicating detector exposure, including a “Detector Exposure
Index,” or “DEI,” which is a unitless metric comparing detector exposure to the expected exposure
value.
     All of these exposure indices share certain limitations. Calibration of the exposure indicator is one
of the significant sources of variability among manufacturers. The accuracy of each indicator depends
on proper calibration to a specific set of exposure conditions.[C7] The exposure conditions differ dras-
tically among the manufacturers primarily with regard to use of added filtration or its absence. It has
been shown that a hardened x-ray beam minimizes the sensitivity of the pixel value, and thus exposure
indicator, to kVP and beam energy variations.[C8] A filtered x-ray beam also gives a better clinical rep-
resentation in that the energy spectrum is more similar to that exiting a patient and incident on the
detector during clinical use.
     Another limitation shared by the various exposure indices is sensitivity to the mathematical
processes used to identify collimation boundaries and segmentation of the anatomically relevant data.
The determination of the VOI is a key step in determining the exposure index. The mathematical algo-
rithms should be robust enough to provide a reasonably accurate and reliable estimate of the exposure
indicator regardless of collimation boundaries, anatomical positioning, inclusion of foreign bodies,
etc., but this is not always the case. In addition, if these processes are performed in conjunction with
the segmentation done for image processing purposes, the exposure indicator will be dependent upon
the anatomical menu selection.
     Some cassetteless DR vendors have implemented methods to address this issue. These methods,
having evolved independently by different groups and based on different technologies and system
architectures, vary widely. All methods in use today share a common end result: they all report a
value that reflects the system sensitivity for a given exposure. This may be used to determine the
exposure incident on the image detector. The value should be accurate, consistent, and reproducible.
A system that provides inconsistent feedback may result in inconsistent image quality and causes
confusion and frustration for the radiologists and the technical staff. Some systems only indicate the
DAP to an ideal patient, which is of no use in managing image quality and only satisfies certain reg-
ulatory requirements.
     The additional appendices contain more detailed descriptions of some of the approaches that have
been developed by the various manufacturers.




                                                   44
                                                                                                APPENDIX C


References
  C1. Willis, C.E., J.C. Weiser, R.G. Leckie, J. Romlein, and G. Norton. “Optimization and Quality Control
      of Computed Radiography.” SPIE Medical Imaging VI: PACS Design and Evaluation, vol. 2164, pp.
      178−185,1994.
  C2. Seibert, J.A., D.K. Shelton, and E.H. Moore. (1996). “Computed radiography x-ray exposure trends.”
      Acad Radiol 4:313−318.
  C3. Huda, W. (2005). “The current concept of speed should not be used to describe digital imaging systems.”
      Radiology 234:345−346.
  C4. Chotas, H.G., and C.E. Ravin. (1992). “Digital radiography with photostimulable storage phosphors:
      control of detector latitude in chest imaging.” Invest Radiol 27:823−828.
  C5. Willis, C.E. (2004). “Strategies for dose reduction in ordinary radiographic examinations using CR
      and DR.” Pediatr Radiol 34(Suppl 3):S196−S200.
  C6. Arreola, M., and L. Rill. (2004). “Management of pediatric radiation dose using Canon digital radiog-
      raphy.” Pediatr Radiol 34(Suppl 3): S221−S226.
  C7. Goldman, L.W. “Speed Values, AEC Performance Evaluation and Quality Control with Digital
      Receptors” in Specifications, Performance Evaluations, and Quality Assurance for Radiographic and
      Fluoroscopic Equipment in the Digital Era. L.W. Goldman and M.V. Yester (eds.). AAPM Medical
      Physics Monograph No. 30. Madison, WI: Medical Physics Publishing, pp. 271−297, 2004.
  C8. Tucker, D.M., and P.S. Rezentes. (1997). “The relationship between pixel value and beam quality in
      photostimulable phosphor imaging.” Med Phys 24(6):887−893.




                                                   45
                                                                                              APPENDIX D


                                           Appendix D
                                              Agfa CR

Agfa CR systems provide exposure feedback for each acquired image in the form of a dose index
called lgM. The lgM value indicates the deviation, expressed as the logarithm of the median exposure
level in a calculated region of interest from the expected value. Similar to conventional radiography,
the user selects this expected exposure value during the image acquisition process by choosing a speed
class in the user interface. The speed class defines the operating point of the acquisition system.
         For example, according to ISO 9236-1, a 400-speed screen/film system requires an average
detector dose of 2.5 µGy to achieve a predefined aim density under specified exposure conditions. A
speed class of 400 indicates that the CR system is adjusted to expect about 2.5 µGy detector dose at the
center of its much wider (~500:1, or ~2.7 logE) operating range. The relationship between lgM, calcu-
lated detector dose, and speed class can be expressed as follows:

                                            ⎛ Dose ( μ Gy ) ⎞       ⎛ Speed Class ⎞
                      1gM = 1.9607 + log ⎜                  ⎟ + log ⎜             ⎟⎠ .
                                            ⎝    2.5        ⎠       ⎝    400

    Thus, if the calculated (median) detector dose for an image taken with speed class = 400 is 2.5 µGy,
lgM will have its baseline, or reference value of 1.9607. If the detector dose is twice as high as expected
for the selected speed class, lgM will increase by 0.301 (log2). If the detector dose is half as high
as expected for the selected speed class, lgM will decrease by 0.301. Note that whenever
Dose(µGy)*Speed Class = 1000 (analogous to ISO 9236-1), lgM always takes on its reference value.
These relationships assume that the system's signal response (gray level vs. dose) has been calibrated
according to Agfa's recommended procedure (which uses 75 kVP, 1.5 mm Cu).
    The calculation of lgM is based on a histogram analysis of the acquired (12-bit) image. The gray
levels (called Scanned Average Level, or SAL in Agfa parlance) of this 12-bit image represent the
square root of exposure, rather than the more commonly used log. This quantization scheme removes
the signal dependence of the (Poisson) noise in the image, producing uniform noise amplitude every-
where. Regardless of the quantization scheme, histograms of radiographic images usually contain
several peaks, corresponding, for example, to areas of beam collimation (low exposure), direct x-ray
background (high exposure), and the anatomical region of interest between them (see Figure D1).
Through spatial image segmentation and histogram analysis, the lgM algorithm first identifies the
peak in the histogram (if there is one) corresponding to collimated areas and eliminates it from further
consideration. By looking at the shape and amplitude of other peaks in the histogram, it then finds and
analyzes the peak corresponding to direct x-ray background (if there is one). The remaining typically
broader main peak is assumed to contain the relevant clinical information. This is the region of interest
in which lgM is calculated. The algorithm first derives reasonable endpoints for this main histogram
lobe, and finds its median value, which defines the lgM value for that image. By comparing the lgM
value to the reference lgM value, the deviation from the expected detector exposure can be found. This
information is stored in the image header and displayed on the output image.



                                                    47
AAPM REPORT NO. 116




Figure D1. Schematic drawing of the histogram of a typical radiographic image.



    In addition to providing per-image dose feedback, Agfa CR systems also provide tools to monitor
dose per exam over time. The dose monitoring software enables each facility to set up reference dose
(lgMref) values for up to 200 exam categories. This can be done by simply defining the expected val-
ues, or empirically during a learning phase, in which the software compiles statistics for and registers
lgM values for 50 consecutive images in each category. When the lgM value of a newly acquired
image deviates from the stored reference value for that exam category, the image is flagged, and the
output image contains a numerical and visual (bar graph) display of the lgM value relative to the refer-
ence value that shows the extent of over- or underexposure. The software also maintains a history file
containing dose (lgM) information for the last 50 exposures in each exam category so that radiolo-
gists, radiology administrators, or physicists can monitor exposure consistency and investigate/
correct any occasional or systematic deviations.




                                                     48
                                                                                                  APPRNDIX E


                                            Appendix E
                                            Fujifilm FCR

      Note: The following explanation is specific for FCR systems with 10-bit data output. The expla-
      nation is applicable in principle to FCR systems with greater than 10-bit output, recognizing that
      the 10-bit-specific references (e.g., 210 and 1023) would be replaced with values appropriate for
      the output for the specific FCR system of interest.


Histogram analysis is used to define the wanted versus unwanted signals in a scanned image plate for
a particular incident exposure and examination type. As the linear exposure latitude for the imaging
plate is very wide, a variable reading sensitivity (sensitivity number, S) is necessary to map the stimu-
lated luminescence of the imaging plate to a range of output digital numbers within a 10-bit range
(1024 discrete gray levels).
     In the Automatic mode, the PSP reader determines the latitude as well as the minimum and max-
imum stimulated luminescence values of the information extracted by the EDR process. The imag-
ing plate is scanned directly using a combination of an analog logarithmic amplifier and a 12-bit
(4096 gray levels) ADC encompassing the full dynamic range of the stimulated luminescence inten-
sity at a fixed photomultiplier tube (PMT) sensitivity and gain. In order to normalize the image data
and extract the desired range, an “electronic” EDR process is applied to the resultant data. Final
image output is described by 10 bits (1024 gray levels). Values identified by the EDR process
include the maximum and minimum log photostimulated luminescence (PSL) signals (S1 and S2,
respectively) in the image histogram as shown in Figure E1. Examination-specific algorithms eval-
uate the shape of the histogram to determine the “useful” signal range. Within this range, the median
input digital value, Sk, is “mapped” to the digital output value 511 in the 10-bit digital range. The
Sensitivity number, S, is calculated as: S = 4 × 10(4-Sk), and is an index indicating the reading sensi-
tivity and is inversely proportional to the incident exposure on the plate. The approximate relation-
ship to the mean incident exposure is given as: exposure (mR) ≅ 200/S for standard x-ray beam
conditions (80 kVP, 3 mm Al total filtration equivalent). The latitude number, L, is an index repre-
senting the logarithmic range of digitization of the stimulated luminescence signals about the
median value, Sk. L is calculated from the maximum and minimum luminescence values within the
defined image area and the corresponding digital output values of the reading unit as:

                                    L = 1023 × (S1 − S2) / (Q1 − Q2),

where Q1 and Q2 are the digital values corresponding to the log PSL output signals S1 and S2 of the
reading unit, respectively. An example of an image histogram with the above-mentioned parameters
is illustrated in Figure E1. An Sk value of 2.30 corresponds to an incident exposure of 1.0 mR. The
latitude of the image reader and ST image plate usually ranges from a logarithmic PSL intensity of
0.3 (0.01 mR) to 4.3 (100 mR).




                                                     49
AAPM REPORT NO. 116




Figure E1. Sensitivity and Latitude numbers defined for the Fujifilm PSP system output parameters as related to the
image histogram.




                                                       50
                                                                                                      APPENDIX F


                                               Appendix F

                       Kodak CR (now Carestream Health,Inc.)


Kodak DirectView DR and Kodak DirectView CR products provide the user with an EXPOSURE
INDEX for each clinical image, which is a calibrated measure of the exposure incident on the detec-
tor. The following description of the EXPOSURE INDEX applies to CsI-based Kodak DirectView DR
systems and Kodak DirectView CR systems used for general radiography applications. The com-
mon measure of receptor exposure reflects a highly integrated design philosophy for these prod-
ucts, which extends to the user interface and the underlying image data handling.


For-Processing Image
A FOR-PROCESSING IMAGE is computed from the RAW IMAGE DATA acquired for each image. The details of
the computation depend on the technology. It is quite different for storage-phosphor-based CR images
than it is for flat-panel DR images. However, in both cases the result is a FOR-PROCESSING IMAGE that is
calibrated to an x-ray exposure under a STANDARD CALIBRATION CONDITION and represented on a com-
mon logarithmic scale. Kodak CR and DR systems allow users access to the FOR-PROCESSING IMAGE.

System Calibration
It is very useful to have a simple-to-reproduce, scatter-free exposure condition to calibrate digital
detectors. Kodak CR and DR systems are calibrated at 80 kVP with a 0.5 mm Cu and 1.0 mm Al added
filtration at the x-ray tube housing. This choice for a STANDARD CALIBRATION CONDITION has been
shown to minimize the sensitivity to small errors in kVP1 as well as to mitigate the effects of expected
differences in inherent tube filtration. Kodak CR and DR systems are calibrated to produce a relation-
ship between the FOR-PROCESSING IMAGE pixel values and the incident x-ray exposure given by
                                                        ⎛ K⎞
                                       P = 1000 ⋅ log10 ⎜        + 1059,
                                                        ⎝ K 0 ⎟⎠
where P is the pixel value, K is the incident air kerma in μGy, and K0 is 1.0 μGy. Measurement of the
incident exposure excludes the effects of backscatter from the CR or DR detector. CR values are for
GP-25 storage phosphor plates and require a 5-minute delay between exposure and processing to be
observed.
    If measurements are made in milliroentgens, an alternate expression,
                                                         ⎛ E⎞
                                        P = 1000 ⋅ log10 ⎜ ⎟ + 2000,
                                                         ⎝ E0 ⎠
where P is the pixel value, E is the incident exposure in mR, and E0 is 1.0 mR, can be used.



1 Samei, E., J.A. Seibert, C.E. Willis, M.J. Flynn, E. Mah, and K.L. Junck. (2001). “Performance evaluation of com-

puted radiography systems.” Med Phys 28:361-371.


                                                       51
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


Exposure Index
Image segmentation is a key step in processing the FOR-PROCESSING IMAGE of clinical images to create a
FOR-PRESENTATION image that will be sent to a printer or to a Picture Archiving and Communications
system (PACS). The purpose of segmentation is to identify an ANATOMICAL REGION OF INTEREST for each
image. Proprietary algorithms detect and eliminate the FOREGROUND and BACKGROUND regions from
consideration. FOREGROUND is that area of the image that is occluded by collimation. BACKGROUND is
the image area that receives the x-ray exposure unattenuated by the patient. The remaining image area is
evaluated with pixel-value and texture-sensitive algorithms to derive the unique ANATOMICAL REGION OF
INTEREST for that image. Optimal tonal rendering is derived from histogram analysis of pixel values in
the ANATOMICAL REGION OF INTEREST. The EXPOSURE INDEX for each image is the average pixel value of
the FOR-PROCESSING IMAGE within the ANATOMICAL REGION OF INTEREST .


Exposure Index Reporting and Documentation
The EXPOSURE INDEX for each image is displayed on the graphical user interface of Kodak CR and DR
systems. It is also incorporated into the DICOM header created for each image as DICOM tag
(0018,1405). Other exposure-relevant information recorded in the DICOM header includes: kVP
(0018,0060), tube current (0018,1151), exposure duration (0018,1150), and the current-time product
in mAs (0018,1152). The EXPOSURE INDEX for each image acquired is also entered into a log file on the
acquisition system along with other relevant information, including the date, time, patient ID, body
part, view, accession number, and image-reject comments (if any). Summary information is accessible
to key operators (normally the chief radiographer or department administrator).


X-Ray Spectrum Dependence of Exposure Index
The response of DR systems is characterized by the relationship between incident air kerma dose and
the pixel values in original images. Because system responses are x-ray-spectrum dependent, it is
instructive to use the ISO 9236-1 standard, which specifies four x-ray beam conditions that span the
range of common clinical examinations. These are intended to represent the beam conditions (includ-
ing scatter) incident upon the detector for projection radiography of the extremities (ISO I), the skull
(ISO II), the lumbar spine (ISO III), and the chest (ISO IV). The system response for the four ISO beam
conditions, as well as the STANDARD CALIBRATION CONDITION, is given as an algebraic equation, repre-
sented in tabular form, and shown graphically below.

Algebraic Representation
The relationship between pixel value of the FOR-PROCESSING IMAGE and incident exposure can be
summarized as
                                                   ⎛ K⎞
                                    P = 1000 ⋅ log ⎜        + B,
                                                   ⎝ K 0 ⎟⎠

where K is the incident air kerma in μGy, K0 is 1.0 μGy, and B is a beam quality offset that depends
upon the incident x-ray beam condition, or as

                                                   52
                                                                                              APPENDIX F


                                                      ⎛ E⎞
                                       P = 1000 ⋅ log ⎜ ⎟ + C,
                                                      ⎝ E0 ⎠

where P is the pixel value, E is the incident exposure in mR, E0 is 1.0 mR, and C is a beam quality off-
set that depends upon the incident x-ray beam condition. The constants for each beam condition are
given in Table F1.


Table F1. Exposure Response Constants for Kodak’s CR and DR Systems
                                       Kodak CR System                      Kodak DR System
X-Ray Beam                              B            C                       B            C
ISO − I                                839         1780                     648         1589
ISO − II                              1059         2000                     973         1914
ISO − III                             1071         2012                    1039         1980
ISO − IV                              1059         2000                    1025         1966
STD Calibration Condition             1059         2000                    1059         2000




Tabulation
The relationship between pixel value in the FOR-PROCESSING IMAGE and the incident exposure is illus-
trated for Kodak CR and DR systems in Table F2 and Table F3, respectively. The values for the STAN-
DARD CALIBRATION CONDITION (labeled STD) are by design the same for CR and DR systems. However,
because of the differences in detector technology, the responses to the ISO beams differ.




                                                  53
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


Table F2. Kodak CR Systems (GP-25 Cassette): FOR-PROCESSING IMAGE Pixel Values vs. Incident Exposure




                                                  54
                                                                                      APPENDIX F


Table F3. Kodak DR Systems: FOR-PROCESSING IMAGE Pixel Values vs. Incident Exposure




                                                 55
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


Graphical Representation
The dependence of pixel value on incident exposure for the STANDARD CALIBRATION CONDITION as well
as the four ISO beam conditions is shown graphically in Figure F1 for the Kodak CR systems and in
Figure F2 for Kodak DR systems. For the CR systems, only the ISO-I (extremity) condition results in a
significantly different response. The other three ISO beam conditions and the calibration beam all
result in system responses that are nearly identical and therefore are plotted as a single line.




Figure F1. Kodak CR systems (GP-25 cassette): FOR-PROCESSING IMAGE pixel values vs. incident exposure.




                                                  56
                                                                                        APPENDIX F




Figure F2. Kodak DR Systems: FOR-PROCESSING IMAGE pixel values vs. incident exposure.




                                                  57
                                                                                       APPENDIX G


                                        Appendix G

                                   Konica Minolta CR

The amount of photostimulable light emission versus incident x-ray dose exhibits good linearity
over a range of over 4 orders of magnitude. The REGIUS 12-bit (4096 level) quantization range
(QR) is specified by a QR parameter such the range of quantized exposures X is according to the
relationship:
                       200/QR×1[mR]×10−1.5 < X < 200/QR×1[mR]×10+2.5.                           (a)
For example, if QR=200, the quantized range is 10−1.5 to 10+2.5 mR, or 0.0316 to 316 mR. Output
signals are proportional to log10 (mR), so an incident detector exposure of 0.0316 mR is mapped
to value 0, and of an exposure of 1 mR is mapped to an output signal 1535. (The REGIUS is cal-
ibrated using the image from an exposure corresponding to a beam quality of 80 kV, 2.0 m).
    The QR parameter is related to an equivalent screen/film system speed (referred to as an
S-value) as follows. Let R be the incident x-ray exposure that produces a REGIUS output value of
1535 and a printed film optical density (using a fixed printer mapping) of 1.2 within a specified
image area of interest. From expression (a) above, the corresponding exposure is readily deter-
mined as:
                                       X = R = 200/QR.                                          (b)
If read out with QR=200, R equals 1 mR; if read with QR=400, R is 0.5 mR, etc. Suppose it is
desired to darken (or lighten) the printed film such that some other pixel value within a different
area of interest is printed with an optical density of 1.2. REGIUS gradation processing uses an
S-value to adjust output pixel values to achieve the corresponding darker or lighter printed image
(using the same printer mapping). Let R` be the actual x-ray dose required to produce a screen/
film image optical density of 1.2 in the desired region. This S-value is then defined as:
                                         S = QR×R/R`                                            (c)
where R depends on the QR parameter as given in expression (b) above. From its definition and
the above discussion, we observe the following properties of the S-value:

   (1) S-value is independent of the QR parameter; by substitution of (b) into (c), S = 200/R.
   (2) S-value is determined from pixel values obtained following gradation processing. Grad-
       ation processing is determined by Konica Minolta’s original auto-gradation processing
       algorithm; however, this can be manually changed by the operator.
   (3) S-value is in inverse proportional to x-ray dose; i.e., for exposures of the same object
       under identical conditions, if the x-ray dose is n-times, the S-value will be 1/n-times.
   (4) When S-value of the image is 200, the incident x-ray exposure to the object area (espe-
       cially the region of interest) output with a printed film density 1.2 is 1 mR.

A consequence of property (2) is that S-value is not uniquely determined by the amount of x-ray
exposure. However, for any particular (exam type-specific) suitable gradation processing, proper-
ties (1) and (2) allow the S-value to serve as a very useful relative exposure index.


                                                59
                                                                                          APPENDIX H


                                         Appendix H

                                    Imaging Dynamics

The goal is to determine a method for providing an index of exposure which was easy for the tech-
nologist to understand and which would be traceably related to an existing and well-recognized
standard.
    An exposure of 1 mR will produce a mid-range optical density on a 200-speed screen/film
system. An exposure of 0.5 mR will produce the same optical density on a 400-speed screen/film
system. Our exposure index is based on this relationship. We determine for an image the estimated
radiation input to produce its mid-range density and relate that to the screen/film system speed
that would have responded in a similar fashion.
    The first requirement is a calibration of the digital system’s response to input radiation. To
emulate the typical exit spectra from a patient’s body, we harden the beam by adding 1 mm of cop-
per filtration. Measurements are then made at 80 kVP to determine the system input/output char-
acteristic in terms of milliroentgens per digital number (mR/DN). This input/output ratio, R1O, is
stored as a system characteristic and does not need to be recalculated on an image-by-image basis.
    To calculate the exposure index, which we refer to as the f# due to its similarity to aperture f-
stops on a lens, we segment the image to exclude areas of direct exposure and areas outside the
exposed region. The remainder represents the patient anatomy. The median value, IMed, of the
anatomy histogram is found. Experimental data has shown that using the median value will in
most cases give an accurate representation of the mid-range optical density in the image. It is not
unduly skewed by small errors in image segmentation. This is not the case if the mean is used,
where a significant shift in value occurs if the segmentation happens to include some areas of
direct exposure.
    Using the input/output ratio R1O and the median value IMed, we calculate:

                                           XMed = IMed . R1O,

where XMed is the radiation level which resulted in the mid-range density.
   Effective speed, SE is therefore given by:
                                                200
                                         SE =         .
                                                X Med

    In clinical practice, different screen/film types are used for different examinations. A 400-speed
system is common for chest exams, while 100 speed is common for extremities such as hands. The
slower speed gives finer detail.
    Our exposure index takes this into account by relating the effective speed SE to a target speed
ST. The target speed is determined on an institutional basis and is stored in an anatomical param-
eters database for reference when processing each image.




                                                  61
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


    The radiation technologist should not be required to remember what the correct screen/film
speed equivalent is for each anatomy in assessing the exposure index. We therefore calculate the
relationship of the effective speed to the target speed. By expressing this as a log base 2, thus:
                                                     ⎛S ⎞
                                         f # = log 2 ⎜ T ⎟ .
                                                     ⎝ SE ⎠
    The resultant index is dimensionless and applies equally regardless of the target speed. The
radiation technologist knows that they are aiming for an f # of zero. Underexposure by a factor of
2 will give a value of −1, by a factor of 4 will give −2. Overexposure by two times will give a value
of 1; by four times will give a value of 2. In practical terms, the technologist can reasonably expect
that if an image with f # between −1 and +1 is obtained, the exposure will be of reasonable diag-
nostic quality. It is worth noting that no exposure index derived solely from the properties of the
image can be completely reliable in clinical use. There will always be a small number of cases
where unusual pathology or implants will alter the overall balance such that the image will give a
misleading index. Technologists should be advised to use their own best judgment in conjunction
with the exposure index to determine if an image needs to be repeated. It would be inappropriate,
for example, to repeat an image based on a high f # simply because it lies outside the institution’s
guidelines if the resulting image is of very high quality.
    One advantage of this numbering system is that technologists are generally familiar with the
range of density settings on the automatic exposure control (AEC), or phototimer system. The f#’s
described here may be thought of as somewhat analogous, with plus and minus densities. By using
a system that echoes an already familiar numbering scheme, the technologists are more likely to
be comfortable with it and pay closer attention to the results. By contrast, other exposure indices
in use today require the technologist to understand less intuitive numbering schemes. For exam-
ple, one widely used system displays the log median value and asks the technologist to target a
proper exposure around 2.2.
    Each 0.3 increment or decrement represents a doubling or halving of exposure, respectively.
While this is certainly a viable scheme, it is not intuitive.




                                                 62
                                                                                               APPENDIX I


                                            Appendix I

                      Philips DigitalDiagnost Exposure Index


General
The Philips DigitalDiagnost flat-panel DR system calculates an exposure index (EI) for every image.
The EI is inversely proportional to the detector air kerma, K, and is derived from a “characteristic” pixel
value of the image.
    The scaling of the EI is defined in a way similar to screen/film speed (ISO 9236-1):

                                                EI = 1000 / K                                          (1)

where K is the air kerma in µGy at the detector entrance.
    The air kerma K is obtained from the characteristic pixel value PVc and the sensitivity SENS of the
detector, expressed in digital numbers per µGy:

                                                K = PVc / SENS.                                        (2)

    The sensitivity of the flat-panel detector after applying the standard detector-specific corrections is
SENS = 207 µGy−1, for a beam quality corresponding to RQA5 according to IEC 61267 (70 kV, 21 mm
Al added filtration, HVL 7.1 mm Al).

Exposure Index Values
The exposure index for the DigitalDiagnost is intentionally confined to values that follow the ISO R'10
scale, well-known from, e.g., screen/film speeds. The numbers calculated according to equations (1)
and (2) are thus rounded to the values …, 100, 125, 160, 200, 250, 320, 400,… (see Table I1). Each step
correponds to a factor of 100.1 (or an increase by about 25%).
    The rationale for this grading is the following:

    • under clinical conditions the reproducibility of the EI for fixed detector exposure conditions
        is approximately of this size, owing mainly to variations in image/histogram evaluation for
        different patients/examinations;
    •   one step of the ISO R’10 scale corresponds to one “exposure point,” which is a scale well-
        known to most x-ray techs and is, for example, also used for the grading of the mAs scale on
        many x-ray generators.




                                                    63
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


Table I1. Relation between Detector Exposure/Air Kerma, Pixel Value, and Exposure Index(for Beam Quality RQA5)




                                                      64
                                                                                             APPENDIX I


Determination of Characteristic Pixel Value
An x-ray image usually contains a wide range of pixel values. An important step in the calculation of
the exposure index according to equations (1) and (2) is to determine a characteristic pixel value PVc,
i.e., a pixel value that corresponds to the average detector signal representing the target area of the
examination.
     This process usually comprises two steps:

    • the determination of an subarea (ROI) of the full image, containing the target area;
    • the determination of the characteristic pixel value in this ROI. This can be the average or the
       median pixel in this subarea; however other, more sophisticated algorithms involving the
       pixel histogram may also be used.

     Slightly different approaches are used in different software releases of the DigitalDiagnost. Up
to and including release 1.2 the determination of the characteristic pixel value is coupled to the
“ranging” algorithm which detects the exposed area and finds specific pixel values from the (cumu-
lative) histogram, used to adapt the display look-up table (LUT). Since the LUT adaptation may be
dependent on the selected image type (examination/anatomy), the characteristic pixel value and such
the EI may depend on the type of examination, even for similar histograms.
     Starting with release 1.3 the determination of the characteristic pixel value for the EI-determina-
tion is decoupled from the determination of ranging parameters and is independent of the type of
examination.
     For images with automatic exposure control (AEC), PVc is determined as the median pixel value
in the area(s) corresponding to the activated measuring field(s) of the AEC.
     For images with manual selection of exposure parameters, the area in which PVc is determined is
defined as follows: the characteristic pixel value is defined as the median pixel value of the center
25% area of the image (called the “quarter field”). Collimated and direct radiation areas are masked
out before calculating the median.



kV Correction
As the sensitivity of the detector changes with x-ray photon energy, the relation between pixel value
and incident air kerma is not fixed for different beam qualities. Consequently, a given EI will corre-
spond to different exposure values (air kerma values) for different kilovoltages. This effect is most
pronounced for low kVP, where the sensitivity (pixel value/µGy) may be only 30% of that at 70 kV. To
mitigate this effect, a kV correction factor is applied in the EI calculation in the DigitalDiagnost
(starting with release 1.2), which compensates for changes in the sensitivity (see Figure I1).




                                                  65
AAPM REPORT NO. 116




Figure I1. kV correction factor for the Exposure Index as used in the DigitalDiagnost.




                                                      66
                                                                                        APPENDIX J


                                        Appendix J

                                      GE Healthcare


Definium Systems
GE digital radiography Definium systems provide the user with three values related to the incident
exposure (air kerma) to the digital detector:

   • Uncompensated Detector Exposure (UDExp) in μGy
   • Compensated Detector Exposure (CDExp) in μGy
   • Detector Exposure Index (DEI), unitless
    UDExp, CDExp, and DEI are displayed as (optional) image annotations on the acquisition work-
station and are stored in the image DICOM header. DEI is also displayed on the acquisition user
interface in order to provide quick feedback to the radiography technologist.

   1. Anatomy Segmentation: As a preliminary step, the anatomy regions are identified in the raw
      image and a Median Anatomy Value (AM) in unit of counts is determined. (The raw image is the
      image read from the digital detector after bad pixel, offset, and gain correction.)

   2. Detector Sensitivity: Two sensitivity values are estimated for the digital detector based on
      calibrations at the manufacturer and/or by field engineers.
      o Uncompensated Detector Sensitivity, USens, is defined as the conversion efficiency of
         the detector in units of counts/μGy at 80 kVP (with a standard filtration and no anti-
         scatter grid).
      o Compensated Detector Sensitivity, CSens, is equal to USens after compensation for
          kVP, presence of anti-scatter grid, and user-selected additional collimator Cu filtration.

   3. Detector Exposure: Two exposure values are calculated using USens and CSens.
      o Uncompensated Detector Exposure, UDExp =AM/USens
      o Compensated Detector Exposure, CDExp =AM/CSens

   4. Detector Exposure Index: DEI is a unitless normalized metric relating obtained median
      anatomy count value (AM) to expected count value for the used technique (kVP, filtration,
      and anti-scatter grid). Expected count values are derived using the Automatic Exposure
      Control (AEC) with standard acrylic phantoms, appropriate over the kVP range.
       Hence, DEI can be effectively used for indicating
       o Over-/underexposure due to patient mispositioning or incorrect selection of ion cham-
         bers with AEC acquisitions, and
       o Over-/underexposure due to inappropriate technique selection with fixed-time
         acquisitions.
       o Over-/underexposure due to other operator-related or system-related events.


                                                67
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


       DEI values are displayed on the acquisition user interface after each acquisition, along with a
       DEI Lower Limit and a DEI Upper limit that are user-configurable for each anatomical view
       and patient type (Adult vs. Pediatric).
    For each acquisition performed on the system, UDExp, CDExp, and DEI, along with other
technique and acquisition information, are logged on the system and can be exported to a .csv file
on CD at any time.


General Properties

   • UDExp, CDExp, and DEI are independent of image processing and reprocessing. The
       values, once calculated, are stored in the DICOM header and cannot be modified by the
       user.
   •   UDExp, CDExp, and DEI are potentially affected by errors in the identification of the
       anatomical regions in the image, the identification of collimated regions in the image
       (auto-shuttering), or the presence of large-area prosthesis/shielding. Before closing an
       exam, the user has the option of modifying/correcting the auto-shuttering and reprocess-
       ing the image to get more accurate UDExp, CDExp, and DEI values. (Note: The image
       processing will NOT affect the DEI metrics. Only the shutter location will.)


Technical Mode
A user with administrative privileges on the system can select the Technical Mode for detector expo-
sure metrics, whereby all metrics are calculated based on a 512×512 pixel square in the center of the
image. In this mode, the result of Anatomy Segmentation is not used in the calculations. This mode
can be useful when imaging non-humanoid phantoms.



XR/d and XQ/i Systems
The GE XQ/i and XR/d digital detector systems do not directly report a detector-exposure or sensitivity
index to the operator. A “Sensitivity” value is embedded in the DICOM header. This value is related to
detector exposure through the original pixel value.
    For images other than those of Chest exams, feedback is given to the operators on adequacy of
technique by darkening or lightening the final image depending on what raw mean signal value in the
recognized image histogram is present in the image relative to the expected value for the selected
anatomical view (this behavior no longer applies in the new Definium systems, which provide detector
exposure metrics).




                                                  68
                                                                                           APPENDIX K


                                            Appendix K

                                              Alara CR

In order to optimize radiation dose, image quality, and use of the CR reader’s dynamic range for a
wide variety of radiographic studies, Alara’s CR product provides the capability of changing system
gain. Analogous to screen/film radiography, we have called the various gain settings Speed Classes
(SC). The nominal or target x-ray exposure for each SC is summarized in Table K1.


Table K1. Target X-Ray Exposures for Various Speed Classes
                                                                    Target Exposure
                 Speed Class                                             (mR)
                       50                                                    4.0
                       75                                                    2.67
                      100                                                    2.0
                      200                                                    1.0
                      300                                                    0.67
                      400                                                    0.5
                      800                                                    0.25




    For each image, an Exposure Indicator Value (EIV) is computed. For all speed classes, and for
Standard and High Resolution modes, the target EIV is 2000. The EIV is logarithmically related to
the energy deposited in the plate: changes of 300 in the EIV correspond to changes by factors of 2 in
exposure.
    The EIV for each Alara CR device is calibrated using an RQA5 x-ray spectrum (70 kV, 21 mm Al
added filtration, HVL = 7.1 mm Al; IEC 61267:1994). The gains (PMT voltage settings) required to
achieve a target digital count for each of the Target Exposures listed in Table K1 are determined. Thus
for a particular device, a table of PMT voltage settings by Speed Class is generated. At system instal-
lation, each exam type is assigned a speed class according to site preferences. Subsequent selection
of exam type automatically selects the speed class.
    Prior to image processing, the EIV is computed from the 16-bit, linear-with-exposure image
according to the following basic steps:

    1. Using a combination of histogram and morphological analysis, image regions correspon-
       ding to overscan, x-ray beam collimation, and direct exposure are identified.

    2. The mean pixel value of the remaining region, which corresponds to anatomy, is computed
       and converted to mR via the RQA5 calibration mentioned previously.

    3. EIV is computed according to:
                                                    ⎡            SC ⋅ mR ⎤
                               EIV = 1000 ⋅ log10 ⎢ ResScale ⋅
                                                    ⎣               2 ⎥⎦

                                                    69
AAPM REPORT NO. 116



      where ResScale accounts for the slightly different system response at Standard and High
      Resolution. SC and mR refer to the system speed class and the mean anatomy exposure in
      mR, respectively.
         The EIV is displayed as a numerical value on the image on the QC workstation, and is
      shown graphically on a horizontal scale along the bottom of the thumbnail views of the
      images. The EIV is also stored in DICOM tag (0018,1405) (Relative X-Ray Exposure).
      Alara provides tools to analyze EIV trends.




                                            70
                                                                                                                 APPENDIX L


                                                    Appendix L

                                      Siemens Medical Systems

Description of the exposure index from Siemens Medical System's digital radiographic systems is
summarized in Table L1.

Table L1. Exposure Index Description for Siemen’s DR Systems
Nr.          Question                                    Device
1.1          Company                                     Siemens AG Medical Solutions
1.2          X-ray equipment type                        AXIOM Aristos (FX, MX, TX, VX)
                                                         Digital Flat-Detector
2            Name of the exposure index (if more         Exposure Index,
             than one, please add an extra sheet         abbrev.: EXI
             for each)
3            What is the notation in the DICOM           DICOM Group/Element: 0018,1405 Relative x-ray exposure;
             header and what does the number             Direct declaration of the EXI-value as data type IS,
             mean?                                       no conversion needed.
4            Where is the exposure index?                It is displayed as image-legend on softcopy and hardcopy devices.
5            Definition of the used exposure index       The exposed field is subdivided in a 3×3 matrix, where the central
                                                         segment is defined as the region of interest.The exposure index is
                                                         calculated as the average out of the original pixel values in the
                                                         central segment.
                                                         The calculation scheme is independent of the selected organ
                                                         program, the exposure method, the measuring field (when using
                                                         AEC), and the image processing parameters.
5.1          Functional relationship between             The EXI-value is a relative value, directly proportional to the dose.
             exposure index and dose                     Doubling of the absorbed dose in the image receptor results in a
                                                         doubling of the EXI-value.
5.2          Calibration conditions                      For 70 kV and an added filter of 0.6 mm Cu (following beam quality
                                                         RQA5 in IEC 61267:1994-09), a calibration factor c is determined
                                                         and documented in the system manual: Air Kerma [Gy] = c × EXI.
5.3          Dependence                                  Depends on:
             (e.g., tube voltage, collimating,           collimation, beam quality, examined organ.
             organ range, selected organ program,...)    Depends not on:
                                                         organ program name, selected exposure method (manually or
                                                         automatically), selected measuring field.
5.4          Accuracy of the exposure index              Calibration factor c: ±10% (uncertainty of dose measurement)
             (accuracy of calibration, relationship to   at calibration conditions.
             image receptor dose or speed)               Absolute values at identical doses: the tolerance of the
                                                         conversion factor (Pixel value/dose) for different detectors is ±15%.
5.5          Reproducibility                             <5% (limited by reproducibility of generator and automatic
                                                         exposure control, respectively).
5.6          Using at technical exposures                Currently available test phantoms for acceptance and
                                                         constancy testing can be used without modification.
                                                         At similar positioning of the test phantom, collimation, and
                                                         exposure parameters,a deviation of ±10% indicates a
                                                         significant change.
                                                                                                                   (Continued)

                                                           71
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


Table L1. Exposure Index Description for Siemen’s DR Systems (Continued)
Nr.          Question                                Device
5.7          Precision of the exposure index in      Scaling: EXI-values are scaled as the original 14-bit pixel values.
             constancy tests (and at constancy       (quod vide 5.5 and 5.6)
             conditions)
6            What statements are possible with       The EXI-value is a relative measure for images of the same type,
             the exposure index in the medical       acquired at user-defined standard protocols.
             image and what conditons and            The EXI-values can vary for different organs and projections.
             limits are valid?                       With the EXI-value it is possible to discover:
                                                      − changes in the dose-presettings (speed)
                                                      − changes in the selection of measuring fields
                                                      − wrong positioning of the measuring field w.r.t.the organ.
7            That does the company think about       1. Control of the system components “AEC” and “image
             aims of the statement or usage of the   receptor” for constancy test.
             discussed exposure index?               2. Control of the exposure parameters in clinical routine.




                                                       72
                                                                                            APPENDIX M


                                          Appendix M

                                               iCRco

The exposure index is the key link between the x-ray physics at the site and the specific capture
device. It represents an estimate of the radiation a patient receives from an x-ray exposure. In con-
ventional screen/film x-ray, the dose can be estimated by the darkness of the x-ray film itself. For CR
systems, the appearance of the digital x-ray image on a computer monitor does not depend on the
dose level. However, the actual pixel values recorded by the PMTs correlate well with the actual
x-ray dose. Therefore, it is possible to calibrate a CR device to act as a dosimeter: for example, the
dose captured by the phosphor plate can be accurately measured using an iCRco CR scanner and
translated into an exposure number.


A Generalized and Practical Aproach
The mature status of CR technologies combined with the competitive nature of the marketplace has
resulted in vendor-specific methodologies for computing exposure index. This has detracted from the
original purpose of the exposure index: to provide a level of confidence of image quality to the technol-
ogists while minimizing radiation to the patient. This creates confusion and an unnecessary barrier in
the migration to digital.
    iCRco has developed an approach that accomplishes two important goals: (1) it facilitates migra-
tion towards a generalized standard, and (2) it provides a practical easy-to-use metric for end-users to
apply in a clinical environment.
    Our method provides a dimensionless number representing a level 0 performance relative to an
expected anatomy-specific exposure. This is not too different from the number generated by the
method developed by Imaging Dynamics Company (IDC). For example, in IDC’s approach, an expo-
sure of −2 is a 4 times underexposure, −1 is 2 times underexposure, 0 is perfectly exposed, +1 is 2 times
overexposed, and +2 is 4 times overexposed.
    The analytics behind our approach have the fine precision required for an exact continuous numer-
ical indicator if required. However, for practical applications we have simplified the display by group-
ing “performance ranges” into a discrete number ranging from −2, −1, 0, +1, +2, see Figure M1. The
goal for the user is to keep the images in the neutral range (around 0) independent of the anatomical
view.
    Graphically, we have color coded the number shown on the computer screen, if the level is within
the −2 to +2 range, the number is shown in green (as shown in Figure M2). If the level is outside the −2
or +2 range, the number is shown in red.




                                                   73
AAPM REPORT NO. 116




Figure M1. Relative exposure index as a function of plate dose in mR.




Figure M2. Magnified view of display of exposure index. For values in the −2.0 to +2.0 range the exposure index is
displayed in green; if outside the range, the value is displayed in red to signal to the technician that the exposure is
out of range.




                                                          74
                                                                                                     APPENDIX M


Exposure Index Calibration Wizard
iCRco’s equipment comes with a built-in software module which calibrates the CR device to the x-ray
at the site. The software presents an interactive step-by-step procedure that can be performed during
installation and maintenance. Reference exposures are taken at progressively increasing levels of dose
and measured using a dosimeter. These calibrated exposures serve as the reference levels for the expo-
sure index. The objective is to calibrate the device around an 80 kVP source, hardened with 1.5 mm Cu
at the x-ray source. The pixel analysis is performed on an area corresponding to 80% of a 14 by 17 in.
cassette. The software performs a regression by which the linearity of the system is evaluated as a func-
tion of dose, as shown in Figure M3.




Figure M3. Linearity of the exposure index is shown as a function of log of dose and its corresponding pixel value.




There is a built-in table of anatomy-specific target exposures which serve as reference.
    The resulting exposure index is a ratio of the pixel value analysis as described above and the
expected reference value for the given anatomy. The exposure index represents a deviation from the
reference. Of course, the reference levels can be adjusted based on the policy and tastes of users at the
site.
    To facilitate and demonstrate the generalized approach, in our system we have implemented
translation of our numbers into exposure numbers of other vendors including Fujifilm S Number and
Agfa IgM. Translation into other methodologies can be implemented as well.




                                                       75
                                                                                             APPENDIX N



                                           Appendix N

                                 Canon Medical Systems


REX Value and Exposure
With digital x-ray systems, including the CXDI system, by using the analysis explained in the previous
section, the density of the image is always automatically adjusted to a specific level regardless of the
dose amount. Even if the density is constant, however, when the dose is high, a clear image with good
SNR is produced, and when it is low, noise is conspicuous in the resulting image.
    The level of the dose is determined by the level of the image quality allowed by the doctor for exam-
ination and diagnosis.
    If the image is always output with a constant density, particularly with phototimer radiography, it is
not known at what level of dose the image was actually taken.
    For this reason, an index is needed as a guide to the level of dose used.
    The REX value (Reached EXposure Value) is defined as having the purpose of indicating the dose.
    Before explaining the REX value, a typical example of the dose index using the two-point method
for analysis is shown in Figure N1.
    As shown in the figure, with the two-point method, the largest and smallest pixel values correspon-
ding to the image are obtained from the histogram and the midpoint is taken as the dose index.
    With the one-point method, on the other hand, the simplest method is to use the pixel values
obtained by analysis directly.




                                               Figure N1.


                                                   77
AAPM REPORT NO. 116


     If this method is used, however, the pixel value obtained by analysis is completely different for each
region and the stability of the analysis is directly affected, making it an ambiguous standard for the dose
index.
     With the CXDI system, therefore, as shown in Figure N2, without directly using the pixel value
obtained by analysis, the reference density is specified as 0.75D and the pixel value that gives this den-
sity is used as the dose index. This is called the REX value.
     However, as a proportional relation with the dose is not established when the pixel value after log
conversion is used, the pixel value before log conversion is used as the REX value.
     The definition of the REX value is explained here using detailed illustrations. Figure N3 shows the
definition of the REX value using a thoracic image as the example.
     The 1st-4th quadrants are defined by counterclockwise rotation, where the 1st quadrant is on the top
right. The 1st quadrant is the LUT curve showing the relation between system output and film density;
the 3rd quadrant is the sensor characteristic curve showing the relation between the dose detected by the
sensor and the sensor output value; and the 4th quadrant is the linear-log curve for converting the sensor
output value proportional to the dose into the system output proportional to the logarithm of the dose.
     The following is a brief explanation using only the 3rd and 4th quadrants in the right half of the
figure.
     First, to explain the algorithm by which the LUT curve is determined.
     The CXDI determines the feature pixel value of the target chest image by automated analysis.
     In this figure, it is assumed that the sensor output value corresponding to this pixel value (pixel
value before log conversion) is 1220.




                                                Figure N2.


                                                    78
                                                                                          APPENDIX N




                                             Figure N3.



    It is also assumed that the corresponding density showing the film density at the position of this
pixel is designated as 1.9D.
    According to these assumptions, the LUT curve is shifted horizontally, the amount of shift being
determined at the position where the arrow from the feature pixel value and the arrow from the corre-
sponding density intersect.
    Next is an explanation of the algorithm by which the REX value is determined.
    The REX value is determined at the position where the arrow from the reference density 0.75D
(fixed) meets the sensor output axis.
    In other words, the REX value denotes sensor output at the position expressed by density 0.75D on
the film output by the CXDI.
    Next is an explanation of the REX value in proportion to the x-ray dose. Figure N4 shows the
change in the REX value when the dose is low.
    In Figure N4, it is assumed that the sensor output corresponding to the feature pixel value deter-
mined by analysis is 650, the patient exposure dose is 650/1220=0.53 times, and the corresponding
density is 1.9D, the same as in Figure N3.
    As the dose is small, in this figure the characteristic value is 650.



                                                 79
AAPM REPORT NO. 116




                                                 Figure N4.




     As the density is constant, the LUT curve moves to the position where the arrow from the sensor
output value 650 and the arrow from the corresponding density 1.9D intersect, and is shifted to the posi-
tion indicated by the dotted line.
     Corresponding to this shift in the LUT curve, the REX value decreases to 200.
     At this time the relation 1220/650=375/200 is maintained.
     As a result, if the shape of the LUT curve is identical and it is only a case of a shift in position, the
REX value is in proportion to the radiographic dose.
     On the other hand, it is possible that the REX value denotes (the reciprocal of) the system sensitivity.
     The REX value is reduced to the extent that the LUT curve shifts to the left of the figure, and the
high sensitivity radiography could be said to correspond to the low dose.
     In the case of screen/film systems, as the LUT curve does not shift, when the dose is low, the density
is simply low.
     However, with the CXDI, the system sensitivity changes and the density is always constant.
     Consequently, the REX value could be said to be (the reciprocal of) the system sensitivity.
     As shown above, the relation between the REX value and the x-ray dose is proportional.
     However, although the REX value is the x-ray dose index, it is not the absolute index.


                                                     80
                                                                                             APPENDIX N




                                               Figure N5.




    The REX value assumes that adjustment, including interactive adjustment, is finished and the QA
image has been defined.
    If the QA image has been defined and the LUT is the same as always, the proportional relation with
the x-ray dose will be established, but if the density and contrast change, the REX value also fluctuates.
    Figure N5 shows this fluctuation of the REX value due to changes in density.
    The REX value decreases as the specified density and the density increase, and the REX value
increases as they decrease.
    Figure N6 shows the fluctuations in the REX value due to changes in the contrast.
    If the contrast is increased when the specified density is higher than the REX reference density, the
REX value will increase, and if the contrast is reduced, the REX value will also be reduced.
    For the above reason, the REX value fluctuates when the specified density and contrast change,
which means that the REX value is determined when all image processing parameters are fixed.
    The REX value is only meaningful when adjustment is finished and the QA image is defined.
    Furthermore, even if the REX value is moved when the LUT is varied by the doctor or x-ray techni-
cian, or according to the x-rayed body part, the actual dose amount cannot be judged simply by compar-
ing the REX value.

                                                   81
AAPM REPORT NO. 116




                      Figure N6.




                      Figure N7.

                         82
                                                                                              APPENDIX O


    Finally, the following explains the correction method using the REX value (REX adjustment) in the
event of analysis failure.
    Figure N7 shows a bright image due to analysis failure.
    If the image is white due to analysis failure, the LUT curve has been shifted to the right (to a higher
pixel value) in relation to the range in which the image exists.
    As for the REX value at this time, large values are displayed.
    Consequently, if the REX value is corrected to a smaller value, the LUT curve is shifted to the left to
the range of the image and the correct density is achieved.
    Alternatively, if the image is black, it can be corrected to the appropriate density by correcting the
REX value to a higher value.




                                                    83
                                                      AN EXPOSURE INDICATOR FOR DIGITAL RADIOGRAPHY


                                           Appendix O

                              SwissVision Dose Indicator

The dose indicator in the SwissVision implementation will be calculated, based on the window cen-
ter value, provided by the MUSICA processing. This window center value describes the center of
area of the logarithmically scaled histogram. The conversion from the linear 12-bit and 16-bit range
to the logarithmic scale is calculated as follows:

                 log12bit = 3.2767 + log10(lin12bit/4095)      valid range: 0.0 − 3.28
                 log16bit = 3.2767 + log10(lin16bit/65535)     valid range: 0.0 − 3.28

Swissray formula for DI:

       PixelValuecenter = 10 (WindowCenter − 3.2767) * 212
       DI = round (30*(log10(PixelValuecenter /216)+3.2767) +1)        if PixelValuecenter > 34.3

            =1                                                         if PixelValuecenter < 34.3


       Legend:

       “WindowCenter”           MUSICA output
       DI                       Dose Indicator




                                                   85
