Report of the Task Group 186 on model-based dose calculation methods
in brachytherapy beyond the TG-43 formalism: Current status
and recommendations for clinical implementation
Luc Beaulieua)
Département de Radio-Oncologie et Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l’Université Laval, Centre
hospitalier universitaire de Québec, Québec, Québec G1R 2J6, Canada and Département de Physique,
de Génie Physique et d’Optique, Université Laval, Québec, Québec G1R 2J6, Canada

Åsa Carlsson Tedgren
Department of Medical and Health Sciences (IMH), Radiation Physics, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Linköping University, SE-581 85 Linköping, Sweden and Swedish Radiation Safety Authority,
SE-171 16 Stockholm, Sweden

Jean-François Carrier
Département de radio-oncologie, CRCHUM, Centre hospitalier de l’Université de Montréal,
Montréal, Québec H2L 4M1, Canada and Département de physique, Université de Montréal,
Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7, Canada

Stephen D. Davis
Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53705 and
Department of Medical Physics, McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, Québec H3G 1A4, Canada

Firas Mourtada
Radiation Oncology, Helen F. Graham Cancer Center, Christiana Care Health System,
Newark, Delaware 19899

Mark J. Rivard
Department of Radiation Oncology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111

Rowan M. Thomson
Carleton Laboratory for Radiotherapy Physics, Department of Physics, Carleton University,
Ottawa, Ontario K1S 5B6, Canada

Frank Verhaegen
Department of Radiation Oncology (MAASTRO), GROW, School for Oncology and Developmental Biology,
Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht 6201 BN, the Netherlands and Department of Medical
Physics, McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, Québec H3G 1A4, Canada

Todd A. Wareing
Transpire Inc., 6659 Kimball Drive, Suite D-404, Gig Harbor, Washington 98335

Jeffrey F. Williamson
Department of Radiation Oncology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23298

(Received 7 May 2012; revised 26 July 2012; accepted for publication 2 August 2012;
published 25 September 2012)
The charge of Task Group 186 (TG-186) is to provide guidance for early adopters of model-based
dose calculation algorithms (MBDCAs) for brachytherapy (BT) dose calculations to ensure practice
uniformity. Contrary to external beam radiotherapy, heterogeneity correction algorithms have only
recently been made available to the BT community. Yet, BT dose calculation accuracy is highly
dependent on scatter conditions and photoelectric effect cross-sections relative to water. In specific
situations, differences between the current water-based BT dose calculation formalism (TG-43) and
MBDCAs can lead to differences in calculated doses exceeding a factor of 10. MBDCAs raise three
major issues that are not addressed by current guidance documents: (1) MBDCA calculated doses
are sensitive to the dose specification medium, resulting in energy-dependent differences between
dose calculated to water in a homogeneous water geometry (TG-43), dose calculated to the local
medium in the heterogeneous medium, and the intermediate scenario of dose calculated to a small
volume of water in the heterogeneous medium. (2) MBDCA doses are sensitive to voxel-by-voxel
interaction cross sections. Neither conventional single-energy CT nor ICRU/ICRP tissue composition compilations provide useful guidance for the task of assigning interaction cross sections to each
voxel. (3) Since each patient-source-applicator combination is unique, having reference data for each
possible combination to benchmark MBDCAs is an impractical strategy. Hence, a new commissioning process is required. TG-186 addresses in detail the above issues through the literature review

6208

Med. Phys. 39 (10), October 2012

0094-2405/2012/39(10)/6208/29/$30.00

© 2012 Am. Assoc. Phys. Med.

6208

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

6209

and provides explicit recommendations based on the current state of knowledge. TG-43-based dose
prescription and dose calculation remain in effect, with MBDCA dose reporting performed in parallel when available. In using MBDCAs, it is recommended that the radiation transport should be
performed in the heterogeneous medium and, at minimum, the dose to the local medium be reported
along with the TG-43 calculated doses. Assignments of voxel-by-voxel cross sections represent a
particular challenge. Electron density information is readily extracted from CT imaging, but cannot
be used to distinguish between different materials having the same density. Therefore, a recommendation is made to use a number of standardized materials to maintain uniformity across institutions.
Sensitivity analysis shows that this recommendation offers increased accuracy over TG-43. MBDCA
commissioning will share commonalities with current TG-43-based systems, but in addition there
will be algorithm-specific tasks. Two levels of commissioning are recommended: reproducing TG-43
dose parameters and testing the advanced capabilities of MBDCAs. For validation of heterogeneity
and scatter conditions, MBDCAs should mimic the 3D dose distributions from reference virtual geometries. Potential changes in BT dose prescriptions and MBDCA limitations are discussed. When
data required for full MBDCA implementation are insufficient, interim recommendations are made
and potential areas of research are identified. Application of TG-186 guidance should retain practice
uniformity in transitioning from the TG-43 to the MBDCA approach. © 2012 American Association
of Physicists in Medicine. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1118/1.4747264]
Key words: brachytherapy, treatment planning, dose calculation, radiation transport, commissioning,
dose scoring, heterogeneities, material assignments
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I

INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6210
I.A Problem description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6210
I.B Report overview and rationale . . . . . . . . . . . . 6210
I.C Review of tissue and applicator material
heterogeneity effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6211
I.C.1 Low energy regime, seeds, and
miniature
x-ray sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6211
I.C.2 Intermediate energies: 169 Yb . . . . . 6212
I.C.3 Higher energies: 192 Ir . . . . . . . . . . . . 6213
I.C.4 Cone beam computed tomography 6213
II REVIEW OF MODEL-BASED
BRACHYTHERAPY DOSE-CALCULATION
ALGORITHMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6213
II.A Semiempirical approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6213
II.B Model-based algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6214
II.B.1 Collapsed-cone
superposition/convolution method 6214
II.B.2 Deterministic solutions to the
linear Boltzmann transport
equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6214
II.B.3 Monte Carlo simulations . . . . . . . . . 6214
III DOSE SPECIFICATION MEDIUM SELECTION 6214
III.A Relationship between Dm,m and Dw,m in the
large cavity regime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6216
III.B Dm,m and Dw,m relationships in the small
and intermediate cavity regimes . . . . . . . . . . 6216
III.C Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6217
III.D Areas of research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6218
IV CT IMAGING AND PATIENT MODELING . . . . 6218
IV.A Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6218
IV.A.1 Material characterization . . . . . . . . . 6219
IV.A.2 CT segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6220

Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

IV.A.3 CBCT segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6220
IV.A.4 Dual energy CT and spectral CT . . 6220
IV.A.5 CT artifacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6221
IV.A.6 Other imaging modalities . . . . . . . . 6221
IV.B Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6221
IV.B.1 Consensus material definition . . . . 6221
IV.B.1.a Prostate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6221
IV.B.1.b Breast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6222
IV.B.1.c Calcifications . . . . . . . . . . . 6222
IV.B.1.d Other materials . . . . . . . . . 6222
IV.B.1.e Applicators, sources, and
other devices . . . . . . . . . . . 6222
IV.B.2 Material assignment method . . . . . . 6223
IV.B.2.a Use of other imaging
modalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6224
IV.B.3 CT/CBCT artifact removal . . . . . . . 6224
IV.C Areas of research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6224
IV.C.1 Determination of tissue
composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6224
IV.C.2 Segmentation methods . . . . . . . . . . . 6224
IV.C.3 CT artifact removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6224
V MBDCA COMMISSIONING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6225
V.A Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6225
V.B From TG-43 to MBDCA-based
commissioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6225
V.B.1 MBDCA commissioning level 1 . . 6225
V.B.2 MBDCA commissioning level 2 . . 6225
V.B.3 MBDCA commissioning workflow 6226
V.B.3.a Test case plans and data
availability . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6226
V.B.3.b DICOM test case
importing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6227
V.B.3.c TG-43-based dose
calculation tests . . . . . . . . . 6227

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6209

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

V.B.3.d MBDCA-based dose
calculation tests . . . . . . . . . 6227
V.B.3.e Reference CT scanner
calibration data . . . . . . . . . 6227
V.B.3.f Select dose scoring
medium type . . . . . . . . . . . 6227
V.C Areas of research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6227
V.C.1 Workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6227
V.C.2 Test cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6227
V.C.3 Gamma-index comparisons . . . . . . 6227
V.C.4 Phantom development . . . . . . . . . . . 6228
VI OTHER ISSUES AND LIMITATIONS . . . . . . . . . . 6228
VI.A Uncertainties related to MBDCA . . . . . . . . . 6228
VI.B Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6229
VI.C Considerations for changing brachytherapy
dose prescriptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6229
VII CONCLUSIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6230
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6230
APPENDIX A: GLOSSARY OF TERMS . . . . . . . . 6230
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6231

I. INTRODUCTION
I.A. Problem description

Brachytherapy plays an important role in the curative
management of cancers in a variety of disease sites,1 most
prominently, gynecological malignancies, breast cancer, and
prostate cancer. Commonly used radionuclides include 137 Cs
for low dose-rate (LDR) intracavitary brachytherapy; 192 Ir
in the form of wires or seeds in ribbons for temporary
LDR interstitial implants, and 192 Ir for high dose-rate (HDR)
brachytherapy. Starting in the late 1960s with 125 I seeds,2 and
continuing with 103 Pd, and more recently 131 Cs, new lowenergy (LE) radionuclides were introduced into clinical practice, revolutionizing the practice of permanent implantation.
In conjunction with transrectal ultrasound (US) image guidance, LE permanent seed implantation is now one of the leading therapeutic approaches for the treatment of early stage
prostate carcinoma. These radionuclides have practical advantages such as reduced shielding requirements and short halflives, making them easier to manipulate and dispose of. In
addition, a new type of LE brachytherapy source has been
developed: the electronic brachytherapy source (EBS), essentially a miniaturized 50 kVp x-ray tube.
The 1995 AAPM Task Group No. 43 (TG-43) report,3 and
its more recent TG-43U1 (Ref. 4) and TG-43U1S1 (Ref. 5)
updates, are currently recognized as the worldwide standard
for LE photon-emitting brachytherapy dose calculation. The
TG-43 approach has been widely adopted for HDR 192 Ir
remote afterloading brachytherapy dose planning. Using a
table-based approach that uses a geometric dose falloff model
to facilitate accurate linear interpolation on a coarse grid, the
TG-43 dose calculation formalism describes dose deposition
around a single source centrally positioned in a spherical
water phantom.4 The current approach for estimating doses
in brachytherapy treatment planning is to superpose precalculated dose distributions for single sources in water according
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6210

to the pattern of the source placement and the source
dwell-time. The single-source data are derived from one-time
source-model specific Monte Carlo (MC) simulations or thermoluminescent dosimetry (TLD) measurements according to
specifications outlined in the AAPM TG-43U1 report, and
are strictly valid only for a homogeneous water phantom
of the size and shape used for data derivation. This method
is fast and practical in the clinic. However, the influence of
tissue and applicator heterogeneities, interseed attenuation,
and finite patient dimensions are all ignored. An exception is
the occasional use of one-dimensional (1D) “effective path
length” algorithms6 applied to the total dose to account for
applicators incorporating high atomic number (Z) shielding
materials.7, 8 These algorithms are appropriate for the primary
dose (i.e., dose contributed by direct, nonscattered photons),
but fail to describe the scatter-dose component dependence
on the full three-dimensional (3D) geometry. 3D scatterintegration, superposition/convolution, or transport-equation
solution methods are required for acceptable accuracy.9–11
In a 2009 Medical Physics Vision 20/20 article, Rivard et al.
performed a review of the literature and concluded that
accepted clinical dose parameters can be over- or underestimated by at least 5% (and by as much as factor-of-10)
in numerous situations.12 Based on the energy range, they
compiled a table (Table I of that paper) describing categories
of clinical applications for which the current dose calculation
standard would lead to significant deviations. These effects
are reviewed in more detail in Sec. I.C of the present report.
In contrast, model-based dose-calculation algorithms
(MBDCAs) offer the possibility of departing from water-only
geometries by modeling radiation transport in nonwater media (tissues, applicators, air-tissue interfaces), resulting in a
much more physically accurate reconstruction of the dose distribution actually delivered to the patient.
I.B. Report overview and rationale

Clinical application of material heterogeneity corrections
in external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) is now the standard of practice for many modalities, e.g., IMRT and hypofractionated early stage lung cancer.13 This transition has
been made possible by the emergence of MBDCAs (Ref. 14)
such as collapsed-cone (CC) convolution,15 superpositionconvolution,16 MC methods,17 and more recently grid-based
Boltzmann solver (GBBS),18, 19 all of which can now be found
in commercial planning software packages, as well as new
treatment techniques and dose-time-fractionation schedules
which require a more realistic appraisal of delivered absorbed
dose. In contrast, relatively little use of heterogeneity corrections has been made in brachytherapy.
From a fundamental physics perspective, the photon interaction processes, which are dominated by Compton scattering
in EBRT, are more forgiving in EBRT than for brachytherapy
where the photoelectric effect dominates energy deposition
for LE brachytherapy sources, and to a lesser degree for highenergy (HE) sources. Thus, the all-water approximation for
dose calculations is much poorer at low (E < 50 keV) and
intermediate (50 keV < E < 200 keV) energies than at high

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6210

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

energies (E > 200 keV). Even for intermediate- and HE photons, the scatter-to-primary ratio is at its maximum in materials of low Z and therefore appropriate 3D modeling of the
scatter component is important. The cases of superficial implants and shielded vaginal applicators are good examples.
Tissue composition heterogeneities could become critical for
electronic HDR sources where mean photon energies are generally about 30 keV and the dosimetric points of interest or
organs at risks (OAR) can be located many centimeters from
the source.
In this context, the clinical introduction of advanced
dosimetry algorithms beyond the current AAPM TG-43 formalism for sealed source brachytherapy dose calculations is
highly desirable. While all of the issues mentioned previously
can be tackled by MBDCAs, this adds a new layer of complexity to current treatment planning systems (TPS). In order
to account for all sources of scatter and heterogeneities, accurate geometrical descriptions of the patient and implanted
applicators, including assignment of cross sections to all media, must be provided on a voxel-by-voxel or component-bycomponent basis. In other words, the location and material
composition of each unique geometric element considered
in the dose calculation must be known. In current practice,
CT images are used simply to perform anatomy delineation.
For MBDCAs, the CT images will become a source of dosecalculation algorithm input data that are critical for dosimetric
accuracy. Furthermore, this same information must be available for applicators, shields, and sources if intersource attenuation needs to be considered. The output of a MBDCA
is highly dependent on how imaging and applicator structure information is obtained and used by the algorithm. Thus,
whereas the TG-43 dosimetry formalism, despite its inherent
limitations, provides the community with an intrinsic consistency in dose calculation, MBDCAs for all their advantages
can lead to large center-to-center dose-calculation variations
if specific guidance is not provided.
This report addresses three major issues associated with
the advent of MBDCAs, namely,
(1) Choice of dose specification medium (Sec. III), because there are energy-dependent differences even
when nonwater materials are included in the radiationtransport model depending on whether dose is specified to a water reference medium or the local tissue
medium.
(2) Voxel-by-voxel cross-section assignment, as neither
conventional single-energy CT nor ICRU/ICRP tissue
composition recipes are de facto accurate guides for
the task (Sec. IV).
(3) Commissioning procedures for MBDCAs (Sec. V).
Each section presents its own literature review, recommendations, and related topics for future research. The report is
concluded (Sec. VI) by discussing changes in dose prescription that may result from transitioning from TG-43 dose computations to more realistic MBDCA dose estimates, and the
uncertainties and limitations associated with MBDCAs.
These recommendations have been reviewed by members
of the AAPM Brachytherapy Subcommittee, AAPM TherMedical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6211

apy Physics Committee, the GEC-ESTRO Brachytherapy
Physics Quality Subcommittee (BRAPHYQS), ESTRO-EIR,
the American Brachytherapy Society (ABS) physics committee, and the Australasian Brachytherapy Group (ABG). This
report has been approved and is endorsed by the AAPM,
ESTRO, ABS, and ABG. While certain commercial products are identified in this report, such identification implies
neither recommendation nor endorsement by the AAPM,
ESTRO, ABS, or ABG. Nor does it imply that the product
is necessarily the best available for these purposes. This report is intended for the experienced brachytherapy physicist
and physician considering early adoption of MBDCAs.
I.C. Review of tissue and applicator material
heterogeneity effects

A short review of early literature on the impact of dosimetry from taking heterogeneity effects into account is provided
below. For a more in-depth review, the reader is referred to
Rivard et al.12 Options for dose scoring/reporting and notation are summarized in Table I. Dosimetric errors incurred
with the TG-43 approach and the magnitudes of differences
between the various doses listed in Table I depend on photon energy. For LE sources, the photoelectric process is dominant; differences in mass-energy absorption coefficients between various tissues and water (see Fig. 1)20 can result in
significant dose differences depending on the medium chosen
for radiation transport and energy deposition.
Note that the studies reviewed in Sec. I.C.1 compare dose
calculations in homogeneous water Dw,w with results of MC
simulations reporting dose to the local transport medium,
Dm,m (cf. Table I). More recent studies investigating the effect of using other media for dose reporting are reviewed in
Sec. III.
I.C.1. Low energy regime, seeds, and miniature
x-ray sources

Taylor demonstrated differences of up to 25% between
Dm,m and Dw,w for breast tissue for the Xoft electronic miniature x-ray source with the dose ratio changing by nearly 25%
over 5 cm.21 For prostate tissue, Dm,m and Dw,w differ by 10%
for 125 I and 103 Pd sources, with gradients of up to 20% over
5 cm in Dm,m /Dw,w .21 Thomson et al. explored differences
in Dm,m and Dw,w for a few different eye tissues for 125 I or
103
Pd seeds in the standardized eye plaques of the Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study (COMS) and found that Dm,m
differed by up to 9% from Dw,w .22 Chibani and Williamson
evaluated the impact of tissue composition on dose distributions and dose-volume histograms (DVHs) in the prostate for
125
I and 103 Pd idealized implants.23 For a 103 Pd-based preimplant plan, the dose Dm,m delivered to 100% of the prostate
volume, D100 , was 6% lower for a prostate modeled as soft tissue than for the same prostate modeled as pure water (i.e., as
Dw,w ). Carrier et al. evaluated the impact of prostate treatment
plans with 125 I permanent seed implants using MC methods,24
comparing dose distributions for a TG-43 calculation, full
MC with water prostate, and full MC with realistic prostate

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6211

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

6212

TABLE I. Summary of dose reporting possibilities. The notation for absorbed dose estimation at location r is Dx, y − Z (r), where x denotes the choice of dosespecification medium (either water or local medium at r); y denotes the choice of voxel composition assignments used to perform the radiation transport
calculations (either homogeneous water; all biological tissue approximated by water except for applicators and air-tissue interfaces; applicators and air-tissue
interfaces with actual tissue compositions and densities); and Z denotes the choice of algorithm (either MBDCA or TG43).
Notation
1

Dw,w-TG43

2

Dw,w/appl/air-MBDC

3

Dm,m-MBDC = Dm,m

4

Dw,m-MBDC = Dw,m

Method for dose calculation

Comment

Superposition of single-source absorbed dose-to-water
distributions derived from a transport geometry
consisting of a 30 cm liquid water sphere (<50 keV
sources) or unbounded water medium (≥50 keV
sources)
MBDCA absorbed dose-to-water estimation assuming a
transport geometry that realistically represents the
geometry, composition, and density of applicators,
sources, and air-tissue interfaces but assumes that all
biological tissues, including bony tissues, are
approximated by unit-density liquid water. Neglects any
differences due to deviations of tissue composition from
water.
MBDCA accounting for nonwater tissue composition
and density as well as patient skin contour, applicator,
and shields. Reporting dose to local medium.
MBDC radiation transport as in 3 but dose to bulk
medium is converted to dose-to-water using cavity
theory (conversion method to be indicated) or dose to
water is scored.

tissue. For clinical treatment plans, differences of 4%–5% for
D90 (the minimum dose deposited in 90% of the prostate volume) between MC simulations in water (Dw,w ) and in prostate
tissue (Dm,m ) were found.24 In a later study of postimplant
dosimetry for 28 patients, Carrier et al. compared MC sim-

F IG . 1. Mass energy absorption coefficients for the materials indicated relative to those for water for energies from 5 to 200 keV, calculated with the
EGSnrc user-code “g.” Atomic compositions and densities are those from
ICRU Report 44 (Ref. 20) and ICRP Report 89 (Ref. 120). The composition
of the soft tissue is that for average soft tissue male (Ref. 20); the composition of the RBM (YBM) is that for “active marrow” (“inactive marrow”)
(Ref. 119).
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

Clinical experience is with this quantity. However,
intersource attenuation, applicator attenuation, tissue
heterogeneities, and skin contours are all ignored.

A major improvement over Dw,w because applicator
shielding effects, interseed attenuation, and the influence of
patient skin counter are all taken into account. These are the
major effects for higher energy brachytherapy, e.g., HDR
192 Ir, and also for low energy brachytherapy in the presence
of applicators. Ignores nonwater composition of tissue,
which may dominate low-energy brachytherapy
applications for some sites.
Requires knowledge of patient media composition
(estimated CT, see Sec. IV). Natural dose specification
choice for MC, CC, or GBBS MBDCAs.
Concern relating to conversion methods may arise at
energies when sensitive target dimensions are similar to or
smaller than secondary electron ranges, e.g., for low energy
brachytherapy sources

ulations using patient data (with media density set according to CT attenuation data) to clinical TG-43 calculations
(Dw,w-TG43 ).25 For D90 , the mean difference between the clinical technique (Dw,w-TG43 ) and the MC method (Dm,m ) was
7%, of which 3% was due to tissue composition and the remaining 4% to interseed attenuation. The clinical calculation
technique (TG-43 formalism) overestimated doses deposited
in the prostate and OAR when compared to MC. Considerations for changing brachytherapy prescriptions are discussed
in Sec. VI.C.
Two recent studies have investigated differences between
Dm,m and TG-43 doses in the context of lung brachytherapy. Yang and Rivard investigated the effect of nonwater tissues using Monte Carlo simulations of a phantom comprised
of soft tissue, lung, and cortical bone.26 Modeling photon
sources with energies between 20 keV and 400 keV, they
concluded that TG-43 overestimates PTV dose and underestimates dose to bone and healthy tissue. Sutherland et al.
performed Monte Carlo simulations with BrachyDose using
patient CT data for patients treated with intraoperative 125 I
lung brachytherapy.27 Significant dose differences were observed between full modeling of patient tissues (calculating
Dm,m ) and TG-43 calculations (Dw,w-TG43 ); TG-43 underestimates the dose (by up to 36% of D90 ) in larger volumes containing higher proportions of healthy lung tissue.

I.C.2. Intermediate energies: 169 Yb

At intermediate energies (between around 50–150 keV),
effects due to varying scatter conditions are maximal for soft
tissues. The differences between different media are greater

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6212

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

than at high energies although less than at low energies. Lymperopoulou et al. have shown that 169 Yb breast brachytherapy
doses calculated with the TG-43 approach, Dw,w-TG43 , can be
5% larger than MC calculated values of Dm,m at the surface
of the planning target volume (PTV), 15%–25% larger at the
breast skin and 30% larger in the lung.28 Contrast medium in
R
balloon enlarges differences with the TG-43
a MammoSite
29
approach.

I.C.3. Higher energies: 192 Ir

Anagnostopoulos et al.30 reported on an esophageal 192 Ir
brachytherapy study that showed no differences within the
target region between Dw,w-TG43 and MC-calculated Dm,m ,
but revealed Dw,w-TG43 dose overestimations of up to 13%
to the spinal cord and 15% underestimations to the sternum
bone.
Lymperopoulou et al. showed Dw,w-TG43 calculated doses
to agree with MC calculated values of Dm,m in the PTV of an
192
Ir breast implant. However, doses calculated by Dw,w-TG43
were up to 5% larger than MC calculated values of Dm,m for
the skin and up to 10% larger for the lung.28
Poon et al. used the PTRAN_CT MC code to calculate Dw,w and dose to medium Dm,m for HDR endorectal
brachytherapy with a shielded intracavitary applicator.31, 32
Two separate CT-based simulations were performed for each
patient, one in which all CT voxels were assumed to consist
of water and another with materials assigned according to the
CT-numbers; in both cases the applicator and shielding were
simulated. In soft tissues, differences between Dw,w and Dm,m
were less than 2%. Differences between Dw,w and Dm,m were
18%–23% in cortical bone, 3%–3.5% in spongiosa, and 5%–
7% in femoral bone.
Poon and Verhaegen found that use of Dw,w-TG43 in dose
calculation for breast implants (HDR 192 Ir brachytherapy)
overestimated the target coverage by 2% on average, and the
dose to the skin by 5% relative to TG-43.33

I.C.4. Cone beam computed tomography

Insights into dosimetry issues for extreme tissue heterogeneities, such as bone, may be obtained from MC estimates
of cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) patient dose,
since CBCT energy spectra overlap the low and intermediate brachytherapy photon-energy ranges. Ding et al.34 and
Ding and Coffey35 observed that dose to bone was two to
four times greater than dose to soft tissue for a Varian OBI
CBCT system (40 kVp–125 kVp with mean energy of about
60 keV); these differences are expected based on the large
differences in mass-energy absorption coefficients (Fig. 1).
Walters et al.36 reported that the elevated bone dose results
in an elevated dose to bone surface cells (osteogenic cells on
the endosteal surfaces), identified by the ICRP as OAR within
the skeleton, due to LE electrons liberated in photoelectric
events in the trabecular bone. These results indicate that skeletal doses are highly sensitive to the geometry and composition
of soft-tissue cavities and bone-mineral matrix assumed, indiMedical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6213

cating that biologically relevant and accurate skeletal dosimetry is complex and may require special considerations.

II. REVIEW OF MODEL-BASED BRACHYTHERAPY
DOSE-CALCULATION ALGORITHMS
This section briefly reviews model-based calculation
algorithms for brachytherapy dose calculations taking into
account heterogeneous geometries. While first-principles approaches (Sec. II.B) are the most accurate, the semiempirical
methods reviewed in Sec. II.A address to varying degrees the
clinical need for improved accuracy with high computational
efficiency compared to the TG-43 method, e.g., in optimizing
source placement and dwell times. A more detailed overview
of calculation algorithms can be found in a 2009 Medical
Physics Vision 20/20 paper by Rivard et al.12 and in two book
chapters from the 2005 AAPM/ABS Brachytherapy Summer
School Proceedings.37, 38
Collision kerma from primary photons (interacting for the
first time outside the source) can be calculated using 1D
ray-tracing and accurately approximates primary-photon absorbed dose under charged-particle equilibrium (CPE). CPE
is valid for treatment planning of brachytherapy except very
close to sources39, 40 or to metal-tissue interfaces41, 42 and
hence the primary dose around brachytherapy sources can be
derived with full accuracy using 1D methods. The scatter dose
(dose contributed by photons interacting for a second time or
more), depends, however, on the full 3D geometry and requires use of 3D scatter integration methods to be accurately
estimated.

II.A. Semiempirical approaches

Methods that apply 1D ray-tracing with scaling for correcting total doses due to the presence of high-Z shields
around 137 Cs were developed early and are also used for
192 8, 43
Ir.
Several methods of varying complexity (none, however, being fully 3D) that separate the primary and scatter
dose components have been developed using 1D ray-tracing
for the primary dose calculation and estimating the scatter
dose component.11, 43–50 Another approach, tested for 192 Ir
sources,32, 51 is based on MC precalculated applicator-specific
dose in water distributions aiming at accounting for highZ shields but considering the patient to be water equivalent. An additional approach uses a TG-43 hybrid technique
where MC calculations for rigid brachytherapy geometries
are performed for input to conventional brachytherapy planning systems.52–56 This technique has been performed for
HDR 192 Ir gynecological implants, skin applicators, deepseated breast lumpectomy cavities, and for LDR eye plaque
brachytherapy planning.
These semiempirical approaches allow brachytherapy
treatment plans to be generated in the same timescales observed for conventional TG-43-based plans yet with markedly
increased accuracy to represent the physical implant. Dose
may be determined in any medium to any medium due to the
precalculated MC dose kernels.

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6213

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

II.B. Model-based algorithms

Model-based approaches either explicitly simulate the
transport of radiation in the actual media or employ multipledimensional scatter integration techniques to account for the
dependence of scatter dose on the 3D geometry. The three
methods of current interest to brachytherapy treatment planning are CC superposition/convolution, GBBS, and MC simulations.
II.B.1. Collapsed-cone superposition/convolution
method

CC is a kernel superposition method designed for treatment planning applications and optimized for calculation efficiency through angular discretization (“collapsed cones”) of
the kernels along a radiation transport grid.15 The kernels map
the spatial energy deposition response of scattered photons
and charged secondaries for a reference medium, commonly
water. The common approach in EBRT, where CC has long
been used,14 is to use two kernels, one for the primary dose
and one for the scatter dose, both operating on the energy released by primary photons. In brachytherapy, the approach is
to calculate the primary dose through a direct raytrace of the
primary photons using the kerma approximation, and use a
scatter order driven process to calculate dose from first scatter
and multiple scatter separately with different kernels,9, 57–59
using the raytrace results for the primary dose as a source term
for scattering. Raytracing operations are used to scale both the
primary dose and all kernels for heterogeneities based on the
density scaling theorem of O’Connor60 and methods going
beyond density scaling have been developed to scale kernels
for heterogeneities of high atomic numbers.58 For the primary
and first scatter doses, this does not impose any approximations other than discretization effects, but is more approximate for the multiple scattering dose. The source characterization data needed for the raytracing of the primary dose can
effectively be derived from precalculated primary dose distributions in water, which have motivated the suggestion of a
primary and scatter separation (PSS) formalism61 for source
characterization that also provides backwards compatibility
with the TG-43 tabulations. The BT collapsed cone algorithm
is currently being integrated to the Oncentra Brachy TPS from
Elekta (Veenendaal, The Netherlands).62
II.B.2. Deterministic solutions to the linear Boltzmann
transport equation

Deterministic methods for solving the linear Boltzmann
transport equation (LBTE) in integral or differential form
yield approximate solutions that converge to the true continuous LBTE solution in the limit of very fine phase-space
mesh spacing. There are several common approaches used,63
including method-of-characteristics, spherical harmonics, and
discrete ordinates.
Deterministic approaches solve the LBTE by systematically discretizing spatial (via finite difference or element
meshes), angular (via discrete ordinates, spherical harmonics,
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6214

etc.), and energy variables (via multigroup approximation),
which results in a linear system of equations, which are iteratively solved. Because these methods are all based on phasespace discretization, TG-186 categorizes them as grid-based
Boltzmann equation solvers (GBBS). Zhou and Inanc developed a GBBS, which they applied to LE brachytherapy,64
based on direct evaluation of the integral LBTE, expanded
in orders of scattering. Daskalov et al. applied a 2D discreteordinates GBBS (from DANTSYS) (Ref. 65) for the dosimetric modeling of 125 I and 192 Ir brachytherapy sources.66, 67 FurR
rather studies have been performed using the 3D Attila
diation transport software (Transpire Inc, Gig Harbor, WA),
for which a third-order linear discontinuous finite-element
method (DFEM) is used for spatial discretization. Like
R
discretizes angular and energy phaseDANTSYS, Attila
space variables via the discrete-ordinates and multigroup
approximations, respectively. Mourtada et al. reported on
R
dose distributions around a 137 Cs shielded colpostat
Attila
and compared the results to MC simulations in liquid water.68
Further optimizations and refinements were performed by
R
and MCNPX 3D
Gifford et al.18, 69 who compared Attila
192
137
dose distributions for Ir and Cs sources. More recently,
Transpire Inc has created an optimized radiation-therapy speR
R
GBBS called Acuros
first for
cific version of the Attila
R
70–72
19, 73–75
and later for EBRT.
Acuros
HDR brachytherapy
was introduced commercially by Varian Medical Systems
(Palo Alto, CA).
II.B.3. Monte Carlo simulations

The MC simulation solves the linear LBTE by random
sampling and is the current state of the art in computational dosimetry. The first MC code with an advanced geometry package specific to brachytherapy sources having several nonanalog estimators (to increase computational speed)
was PTRAN.76 PTRAN can calculate the primary dose analytically and perform MC simulations for the scatter dose
part.2, 77 For treatment planning applications increasing computational efficiency through correlated sampling has been
investigated.78, 79 Chibani and Williamson have presented a
fast MC code intended as a dose calculation engine for
LE brachytherapy seeds.80 BrachyDose is an extension to
EGSnrc allowing for use of a track-length estimator and modeling of clinical sources.81, 82 GEANT4 has also been used for
postimplant treatment planning.25 Most brachytherapy treatment planning applications are based on the assumption of
CPE and implement the equivalence of absorbed dose and collisional kerma using track-length estimators, and may employ
phase-space files to characterize sources before “run-time.”
Further references to such applications are given in Sec. III.
The readers are referred to Sec VI.A for a discussion of the
differences between MC and GBBS.
III. DOSE SPECIFICATION MEDIUM SELECTION
MC simulations and other MBDCA methods offer the possibility of realistic modeling of the absorbed dose distribution in patient treatment geometries, including the impact of

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6214

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

applicator materials, skin surface contour, and deviation of
tissue composition and density from those of liquid water.
As in megavoltage EBRT,83, 84 modeling radiation transport
in nonwater media confronts the medical physicist with another decision: the selection of dose specification medium.
Absorbed dose can be reported either to the local tissue composing each voxel, Dm,m , or to a fixed reference medium
(usually but not necessarily water), Dw,m , regardless of the
composition of the underlying voxels. As summarized in
Table I, choices for absorbed dose estimation at location r
may be represented by Dx,y-Z (r) where: x denotes the choice
of dose-specification medium (either water or local medium
at r); y denotes the choice of voxel composition assignment
used to perform the radiation transport or scatter-integration
calculations (cf. Table I); and Z denotes the algorithm (either
MBDCA or TG-43). In the TG-43 protocol, both the transport
geometry and the dose-specification medium are taken to be
water:Dw,w-TG43 (r).
Choosing between the competing Dw,m and Dm,m alternatives in brachytherapy parallels the controversy this issue
has engendered in megavoltage EBRT planning; arguments
from the EBRT debate are briefly reviewed in the present
paragraph.83–85 For EBRT, one argument for reporting Dw,m
is maintaining consistency with earlier calculation methods
that reported dose to water.83, 84 A more recent argument in
support of Dw,m reporting is that the biological targets of interest, i.e., cells or cell nuclei, consist mainly of water85, 86 and
are likely to vary less between tissue types due to their functional similarity than the tissue-averaged composition. Proponents of Dm,m for EBRT reporting argue that: Dm,m is the
quantity inherently computed with Monte Carlo simulations
and some other MBDCA; that conversion from Dm,m to Dw,m
adds unnecessary uncertainties; and that energy deposited to
macroscopic regions of interest dominates complications and
tumor control. The AAPM TG-105 report on MC EBRT treatment planning does not take a position in favor of reporting
either Dm,m or Dw,m ;85 however, it recommends that publications clearly state which quantity is reported and provide
information to allow conversion between them. These conversions of Dm,m to Dw,m and vice versa employ Bragg-Gray
(small cavity) theory and ratios (water to medium) of mass
collision stopping powers (e.g., see review in TG-105 report85
and recent discussion by Ma and Li87 ). With the exception of
specifying clinically meaningful doses to bone,88 the controversy regarding the medium for dose specification in EBRT
is largely academic since the differences between Dw,m and
Dm,m are limited to 2% for all soft tissues,89–92 with similar
results obtained for proton beams.93
Somewhat different issues need to be considered in selecting the dose-reporting medium for brachytherapy and other
keV photon field applications. While secondary charged particle ranges of the order of several centimeters are common in megavoltage photon EBRT, they are much shorter
in photon brachytherapy (cf. Table II). Thus, in brachytherapy, CPE is generally a valid assumption for dose calculations using common treatment planning voxel grids. Under
CPE, absorbed dose equals collision kerma and can be approximated by kerma since brachytherapy energies are suffiMedical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6215

TABLE II. CSDA ranges of secondary electrons in unit density water [calculated with ESTAR (Ref. 94)] at selected energies relevant for brachytherapy.
Electron energy [keV]
10
30
90
350
1000
3000

CSDA range in water [cm]
2.5 × 10−4
1.8 × 10−3
1.2 × 10−2
1.1 × 10−1
4.4 × 10−1
1.5 × 100

ciently low to yield negligible radiative energy losses: Dw,m =
coll
coll
≈ Kw,m and Dm,m = Km,m
≈ Km,m , where Kcoll and K
Kw,m
denote collision kerma and kerma, respectively. In EBRT,
cellular and subcellular biological targets can be considered small cavities with small dimensions in relation to secondary charged-particle range; this is not generally the case in
brachytherapy. In addition, LE brachytherapy dose distributions are highly sensitive to the atomic compositions of media
(Fig. 1).
In EBRT, unrestricted mass collision stopping power ratios are often used to convert Dm,m into Dw,m , an approach
that is valid only if the water cavity is a Bragg-Gray cavity, i.e., small enough to not perturb the fluence of secondary
electrons generated in the medium. Although the appropriate water volume (cavity) size remains to be determined, the
Bragg-Gray assumption implies that these cavities are much
smaller than the 3–5 mm-sized voxels typically used for dose
calculation, e.g., cavities may represent cellular structures or
micrometer-size radiosensitive targets (e.g., soft tissue structures within trabecular bone).36, 86, 88 In the context of proton
therapy, Paganetti discussed the conversion of dose to a patient voxel (of local medium) to dose to water for an infinitesimal volume of water within that voxel.93 While Dw,m may be
computed on-the-fly for some MC dose codes, e.g., by multiplying the energy loss from each electron condensed history
step by the water-to-medium ratio of restricted mass collision
stopping powers, the conversion of Dm,m into Dw,m is typically performed as a postprocessing step which occurs after
calculation of Dm,m on a mm-sized voxel grid.85
The ranges of secondary electrons set in motion by photons from brachytherapy sources are generally shorter than
those for EBRT and vary considerably between the different brachytherapy energy regimes (see Table II for continuous slowing down approximation (CSDA) ranges of electrons
in water for electron energies between 10 keV and 3 MeV).94
If radiation target volumes (“cavities”) are considered to be
macroscopic millimeter-sized voxels, then the range of secondary electrons may generally be considered short in comparison with the cavity size (for 192 Ir energies and below);
hence large cavity theory using ratios (water to medium) of
mass-energy absorption coefficients could be used for the
postprocessing Dm,m to Dw,m conversion; direct computation
of Dw,m using the collision kerma approximation should yield
identical results. While a cavity of cellular dimensions might
be considered “Bragg-Gray-like” for 192 Ir at 380 keV or
for MeV photons (EBRT), the situation is different below

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6215

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

50 keV: cellular dimensions are comparable to the ranges of
secondary electrons (mammalian cell diameters are generally
of order 10–20 μm; cell nuclei diameters range from a few
micrometers to upwards of 10 μm),95 rendering both large
and small cavity theory assumptions suspect. For example, for
125
I sources, secondary electron ranges vary from 3 to 20 μm
(Table II). Thus, depending on the size of an assumed biological target in relation to photon energy, different calculation techniques are required to compute Dw,m . In addition, for
LE brachytherapy the two quantities Dw,m and Dw,w-TG43 differ considerably regardless of the method used to compute
Dw,m (see Sec. III.A) and hence, for this energy regime, one
cannot motivate reporting Dw,m to connect with previous clinical experience. However, for HE brachytherapy sources, the
situation is more similar to EBRT.
Sections III.A and III.B discuss the relationships between
Dm,m and Dw,m in the context of cavity theory. Section III.A
focuses on the large cavity regime and reviews recent publications which compare Dm,m and Dw,m under this assumption. This is followed in Sec. III.B with a cavity theory analysis of cellular and subcellular target dosimetry and a discussion of issues related to the choice of dosimetric medium,
based on ongoing and recent research by Thomson et al.96
and Enger et al.,97 designed to determine which choice of
macroscopic dose specification medium might better correlate with absorbed dose to biologically relevant cellular or
subcellular targets. After reviewing the scientific research in
Secs. III.A and III.B, Sec. III.C presents the recommendation
of TG-186 on the medium for dose specification. Areas for
future research appear in Sec. III.D.
III.A. Relationship between Dm,m and Dw,m in the large
cavity regime

Recently published studies27, 98, 99 comparing Dm,m and
Dw,m either assume that Dw,m and Dm,m are related by
the mean ratio of mass-energy
absorption coefficients (waw
ter/medium), μen /ρ m , or directly compute (under the ascoll
coll
sumption of CPE) both Dw,m = Kw,m
and Dm,m = Km,m
. The
latter are derived by application of the mass-energy absorption coefficients for water or medium, m, to the photon energy
fluence,  m (E, r) at the point of interest, r, found by transporting photons through the actual heterogeneous geometry

coll
(r) =
Dtarg (r) ≈ Kw,m

m (E, r) (μen (E, r)/ρ)w dE

coll
w
= (μen (r)/ρ)w
m Km,m (r) = (μen (r)/ρ)m Dm,m (r),

(1)
where Dtarg (r) denotes the absorbed dose to the biologically
relevant target at location r. Equation (1) assumes both that
this target cavity is water equivalent and that its minimum
linear dimension is large in relation to the secondary electron
ranges.
Large differences between Dm,m and Dw,m are expected for
certain media at low energies based on the behavior of massenergy absorption coefficients at low energies (Fig. 1), an exMedical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6216

pectation confirmed by recent studies.27, 98–100 Differences between Dm,m and Dw,m are most significant for photons below
50 keV and can be as high as 70%–80% for soft tissues, rising up as high as a factor of 7 for bone.98–100 Landry et al.
reported that the large cavity conversion factors for going between Dm,m and Dw,m (i.e., ratios of mass energy absorption
coefficients) for LE brachytherapy sources (125 I, 103 Pd, 131 Cs,
and an electronic brachytherapy source operating at 50 kV)
do not vary significantly with distance from the source for
distances up to 6 cm in a variety of tissues (adipose, mammary gland, prostate, muscle, skin).98 Differences between
Dm,m and Dw,m are within 3%–5% for soft tissues at the higher
192
Ir energy, rising to around 15%–25% in bone.99
For biological targets having dimensions on the order of
10 μm, it is only for the lowest energy sources that the large
cavity theory may make biological sense.97 For higher energy
192
Ir and 137 Cs sources, the large cavity assumption implies
that targets have dimensions on the order of 1 mm and thus
excludes the interpretation of the target being the cell or a
part thereof.

III.B. Dm,m and Dw,m relationships in the small
and intermediate cavity regimes

For a water-equivalent target that is much smaller than
the secondary electron range, located at position r, and surrounded by a homogeneous nonwater medium of macroscopic
dimensions, the absorbed dose to the target is
Dtarg (r) ≈ Dw,m (r) = (Scol (r)/ρ)w
m Dm,m (r)
coll
= (Scol (r)/ρ)w
m Km,m (r),

(2)

where (Scol (r)/ρ)w
m is the average over the photon energy
fluence spectrum of Scol (E, r)/ρ, the mass collision stopping power averaged over the slowing-down spectrum arising from secondary electrons liberated by collisions at r of
photons with energy E. Equation (2) was derived using the
fact that (Scol (E)/ρ)m
w is independent of electron energy to
first approximation (Fig. 2, generated using the EGSnrc usercode examin101 ). Unlike the large cavity conversion factor
(μen (r)/ρ)w
m [Eq. (1)], which can vary by as much as an order
of magnitude from one tissue to another for LE brachytherapy
(Fig. 1), the small cavity conversion factor, (Scol (r)/ρ)w
m , deviates from unity by no more than ±5% for soft tissues over
the brachytherapy energy range. Except for the very lowest
energies where biological targets of the order of 2–10 μm
are comparable to secondary electron ranges, Eq. (2) suggests
that for kerma-based MBDCAs, Km,m is a more logical quantity to score than Kw,m .
A review of cellular morphology (size and composition of
cellular components) reveals that nuclei and cytoplasm contain significant mass fractions of proteins, inorganic elements
(ranging from sodium to calcium), and lipids (adipose cells
only) and that these fractions vary widely with cell type.96
Values of (μen (r)/ρ)w
m for cytoplasm and nuclear media (for
many soft tissues and tumor types) deviate from unity (up to

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6216

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

6217

the relevant biological target is the nucleus. For photons with
energies less than 50 keV, this is a very complex situation in
which the target can approximately be modeled as a BraggGray cavity, but where secondary electrons arise from photon collisions in two different compartments (lipid droplet or
cytoplasm). These compartments have significant compositional differences resulting in more than a twofold reduction
103
Pd–125 I energy
in the cytoplasmic (μen (r)/ρ)m
w ratio in the
range, with deviations exceeding 10% persisting at energies
as high as 90 keV. This complex situation is reminiscent of
the two-component thick-wall ion chamber problem solved
by Almond and Svensson.102 Following this approach:
⎡
nucl


μen lip S
coll
× ⎣α
Dtarg = Dnucl ≈ Km,m
ρ m ρ

F IG . 2. Unrestricted mass collision stopping power ratios for the materials indicated relative to those for water generated using the EGSnrc usercode examin (Ref. 101). Atomic compositions and densities are the same as
Fig. 1.

10%) for 103 Pd and 125 I spectra. Hence, cell targets may not
generally be assumed to be water equivalent.
Enger et al. used Geant4.9.4 to score dose to 14 μm diameter cavities consisting of either water, cell nucleus medium,
or soft tissue embedded in small phantoms composed of uniform soft tissue, to compute Dw,m , Dn,m (where “n” represents cell nucleus medium; cells were not explicitly modeled), and Dm,m , respectively.97 For source energies between
20 keV and 300 keV, it is reported that Dw,m is a “good substitute” for Dn,m for the soft tissues (breast, prostate, muscle,
adipose) and the four cell nucleus compositions considered
under the assumptions used in the simulations. It was concluded that there is a need for more data on tumor and healthy
tissue cell compositions as doses to the cavities of nuclear
media depend on their composition. Further investigations of
issues related to cell dosimetry for brachytherapy likely require accurate simulation of media surrounding the nucleus
as many electrons depositing dose in the nucleus are set in
motion outside it. To this end, research by Thomson et al. involved Monte Carlo simulation of clusters of cells including
cell nuclei, cytoplasm, and extracellular fluid.96 Their results
(full paper under review August 2012) suggest that doses to
cell nuclei are sensitive to the presence of the different media
surrounding the nucleus (e.g., cytoplasm, extracellular fluid);
nuclear doses and their relation to Dw,m and Dm,m depend on
many factors including cell and nucleus size, cellular and bulk
tissue compositions, and source energy.
The complexity of the relationship between macroscopic
and biological target doses is well illustrated by adipose cells.
Such cells have a very large diameter, typically 100 μm, with
each cell containing approximately 96% lipid, 2% intracellular water, and 2% electrolytes and protein. An idealized
model of a fat cell might consist of a 33 μm thick spherical shell of lipid, enclosing a 34 μm diameter cytoplasmic
cavity which in turn surrounds a 3 μm nucleus. Suppose that
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

+ (1 − α)

μen
ρ

cyto

S
ρ

m

nucl

⎤
⎦,

lip

(3)

cyto

where Dnucl is the dose to the target nucleus, α is the fraction of electron fluence crossing the nucleus (=nucl) arising
in the lipid shell (=lip) and (1- α) is the corresponding fraction arising from the cytoplasmic shell (=cyto). Invoking the
approximations that nucl ≈ cyto ≈ wat and m ≈ lip, Eq. (3)
becomes
⎡
wat
S
coll
× ⎣α
Dtarg = Dnucl ≈ Klip,lip
ρ
lip


+ (1 − α)

μen
ρ

wat
.

(4)

lip

Even in this simplistic approximation, Dtarg is the weighted
average of a correction that is as large as two with one that is
approximately 0.95, with weighting factors that vary strongly
with energy and cellular dimensions. An even more complex
analysis would arise if one were to treat the nuclear target
as an intermediate size cavity by means of Burlin cavity theory. In this scenario, only MC methods capable of transporting both photons and secondary electrons through a complete
microscopic-scale geometric model could quantitatively estimate a biologically meaningful target dose. While research
investigating relations between macroscopic medium dose
and cellular absorbed doses and employing MC methods is
ongoing,96, 97 this example clearly shows that it is premature
and potentially misleading to conclude that either the small or
large cavity models can be naively applied to water-equivalent
targets if the goal is to maximize the correlation between the
macroscopic dose descriptor and biological effectiveness.
III.C. Recommendations

The scientific literature reviewed in Secs. I.C, III.A
and III.B reveals that the adoption of MBDCA for brachytherapy will generally change reported doses compared to the
previous water-based dosimetry practices (e.g., following
the TG-43 formalism, Dw,w-TG43 ), whether Dw,m or Dm,m is

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6217

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

reported. Depending on the clinical setting (source energy,
treatment site, biological tissues in the region of interest),
both Dw,m and Dm,m may deviate significantly from Dw,w
(Dw,w-TG43 ), as well as from each other, especially in the LE
domain. Hence, it is difficult to motivate selection of dose
specification medium on the basis of maximizing correlation
with TG-43-era clinical dose specification. The lack of correlation of Dw,m and Dm,m with Dw,w-TG43 motivated the Task
Group to reframe the choice of dose-specification medium
from a debate over competing dose-specification conventions
to a scientific question: which approach maximizes the correlation between the macroscopic dose distribution and absorbed dose to biologically relevant targets, and, ultimately,
underlying biological response?
At the time of writing, it is unclear (due to the lack of
published data) whether Dw,m better tracks energy imparted
to potential targets of subcellular dimensions than does Dm,m ,
or vice versa. Over some of the brachytherapy energy range,
3–10 μm biological targets are small cavities. Considering a
simple model in which the local voxel is uniform, homogeneous (nonwater) bulk medium except for isolated biological targets of diameters much less than the secondary electron
coll
than
range, dose to biological targets is better tracked by Km,m
coll
Kw,m [Eq. (2)]. Hence, for MBDCA invoking charged particle
coll
equilibrium (Dm,m ≈ Km,m
), this simple model suggests that
coll
coll
dose to biological targets is better tracked by Km,m
than Kw,m
.
Thus, if Dw,m is desired, it is preferable to apply postprocessing small cavity conversions rather than to erroneously invoke
coll
.
the large cavity approximation by directly computing Kw,m
At the lowest brachytherapy energies where the small cavity approximation breaks down, the appropriate conversion
method from Dm,m to Dw,m or Dm,m to Dtarg is unknown; nor is
it known whether Kw,m better tracks Dtarg than Km,m . Further,
available radiobiological data suggest that water may not be
the most appropriate reference medium as cellular and subcellular targets contain large and variable fractions of water,
electrolytes, proteins, and lipids.
As available evidence does not directly support Dw,m , reporting Dm,m is preferred as it is a conceptually well-defined
quantity, in contrast to Dw,m , which is a theoretical construct
without a physical realization in a nonwater medium. On the
basis of all these considerations, it is the consensus of TG-186
to require only reporting of Dm,m when using MBDCAs. This
does not preclude individual practitioners or protocol groups
from reporting Dw,m or other quantities of interest along with
Dm,m . Further, TG-186 views the required Dm,m reporting as
an interim recommendation; a definitive recommendation requires additional research, as discussed in Subsection III.D.

III.D. Areas of research

To address the underlying scientific question stated above,
namely, the question of which dose specification approach
maximizes the correlation between macroscopic dose and
dose to biological targets, further studies on the relationship
between radiobiological target doses as functions of target
geometry, cellular anatomy, and tissue anatomy are needed.
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6218

Through such studies, the optimal choice of dose specification medium, Dx,m , as well as a method of estimating this
quantity from photon energy fluence or Dm,m may be identified. Current efforts36, 88, 96, 97 use idealized cell or tissue models and coupled photon-electron MC techniques to study relations between Dm,m and dose to biological targets. Future
research should include complex multicomponent and multicellular models in which the assumptions of uniformity and
target isolation (used in the discussion of Sec. III.B) break
down. Investigators conducting such studies should clearly
specify the conversion method used in going from Dm,m into
Dw,m . Reporting conversions from Dm,m into Dw,m using both
stopping power ratios and mass-energy absorption coefficient
ratios could be interesting since potential conversion methods
probably lie somewhere between these two and likely depend
on the tissue or organ in question, as well as the photon spectrum and biological endpoint. As target composition and size
vary from tissue-to-tissue as well as clinical endpoint, it may
be appropriate to treat dose specification as an organ- and
clinical-endpoint specific Km,m to Dtarg postprocessing conversion in the same spirit with which absorbed dose is converted to biologically equivalent dose (BED) using variable
linear-quadratic model parameters.
Comparisons of Dm,m and Dw,w-TG43 for different source
energies and biological tissues are necessary for the recalibration of prescribed and reported doses, especially for LE
sources. Investigations of doses to skeletal tissues, radiosensitive bone marrow, and to biologically important subcellular
structures in adipose tissue are needed.

IV. CT IMAGING AND PATIENT MODELING
IV.A. Literature review

MBDCAs generally require assignment of interaction
cross sections on a voxel-by-voxel basis to compute dose. The
information is taken into account in dose calculations for HE
photons by using the electron densities ρ e (or the mass densities ρ) from CT images.103 At high energies, Compton scatter
dominates and depends mostly on ρ e (e− /cm3 ) = ρNA Z/A.
The ρ e can be extracted by using a calibration procedure using a phantom with known composition.
In brachytherapy, the dose is administered by photons with
energies <1 MeV. The lower the photon energy, the larger
the differences between media in terms of mass-attenuation
and mass-energy absorption coefficients due to the increasing importance of the photoelectric cross section, which is
approximately proportional to the cube of Z and inversely
proportional to the cube of the photon energy. Human tissues are essentially water-equivalent for dosimetric purposes
for MV photon beams and HE sources such as 137 Cs and
192 104
Ir,
but not so for LE sources such as 103 Pd, 125 I, and
131
Cs, and EBS.50, 105–107 Hence, for accurate LE photon
brachytherapy dosimetry, knowledge of tissue mass (electron)
density and the atomic number distribution of the material
is crucial.108 In this report, “segmentation” is defined as the
spatial delineation of different regions of a 3D image dataset
and assignment of elemental compositions and mass (or

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6218

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

electron) densities. For brachytherapy, few studies on tissue
segmentation are available in the literature because the TG43 formalism4 is based on a water geometry with a fixed mass
density.
IV.A.1. Material characterization

Breast tissue is known to vary widely in its mix of adipose and glandular tissue. ICRU-46 (Ref. 109) lists the two
tissues as mainly differing in their carbon content (glands:
33%, adipose: 60%) and oxygen content (glands: 53%, adipose: 28%). The effective atomic number, Zeff , is 6.67 for average adipose tissue and 7.27 for average glandular tissue.110
Therefore, for dosimetric purposes with LE photons adipose
and glandular tissue behave very differently and it is important to be able to distinguish them. Recently, a study of several thousand women who received mammography or breast
CT exams revealed a population average of about 20% for
the volume breast density (VBD, defined as the fractional
volume of glandular tissue), contrary to the commonly assumed 50%.111 The study also showed that VBD ranges from
0% to 75%.
A topic that deserves special attention is calcifications in
prostate and breast. Prostate calcification may be present in
a significant number of patients.39, 112 Using MC simulations,
a preliminary study was performed to assess the dosimetric
effect of calcification in prostate.23 The authors were unable
to find a reliable reference on the composition and density
of calcifications in the prostate; therefore, they used breast
calcifications from ICRU Report 46 as a surrogate.109 They
reported a decrease of up to 37% in the CTV D90 dose metric.
Another study found that the CTV D90 parameter was lower
than estimated by up to 17 Gy (about 12% of the 144 Gy
prescription dose).25 More recent pathological measurements
of calcifications in prostate have been reported.112
Another medium that may need to be specified accurately
is the imaging contrast agent. Kassas et al.113 looked at the
effect of iodine-based contrast medium on dose calculations

6219

R
for HDR 192 Ir partial breast irradiation with the MammoSite
system. At 1 cm away from a 6 cm diameter balloon, they
obtained a dose decrease of 5.7%. Metals and other materials used in applicators and shielding also need to be assigned correctly. This is often done by using an explicit solid
model of the applicator/shielding that is added to the tissues
extracted from the images. One recent example of this procedure is the MC dose calculations for a shielded colorectal cancer treatment.31 More examples can be found in the
literature.51, 114–116
Yet another issue of potential importance is the presence of
edema in the prostate and breast, and its changing influence
on the dose over time.117 Although considered to be largely
water-equivalent, more studies of prostate composition and
volume variation are warranted.
Recently, Landry et al. studied in detail the tissue composition/density sensitivity of MC dose calculations for LE
brachytherapy.118 Tissue composition reported in the literature varies depending on the reference. For example, the carbon content of breast adipose tissue, which largely determines
its effective atomic number and, therefore, the fraction of photoelectric versus Compton events, has been reported to vary
between 52% and 68%,110 leading to variations in effective
atomic number of 6%. Similarly, for prostate tissue the carbon content reported in the literature varies widely between
9% and 26%, leading to effective atomic number variations
of only 2%.110, 119, 120
Landry et al. also investigated the influence of tissue composition uncertainties on dose calculations for single sources
of 125 I, 103 Pd, and an EBS source.118 Figure 3 shows the
dose ratio Dw,m /Dw,w-TG-43 , where Dw,w-TG-43 is the TG-43
water approximation and Dw,m is the dose scored with MC
techniques by transporting photons in medium, and scoring in water (i.e., Dw,m derived under large cavity assumption). In adipose tissue, all three sources show significant
dose deviations from TG-43 at the distances examined. The
influence of the variation in adipose composition is also
shown. In prostate, the effect is smaller but still noticeable.

F IG . 3. Dw,m /DTG-43 as a function of radiological distance for 125 I, 103 Pd, and 50 kV EBS at three different distances from a single source, using data from
Landry et al. (Ref. 118) For adipose the vertical boxes indicate the spread in Dw,m /DTG-43 with varying adipose composition.
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6219

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

More results are discussed in Landry et al.118 For HDR 192 Ir
brachytherapy of gynecologic cancers with standard CT/MR
compatible applicators (no shielding), MDBCA has little impact (<5%) compared to TG-43 for most clinical
parameters.121, 122
IV.A.2. CT segmentation

In HE photon radiotherapy, patient heterogeneities are
modeled by ρ e derived from CT data. The accuracy of this
approach depends on the reliability of the Hounsfield Units
(HU), which are calibrated using tissue substitutes. The latter
have to be used with care in brachytherapy as they often are
designed to be tissue-equivalent only for HE photon dosimetry. In MV dose calculations, large HU errors can be tolerated
before dose errors of a few percent are produced.123, 124 See
also AAPM Report No. 85 by Papanikolaou et al.13
A more sophisticated tissue segmentation method has been
introduced—the stoichiometric method—to take into account
the atomic composition of the phantom materials used for
CT calibration.125, 126 The measured HU of tissue substitutes
are used to determine linear attenuation coefficients as a
function of ρ e and atomic number for the CT photon spectrum. This relationship is used to predict HU for tissues
with known relative ρ e for photon dosimetry. This method
allows the patient CT data to be used directly in the treatment planning calculations without the need for segmentation and identification of specific tissue types. However, the
accuracy of this method for LE photon dose calculations is
unknown.
It is generally accepted that MC dose calculations are the
most accurate for photon radiotherapy. The majority of MC
codes require that in addition to mass or ρ e , a medium needs
to be assigned to all voxels. Media assignment errors may
lead to dosimetric errors in MC and other MBDCA calculation methods, which can cause large dose errors compared
to simply assigning all voxels to water with a variable density. A sensitivity study was performed for CT image use in
MC dose calculations for 250 kVp–15 MV photons.127 The
authors found that inaccuracies in tissue segmentation caused
dose errors of more than 40% in certain media in 250 kVp
beams. These large errors occurred in CaCl2 solutions, mimicking bone. Schneider et al.128 showed that many different
tissues have similar HU values (between −100 and +100) and
hence cannot be readily resolved. They introduced a model
where all skeletal tissues are composed of a mix of osseous
tissue and bone marrow, and all soft tissues are a mix of fat
and water. Other studies on HE photon dosimetry have been
published.129–131
For LE photons, HU studies are rare. Watanabe derived
linear attenuation coefficients from HU for LE brachytherapy
MC dose calculations.132 They introduced a model that relates
HU to ρ e and Zeff accounting for both photoelectric absorption
and Rayleigh scatter. Their technique led to errors of 10%–
20% for the elements O, C, and Ca, and is only a moderate
improvement over the older Rutherford formalism for high-Z
media such as bone.133 These authors did not investigate the
ensuing effect on dose calculations.
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6220

It appears that the direct extraction of interaction coefficients for LE photons from CT images is an ill-studied subject. More accurate tissue determination may be possible with
monoenergetic synchrotron x-ray CT scanners,134, 135 but this
remains far from an established clinical technique. Advantages would be reduced beam-hardening artifacts and possible energy tuning to match either patient dimensions or the
K-edge of a contrast medium.134
IV.A.3. CBCT segmentation

A similar issue is the extraction of tissue information from
cone beam CT (CBCT) scanners used in the treatment room.
The advantage is that information on patient geometry and
composition can be obtained at treatment time, which may
be different than the information at the stage of CT scanning due to various factors such as weight loss, different organ filling.136, 137 CBCT scanners have been investigated to
some extent for EBRT, both for kV and MV-CBCT,138–140 but
not yet for brachytherapy. This discussion is limited to kVCBCT as appropriate for brachytherapy. The imaging quality in a kV-CBCT scanner is inferior to a regular fan-beam
CT scanner due to increased photon scatter intercepted by the
larger 2D detection panel leading to reduced imaging contrast,
increased cupping, and streaking artifacts.139 Therefore, calibration of the kV-CBCT scanner in terms of HU versus ρ e is
essential for dose calculations.138, 140 On the other hand, the
spatial resolution of the CBCT scanner in the axial direction
is superior to a fan beam CT scanner.
A study using a kV-CBCT scanner and several calibration phantoms reported that the accuracy of EBRT dose
calculations-based CBCT images of phantoms and patients
was within a few percent of dose calculations based on images from a fan beam CT.140 In contrast, more recently Hatton
et al.,138 also studying a kV-CBCT scanner attached to a linear
accelerator, found that phantom size substantially influenced
the HU. Compared to CT-based dose calculations, this led to
large dose errors of up to 20% for 18 MV x-rays in bone.
In brachytherapy, the use of a CBCT scanner in the treatment room has been investigated to a limited extent, e.g.,
to investigate the possible use a CBCT scanner for conventional TG-43 dose to water calculations in HDR cervix
treatment.141, 142 Dose to medium calculations in brachytherapy based on kV-CBCT imaging has not been attempted yet.
HU calibration in kV-CBCT seems an issue that deserves
more attention and CBCT images should not be used for
brachytherapy dose calculations when tissue heterogeneity information needs to be taken into account.
IV.A.4. Dual energy CT and spectral CT

Nearly 40 years ago, it was proposed that dual-energy CT
(DECT) may allow extraction of tissue characteristics in a
more accurate way than single-energy CT.133, 143 In a similar
vein, multienergy CT, or spectral CT, was recently advocated
to allow more accurate tissue composition extraction.144–146
The DECT technique is now best known for the determination of bone density.147 It may also be used to measure arterial

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6220

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

calcifications,148 or breast composition.149 The DECT underwent steady development since its inception,150, 151 which led
to research systems and clinically available products.134, 152
The DECT technique utilizes two x-ray CT images acquired
using two well-separated x-ray energy spectra. This then allows obtaining an image of the mass or electron densities (i.e.,
morphology) and another image of the atomic numbers of the
geometry (i.e., chemical composition), which greatly aids in
identifying tissue types. DECT can also be used to aid extraction of photon interaction coefficients more accurately than
single energy CT.108 DECT was used to extract tissue data
needed for MC treatment planning for MV and kV photon
beams.153 Spectral CT may help to extract even more tissue
information than DECT.
To our knowledge, only one study attempted to use DECT
for brachytherapy. The investigators proposed a method to estimate voxel-by-voxel the distribution of the photon interaction coefficients for brachytherapy energies.108 They used two
methods: a parametric fit model and a basis vector model, of
which they recommended the latter. No brachytherapy dose
calculations were shown in this study. Vigorous research efforts are ongoing in DECT and spectral CT.146 It may well
constitute an improvement over single-energy CT to derive
tissue characteristics for brachytherapy dose calculations, but
much research is needed to establish the technique for this
purpose. Two recent studies showed that DECT could segment tissue phantoms more accurately than single energy
CT.154, 155
IV.A.5. CT artifacts

The CT artifacts may lead to differences between true and
reconstructed photon interaction coefficients. The presence of
high-Z, high-density materials in a scanned object will lead to
streaking artifacts which may severely degrade image quality.
Examples specifically for brachytherapy are the presence of
metal applicators, vaginal packing, or radioactive seeds. Usually, those metallic objects are very close to, or even within,
the target volume. Hence, without artifact correction, it is impossible to accurately assess ρ e and the composition of some
voxels. Streaks not only prevent accurate structure delineation
but may also cause dose miscalculation. This is particularly
true for MDBCA dose calculations in brachytherapy, which
may be more sensitive to incorrect media assignment than
other dose calculation algorithms.
A variety of artifact correction techniques have been developed to improve image quality. The simplest approach
that can be used for minor artifacts is to correct the
discrepancies in the CT images themselves.156 More sophisticated approaches use one of three main techniques:
filtered back-projection on a modified sinogram,157–159 filtering techniques,160 and iterative algorithms.160–165 The modified filtered back-projection methods often involve interpolation in the sinogram domain after high-density objects have
been removed. The impact on MC dose calculation accuracy was assessed for a double-hip prosthesis case.166 For an
18 MV photon dose calculation, the dose differed significantly in the corrected and noncorrected CT geomeMedical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6221

try. This technique was also used to reduce imaging artifacts in the presence of a Fletcher-Suit applicator for HDR
brachytherapy,158, 163 but these authors did not perform dose
calculations. Recent studies have looked at correction methods for metallic LDR seed implants using post processing algorithms on CT slices, virtual sinogram technique, or
the more efficient approach processing the raw sinogram
data.27, 167–169 The presented preliminary dosimetric results
indicate that artifacts can lead to large discrepancies.27, 167 It
is clear that CT artifact correction should also be encouraged
as a field of research to improve brachytherapy dose accuracy.
IV.A.6. Other imaging modalities

Volume delineation based on imaging modalities other
than CT can be performed, especially when the lack of electron density information is not a significant problem, e.g.,
for a homogeneous dose calculation. Contours drawn using MRI could suffer from image distortion but can still be
used successfully in brachytherapy planning [for example,
prostate170 or GYN (Ref. 171) treatments]. Image fusion with
CT often offers the best results.172 Also, US imaging has
been used to outline organs in brachytherapy. In particular,
transrectal US imaging is commonly used to perform LDR
prostate seed implants.173–175 This technique clearly visualizes the prostate and the urethra, but the act of imaging the organs deforms them. The consequences for dosimetry are not
well understood. Three-dimensional US imaging with external US transducers offers possibilities for noninvasive imageguided brachytherapy for prostate, cervix, and breast without
geometric distortion, although these techniques are currently
rarely used for brachytherapy.176, 177 However, none of these
techniques can presently provide information on tissue heterogeneities as would be required within the scope of the current task group report. In US techniques, contrast-enhanced
imaging178 and tissue typing179 are active fields of research,
which may also play a future role in brachytherapy.

IV.B. Recommendations

IV.B.1. Consensus material definition

The number of materials should be limited to a few. For
prostate and breast, there is still disagreement on the composition to be used, so more tissue composition studies are required. The mass density derived from the CT scanner image
should be used, but special measures should be taken if metal
streaking and other CT artifacts are present. Table III lists the
recommended tissue compositions.
IV.B.1.a. Prostate. For noncalcified prostate, the composition from Woodard and White110 is recommended since the
ICRP-1975 (Ref. 119) composition is dosimetrically equivalent to Woodard’s composition. The ICRP-2003 (Ref. 120)
composition refers to “average male soft tissue,”109, 118 which
is similar but not the same as prostate. While individual patients may differ considerably in their prostate composition,
this causes dose differences in clinical implants of only a few
percent.118

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6221

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

6222

TABLE III. Material definitions. Water is given for comparison.
% mass

Mass density

Tissue

H

C

N

O

Z>8

g cm−3

Prostate (Ref. 110)
Mean adipose (Ref. 110)
Mean gland (Ref. 110)
Mean male soft tissue (Ref. 109)
Mean female soft tissue (Ref. 109)
Mean skin (Ref. 109)
Cortical bone (Ref. 109)
Eye lens (Ref. 109)
Lung (inflated) (Ref. 109)
Liver (Ref. 109)
Heart (Ref. 109)
Water

10.5
11.4
10.6
10.5
10.6
10.0
3.4
9.6
10.3
10.2
10.4
11.2

8.9
59.8
33.2
25.6
31.5
20.4
15.5
19.5
10.5
13.9
13.9

2.5
0.7
3.0
2.7
2.4
4.2
4.2
5.7
3.1
3.0
2.9

77.4
27.8
52.7
60.2
54.7
64.5
43.5
64.6
74.9
71.6
71.8
88.8

Na(0.2), P(0.1), S(0.2), K(0.2)
Na(0.1), S(0.1), Cl(0.1)
Na(0.1), P(0.1), S(0.2), Cl(0.1)
Na(0.1), P(0.2), S(0.3), Cl(0.2), K(0.2)
Na(0.1), P(0.2), S(0.2), Cl(0.1), K(0.2)
Na(0.2), P(0.1), S(0.2), Cl(0.3), K(0.1)
Na (0.1), Mg (0.2), P (10.3), S (0.3), Ca(22.5)
Na(0.1), P(0.1), S(0.3), Cl(0.1)
Na(0.2), P(0.2), S(0.3), Cl(0.3), K(0.2)
Na(0.2), P(0.3), S(0.3), Cl(0.2), K(0.3)
Na(0.1), P(0.2), S(0.2), Cl(0.2), K(0.3)

1.04
0.95
1.02
1.03
1.02
1.09
1.92
1.07
0.26
1.06
1.05
1.00

IV.B.1.b. Breast. Breast tissue is a nonuniform mixture
of two distinct tissues: adipose and gland. It is clear from
the literature118 that both tissues also have their own range
of compositions. If the adipose and glandular regions can
be distinguished then each region can be assigned to the
respective media as recommended in Table III. With current CT technology this may not always be feasible. If the
adipose and glandular regions cannot be distinguished reliably, a single mean composition (for noncalcified breast)
is recommended for the whole breast, corresponding to the
mean gland and adipose compositions reported in the literature (Table III). From the breast CT HU, the mean overall breast density may be extracted from which the relative
mass fractions of adipose and glands may be derived (see
Sec IV.B.2). Using a generic breast composition is not recommended due to the large spread in breast tissue composition
in the population.180, 181 If no information at all can be extracted from the CT images, then we recommend using a 20%
glandular/80% adipose composition (fractions by weight) as
a population average.111
IV.B.1.c. Calcifications. The literature is sparse on the
composition of calcifications as may be present in breast
and prostate. Chibani and Williamson performed MC calculations for calcified prostate.80 They assumed that prostate
calcifications are similar to breast calcifications for which
they used the composition reported by the ICRU 46 report.109
This report lists as constituents of breast calcifications hydroxyapatite, tri-calcium phosphate, and protein (e.g., their
Table 2.1). From this, Chibani and Williamson listed as the
elemental composition and their weight fractions H (0.3%),
C (1.6%), N (0.5%), O (40.7%), P (18.7%), and Ca (38.2%)
with an average density 3.06 g/cm3 .80 If another calcification
composition assignment is made, then it should be clearly
reported.
IV.B.1.d. Other materials. Table III gives a few more examples of recommended tissues, listed with their mean composition; data for other media can also be found in Woodard
and White110 and also in ICRU Report 46.109 However, we
recommend that any other tissue compositions not shown in
Table III be taken from the ICRU 46 report, until more deMedical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

tailed and accurate tissue composition data become available
to the community.
IV.B.1.e. Applicators, sources, and other devices. MBDCAs require explicit specification of geometry, atomic
composition, and density of all nonwater materials, including
the internal structure of sources and applicators that can
influence the dose distribution. In contrast, the end user of
TG-43 single-source dose distributions need not directly
validate the source geometry used by a MBDCA since source
structure is implicitly included in the dose-rate measurements
and MC calculations from which the TG-43 parameters are
derived. As long as single-source MBDCA calculations are
carefully validated against published TG-43 models, one can
consider the MBDCA geometric assumptions indirectly but
adequately validated. However, because reference-quality
dose-rate distributions for each potential source-applicator
combination are lacking, indirect dosimetric validation of
MBDCA shielded applicator geometries is not a feasible
strategy. The possibility that source and applicator geometry
models in the planning system may not accurately describe
the devices actually used in the clinic creates new and highly
significant error pathways. This may affect treatment outcomes of many patients to the extent that completely ignoring
source/applicator geometries could be less deleterious than
making clinical decisions based upon inaccurate models. To
guide both vendors and early adopters of MBDCAs, the Task
Group makes the following recommendations:
(1) It is the responsibility of the end-user clinical physicist
to confirm that MBDCA dose predictions are based
upon sufficiently accurate and spatially resolved applicator and source models, including correct material assignments, to avoid clinically significant dose-delivery
error prior to implementing the dose algorithm in the
clinic.
(2) Patient CT grids, which typically have cubic spatial resolutions no better than 1 mm, are not adequate for accurate modeling on the spatial scale of
brachytherapy sources and applicators. Dose distributions from LE sources are particularly sensitive to

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6222

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

simplistic geometric approximations. MBDCA vendors should use analytic modeling schemes or recursively specify meshes with 1–10 μm spatial resolution as required to accurately depict LE seed geometry.
Otherwise, nuances of seed geometry will be lost and
resultant dose distributions will be in error.
(3) With regards to MBDCAs, the Task Group takes the
position that it is the responsibility of the manufacturers of seeds and applicators to disclose their
geometry, material assignments, and manufacturing
tolerances to both end users and TPS vendors (if responsible for data entry and maintenance), as this information is needed to accurately model dose around
these devices. The device vendor disclosure must have
sufficient detail to enable the end user to verify correct
entry into the TPS. Furthermore, it is the responsibility
of the TPS vendors to incorporate the device in the system or provide a simple means to the end user to do so.
(4) Prior to accepting a device vendor’s disclosed source
or applicator geometry for clinical application, it
must be verified by an independent investigator (as
defined by TG-43U1). As described by TG-43U1
appropriate verification techniques include transmission radiography and autoradiography, direct
mechanical measurements, microphotography of
disassembled applicator/source components, and
electron microscopy of source components. MC parametric studies can be used to assess significance of
geometric uncertainties.165, 182, 183 If a peer-reviewed
publication of the applicator or source geometry of
interest is not available, the responsibility for performing the independent assessment falls to the end
user.
(5) TPS vendors are nowadays increasingly providing libraries of applicators, which will ease the verification
task. When such libraries are provided, it is the responsibility of the vendor to also provide visualization
or reporting tools that enable the end user to verify
the correctness of each included applicator and source
model against independent design specifications. In
addition, TPS vendors must disclose sufficient information to the user regarding the model or recursive
mesh generation to allow verification of the spatial resolution requirement specified in recommendation (2).
(6) For each individual source model used clinically, during commissioning, the end user should compare MBDCA single-source dose distributions in water to directly calculated TG-43 benchmarks as described in
Sec. V.B. TPS vendors should disclose the dose calculation grid sizes used and provide tools to correct for
volume averaging near sources so that unambiguous
comparisons between TG-43 and MBDCA dose distributions can be performed.
It is the intention of the joint AAPM/ESTRO/ABG Working Group on MBDCA to provide benchmarking data on
a registry to assist with the verification process as stated
in Sec. V.C.2.
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6223

IV.B.2. Material assignment method

For any application of brachytherapy dosimetry in nonwater media, tissue composition is required to compute dose. For
a given organ, it is recommended that the tissue composition
assignment be guided by contours approved by the radiation
oncologist. In case CT images are available, for all voxels
inside a given contour we recommend using the CT derived
densities with a uniform tissue composition. TG-186 recommends the mean tissue compositions listed in Table III. These
should be used whenever possible. In case different compositions than the recommended ones in Table III are used, calculations should also be provided with the recommended compositions to allow intercomparisons.
In any publication for which the results depend on material heterogeneities, each material composition must be specified and its origin described, e.g., citation from the literature
or the authors’ determination. For each material, either the
mass density assumed shall be specified, or if derived from
CT imaging (recommended approach), the scanner calibration method and HU-to-density and/or composition conversion technique shall be described. For the latter, the CT calibration curve depends on the CT x-ray tube kV value that
is used; the appropriate calibration curve for the kV used to
record the images shall be reported. However, before relying
on CT-to-density conversions clinically, the confounding influence of residual streaking artifacts must be ruled out. If
imaging artifacts are present, we recommend a complete override of the tissue in question with a uniform density, which
may be the average of neighboring pixels. For prostate seed
brachytherapy, it may be prudent to rely on the density from
a preimplant CT that is free from metal artifacts.
Typical CT simulators have calibration curves for HU versus electron density relative to water, ρ e,rel , with the latter defined as
ρe, rel = ρNg /(ρNg )w ,

(5)

where Ng stands for the electron density per unit mass (#e/g), and the subscript w denotes water. Since Ng for bodily
tissues, taken from ICRP23 (Ref. 119) and listed in Schneider et al.,126 vary little over the whole range of human tissues (standard deviation 2%), the relationship between ρ and
ρ e,rel is nearly linear. When all the tissues (excluding “inflated
lung”) are fit to a straight line, the following relation is obtained:
ρ = −0.1746 + 1.176ρe,rel

(R 2 = 0.99992),

(6)

which has a maximum error of less than 1% (ρ e,rel is dimensionless, ρ is in g cm−3 ). For “inflated lung” usually ρ
= 0.26 g cm−3 or ρ e,rel = 0.26 is used.
A possible exception to filling structure contours with a
single uniform tissue might be breast. If adipose and glandular tissues can be distinguished in the CT images, e.g.,
by a thresholding algorithm, or by registration with another
imaging modality, the regions segmented as either adipose or
gland may be assigned with their proper mean composition
(Table III) and voxel mass densities.181, 184 If the adipose and
glandular regions cannot be distinguished reliably, then the
whole breast should be assigned to a uniform medium, which

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6223

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

should be a mix of adipose and gland, since it is well known
that a wide, age-dependent range of mixes exists among the
female population.111 From the breast mean mass density
ρ obtained from the CT scan and the known (or assumed)
mean mass densities for adipose ρ A and glandular tissue ρ G
(Table III), the fractional weight of glandular wG and adipose
tissue wA can be estimated from
wG = (1 − ρA /ρ)/(1 − ρA /ρG ),

(7)

wA = 1 − wG .

(8)

Although a mean breast density ρ is used to determine the
fractional weight composition, the CT-based voxel mass densities are recommended.
Bone, possibly comprising bone marrow, is a special case
with many possible compositions. Voxel mass density should
be taken from CT images. The composition of cortical bone
in Table III is recommended, but it should be pointed out
that bone rarely plays an import role in brachytherapy dose
calculations. In case another composition is used, it should
be documented and a comparison with the composition of
Table III should be provided for intercomparison purposes.
In case CT images are available, for all voxels outside contours, we recommend using the CT densities with a composition of “mean soft tissue” as defined in Table III. If adequately
visualized and segmented, fat-like tissues can be contoured
and used in the calculation. The mean adipose tissue listed in
Table III may be used; if an alternative composition is used it
should be documented.
IV.B.2.a. Use of other imaging modalities. In case no CT
images of the target geometry are available, the Task Group
recommends:

6224

IV.B.3. CT/CBCT artifact removal

For MBDCA dose calculations, it is recommended to first
remove visible artifacts. In the simplest approach, a manual
override of the tissue composition and density (see “Use of
other imaging modalities” above) should be performed and
documented. The use of advanced algorithms for artifact removal, as described in Sec. IV.A.5, is not the standard of care
and should be used cautiously. For any application, the user
shall clearly describe the CT artifact removal method used,
if any.

IV.C. Areas of research

IV.C.1. Determination of tissue composition

The consensus list of tissue composition and density needs
to be validated and refined. It needs to represent the tissues
from typical cancer patients more accurately than the poorly
validated recommendations from ICRU, ICRP, and other
groups. Further experimental investigation into tissue compositions, including their interpatient and intraorgan variations, with an emphasis on dosimetric applications, is strongly
encouraged. Research is needed to characterize prostate and
breast calcifications more accurately. Tissue composition of
organs in cancer patients and healthy subjects may not be
the same. Ideally, the tissue composition and mass density of
all voxels should be known for individual patients. With the
current state-of-the-art in CT imaging, this has not yet been
realized. Hence, further research into more sophisticated CT
imaging methods such as dual-energy or spectral x-ray imaging and diffraction imaging is needed. Research into alternate
quantitative imaging methods such as MRI and US is also
needed.

r Using bulk tissue densities and compositions recommended previously based on contoured organs if possible.
r For LE brachytherapy, if US images are used (e.g.,
prostate seed implants), tissues outside the prostate contours should be set to mean soft tissues as described
previously.
r For a multiple source implant, individual sources should
be modeled.
r For HE sources (e.g., 192 Ir), MRI and US images can
also be used provided that caution is exercised when extracting contours because of possible image distortions
(MRI) and the nonquantitative nature of the image content. Furthermore, all tissues could be set either to the
recommended bulk tissues densities and compositions
from contours or alternatively to water with unit mass
density. However, high-Z materials, such as applicators,
should be taken into account as described in Sec. IV.B.1
and low-density media such as air must be included in
the calculation to account for scatter conditions.
Finally, it is expected that TPS vendors will provide easyto-use or automated tools to help clinical users accomplish
these tasks.
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

IV.C.2. Segmentation methods

Research efforts are ongoing in DECT and spectral CT.
Whether this constitutes an improvement over single-energy
CT to derive tissue characteristics for brachytherapy dose
calculations remains to be seen.154, 155 HU calibration in
kV-CBCT is an issue that deserves more attention before CBCT images can be used reliably for brachytherapy dose calculations taking tissue heterogeneities into account. Tissue segmentation methods based on feature recognition and/or anatomy atlases should also be pursued in
brachytherapy.

IV.C.3. CT artifact removal

It is clear that robust CT artifact correction algorithms are
needed for accurate LE brachytherapy MBDCA dose calculations. Most efforts have been devoted to improving image
quality and pattern recognition. Specific research efforts for
improving dose calculations are needed. These methods are
not yet commonly available and their potential to improve
dose accuracy needs to be established.

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6224

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

V. MBDCA COMMISSIONING
The commissioning of a brachytherapy TPS includes tasks
outlined in the AAPM TG-40, TG-56, and TG-64 reports with
specifics provided on HDR 192 Ir systems and LDR permanent prostate brachytherapy covered in TG-59 and TG-64,
respectively.39, 185–187 The majority of these recommendations
address treatment-specific QA tasks, and all of these reports
presume the AAPM TG-43 formalism.3, 4 As the focus of this
report is advanced brachytherapy dose calculation algorithms,
this section will therefore focus only on QA tasks related
to MBDCAs. Commissioning brachytherapy MBDCAs will
have many aspects in common with TG-43-based systems, but
will require algorithm-specific tasks described below.
V.A. Literature review

The literature is growing on MBDCAs and the dosimetric
effects supporting their use for certain disease sites. However,
to our knowledge, there is currently little literature providing
quantitative information or practical guidance on the commissioning of brachytherapy MBDCAs for clinical use.70–72
Consequently, there is an opportunity to establish uniform
commissioning procedures for various MBDCAs and across
institutions.
V.B. From TG-43 to MBDCA-based commissioning

The AAPM, ESTRO, ABS, and ABG recommend minimum commissioning standards that are designed to evaluate MBDCAs under conditions similar to those encountered
in clinical brachytherapy practice, based on the established
TG-43 dose calculation formalism and the new MBDCA. In
this section, two levels of commissioning tests that should be
performed in addition to TPS QC/QA recommendations already in place based on societal guidelines are described.
All code implementations of MC, CC, or GBBS methods
as MBDCA dose engines involve compromises between computational speed and sufficient dose calculation accuracy and,
therefore, the resulting solutions will have a certain amount
of uncertainty. These code implementations must be carefully
benchmarked against MC or experimentally when uncertainties adequately permit to ensure sufficiently accurate dose prediction within the intended domain.

6225

determine agreement of MBDCA TPS-derived absolute dose
or dose rate in comparison with the dose or dose rate produced in the TPS using the AAPM consensus TG-43 dosimetry parameters for a given brachytherapy source model. Furthermore, hand calculations should be performed for several
points-of-interest covering the range of r and θ to be used
in clinical practice. As recommended in the 2004 AAPM
TG-43U1 report, a 2.0% tolerance should be used for agreement with AAPM consensus TG-43 dosimetry parameters.
Any deviations >2.0% should be carefully examined (see
Example 1), and the clinical impact understood and documented before patient use.
A direct comparison of the MBDCA-based TPS output
in a reference-sized homogenous water phantom to AAPM
consensus data is helpful for physicists during transition to
MBDCA-based TPS. Calculations should be conducted under
reference conditions, i.e., water medium providing full scatter conditions,99, 188 at distances up to 10 cm away from the
source. Comparing TG-43 dosimetry parameters is a necessary first step since these parameters describe the spatial dose
distribution due to the physical source model without significant consideration of the surrounding environment. An example of this comparison is shown below.
Example 1:
Mikell and Mourtada reported on the dose distributions of
a HDR 192 Ir source in a homogeneous water geometry calculated using BrachyVision (BV) TPS (BrachyVision v8.8,
Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto, CA) with the MBDCAR
system.71 The percent dose difference (%D)
based Acuros
of GBBS was determined for three cases:
(1) published TG-43 data,189
(2) MCNPX simulations of the model VS2000 HDR 192 Ir
source centered in a spherical water phantom of radius
R = 15 cm, and
(3) output from a TG-43-based TPS using vendor supplied
F(r, θ ) tables.
R
and TG-43Dose differences >20% between Acuros
based dosimetry near the source delivery cable were observed.
R
using a 0.1 cm long delivery
This was attributed to Acuros
cable, while the TG-43-based TPS algorithm used data based
on a 15 cm long cable. While these dose differences were
large near the cable, the impact on clinical outcomes was negligible with dose differences of less than 3% reported.

V.B.1. MBDCA commissioning level 1

The AAPM TG-43 dose calculation formalism is based on
the assumption that photon-emitting brachytherapy sources
are cylindrically symmetric, enabling single-source dose distributions to be parameterized as functions of radial distance
r and polar angle θ from the source long-axis in spherical, homogenous water phantoms having outer radii R of 15 cm and
40 cm for LE and HE photon emitters, respectively. Analogous to current TPS based on the TG-43 formalism, any TPS
using a MBDCA should allow direct dose or dose rate comparisons using the same dose grid size of TG-43 to facilitate direct evaluation. The clinical medical physicist should
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

V.B.2. MBDCA commissioning level 2

Brachytherapy treatment planning that accounts for radiation scatter conditions and the radiological influence of material heterogeneities differing from liquid water is beyond
the AAPM TG-43 dosimetry formalism. However, these effects are real and potentially produce clinically relevant differences between calculated dose distributions of TG-43-based
and MBDCA-based TPS. Consequently, tests of these effects
on TPS results are required. Comparisons of the 3D dose distributions calculated with the clinical MBDCA-based TPS on
specific virtual phantoms mimicking clinical scenarios should

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6225

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

be independently verified against benchmark dose distributions derived from the same phantom geometries. Based on
the TPS dose output type, Dm,m or Dw,m , the independent dose
calculation should be consistent with the TPS style option. At
this time, clinical physicists should be aware that such benchmark dose distributions should only be obtained via the use
of a well-documented MC code. Direct comparison of the
MBDCA output to a reference treatment plan having identical heterogeneous conditions is mandatory for physicists to
commission MBDCA-based TPS.
For LE photon-emitting brachytherapy sources such as
125
I, the influence of radiation backscatter is often negligible in comparison to the impact of varying tissue composition. For HE photon-emitting brachytherapy sources, such as
192
Ir, radiation scatter plays a major role. While variations in
soft tissue composition cause minimal changes in dose calculation, applicators having components with mass density
>2 g/cm3 are dosimetrically important. For both energy
regimes, any deviations between the MBDCA-based TPS results and the reference treatment plan should be documented,
and the clinical significance understood. Example 2 for LE
sources, and Examples 3 and 4 for HE sources, illustrate comparisons between reference (MC-based) treatment plans and
MBDCA-based TPS results.
Example 2:
Dose distributions around the 16 mm COMS eye plaque,
using a fixed geometry of 125 I seeds, have recently been examined by two independent groups.22, 190 Both investigation
teams calculated 3D Dm,m dose distributions accounting for
plaque material heterogeneities, but set the eye composition to
liquid water. Dosimetric agreement on the plaque central-axis
between these groups has recently been shown to be 0.991
± 0.019 (k = 2).191 The data of Melhus and Rivard were entered into the Pinnacle TPS using a MBDCA with a hybrid
TG-43 MBDCA approach assuming cylindrically symmetric
plaque dose distributions.54 The TPS agreement with the reference data was 0.999 ± 0.004 (k = 2) for distances ranging
from 0.0 to 24.3 mm from the plaque/eye interface along the
plaque central-axis.

6226

cator (GM11004380, Varian Brachytherapy, Charlottesville,
VA) were compared to corresponding MC simulation results,
as well as experimental results obtained using the VIP polymer gel-MRI three-dimensional dosimetry method with a
custom-made phantom. The TPS and MC dose distributions
were found in agreement, mostly within 2%. However, differences between the TPS and MC results (>2%) were observed at points in the penumbra of the shields (i.e., close
to the edges of the “shielded” segment of the geometries).
These differences were experimentally verified and therefore
attributed to the TPS. Apart from these regions, experimental
and TPS dose distributions were found in agreement within 2
mm distance-to-agreement and 5% individual point dose difference criteria.
V.B.3. MBDCA commissioning workflow

New clinical tools often require new workflows for proper
integration into clinical practice. Figure 4 illustrates how one
might perform MBDCA validation. It should be noted for
the early adopters of MBDCAs that test cases as proposed in
Sec. V.B.3.a below might not be available, hence, users should
perform their own verifications using independent methods
(experimental or theoretical) to verify the MBDCA dose results under situations similar to the clinical situation, for
R
example, for partial breast irradiation with MammoSite
R
(Hologic Inc., Bedford, MA) vs SAVI
(Cianna Medical, Aliso Viejo, CA) applicators, which is different than gynecological cases using shielded colpostats or cylinders.
V.B.3.a. Test case plans and data availability. Test case
plans should be made available beyond the scientific, peerreviewed literature via the web. This could be accomplished

Example 3:
R
) to
Zourari et al. tested a MBDCA-based TPS (Acuros
account for the altered scatter conditions generated by the
proximity of a HDR 192 Ir brachytherapy source to the boundary of a R = 15 cm water phantom in comparison to MC
results.70 Dose distributions with the source shifted 5 cm and
12.5 cm from the phantom center differed by more than 20%
in comparison to the TG-43 results, but showed agreement
within 3% (k = 2) of MC results, with the largest errors along
the source long-axis.
Example 4:
Petrokokkinos et al. reported on the dosimetric validaR
for multiple 192 Ir source dwell position
tion of Acuros
brachytherapy applications employing a shielded applicator
in homogeneous water geometries.72 Seven VS2000 HDR
192
Ir source dwell positions and a partially shielded appliMedical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

F IG . 4. MBDCA commissioning workflow for heterogeneous dose distributions calculated by a MBDCA-based TPS. Major process flow components
(a)–(f) are discussed in the text.

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6226

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

through expansion of the joint AAPM/RPC Brachytherapy
Source Registry as described by Rivard et al.99 This Registry currently houses a list of sources (both LE and HDR
192
Ir), which meet the minimum dosimetric prerequisites
and calibration frequencies recommended by the AAPM.
This Registry, or some complementary international counterpart, should be expanded to include quantitative data on
brachytherapy source benchmarks in easily accessible electronic format to facilitate comparisons with TPS outputs from
MBDCAs beyond the current approach of pointing medical physicists to the published literature. Further, test cases
should be developed with uniformity amongst vendors (when
appropriate) for inclusion in their commissioning test procedures to depict dose calculations with and without MBDCAs.
However, such development is beyond the scope of this Task
Group and is left as an area of research (Sec. V.C).
Having an independent repository to house the reference data (such as the Registry) would help facilitate this
process efficiently—especially with international accessibility. By submitting engineering drawings of the source and
source-applicator combinations, manufacturers will facilitate
accuracy and ease of simulations to raise the standards for
brachytherapy dose calculations.
V.B.3.b. DICOM test case importing. During the MBDCA TPS commissioning process, the physicist downloads
and imports DICOM files of virtual phantoms as test cases
(see above) from a secure website. Such files include the
geometry, precontoured DICOM-RT ROIs, points-of-interest
(POIs), the RT-Plan, explicit material definitions (for crosssection assignments) and a description of the source strength,
dwell positions, dwell times, and other information as found
in the DICOM-RT structure.
V.B.3.c. TG-43-based dose calculation tests. Once the
test case plan is imported, the first step is to copy the plan
for comparison under TG-43 conditions. Reported POI results
should be quantitatively compared to the plan report obtained
from the Registry. This step allows for verification that all
treatment plan parameters, such as source strength, loading
configuration, match the test case plan prior to running the
more complex MBDCA dose engine.
V.B.3.d. MBDCA-based dose calculation tests. After the
initial TG-43 plan verifications, the physicist copies the test
case plan and reruns the dose calculation using the MBDCA.
Using the TPS plan evaluation tools, comparisons between
the reference data and the institutional results are made of
ROI DVHs, POI doses, etc. If the MBDCA-based TPS allows
users to insert a solid brachytherapy applicator in a plan, the
physicist should use the TPS measuring tools (distance and
angle rulers) to compare vendor drawings to the outer and inner dimensions in the applicator library. At a minimum, the
physicist should measure a few dimensions of the applicator(s) used in the clinic with mechanical calipers or radiographic imaging.186 Given established tolerances, the physicist will release the system for general clinical use or inclusion in cooperative clinical trials.
V.B.3.e. Reference CT scanner calibration data. An important input for the MBDCA-based TPS is the reference CT
scanner calibration function, especially for LE brachytherapy
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6227

sources as discussed in Sec. IV. The physicist should copy this
calibration curve from the Registry for TPS entry. This is not
intended to replace the institution’s CT calibration curve but
is only for the purpose of comparing to the reference datasets.
Also, the physicist should verify that the materials used in the
TPS are consistent with those provided in the test case.
V.B.3.f. Select dose scoring medium type. User should
specify dose scoring medium (to medium or water) following the recommendation of Sec. IV.

V.C. Areas of research

V.C.1. Workflow

The recommended commissioning workflow is general
enough to be applicable to any MBDCA TPS. It contains multiple checks against the current, well-known TG-43 standard
to ensure consistency of the process. However, commissioning of a MBDCA currently represents a particular challenge
on multiple counts. Presently, there is only a single commerR
.
cial MBDCA-based TPS available, Acuros

V.C.2. Test cases

It is not reasonable to validate MBDCA implementation
for all possible combinations of source-applicator-geometry.
Thus, exploring MBDCA limitations is an important undertaking among early adopters,70–72 and must be expanded to
various tumor sites and treatment geometries. It is expected
that this exercise will be repeated for other MBDCAs as
they become available. In this regard, creation of a Registry (proposed previously) should help early adopters as well
as clinical medical physicists. Developers of new test cases
are strongly encouraged to share their validation geometries
through the Registry. To achieve this goal, TG-186 recommends creation of a Working Group with international membership. This Working Group will determine the submission
modality or prerequisites, review submission prior to availability and propose a first set of test cases to help the community in this crucial process.

V.C.3. Gamma-index comparisons

It will be critical to refine the dose accuracy tolerance
requirements for MBDCAs. The gamma-index concept
(concurrently evaluating percentage agreement and distanceto-agreement) has been used for several years in EBRT
dosimetry quality analysis.192, 193 Considering a gammaindex metric for brachytherapy dosimetry is an important first
step. A simple ±2% tolerance level dates from 1994.185 The
2004 AAPM TG-43U1 report further recommended a 2%
tolerance for agreement of reference dosimetry parameters
and overall dose calculation.4 However, a tolerance criterion
has not been specified for the distance-to-agreement between
the reference dataset and that being evaluated. Further, an
explicit method for performing this evaluation over the range
of all clinical points of interest was not specified.

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6227

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

Since then, a number of investigators have applied the
gamma-index concept to brachytherapy. Yang et al.56 compared MC dosimetry results for HDR 192 Ir breast applicator
to those obtained using a TG-43 hybrid MBDCA approach
and found a 99.24% gamma-index pass rate with 1% and
1 mm criterion, and a 99.95% pass rate for a 2% and 2 mm
criterion. Petrokokkinos et al.72 examined the accuracy of the
R
system in comparison to MCNPX-based MC simuAcuros
lations for the dose distribution from a HDR 192 Ir source in
the presence of a shielded vaginal applicator. The large majority of points on the transverse and coronal planes met the
gamma index 5% and 2 mm pass rate criterion. Bannon et al.
examined 103 Pd and 192 Ir sources using a 0.5 mm dose grid
and a 2% and 2 mm criterion, and obtained passing rates of
99.6% and 99.9% for linear sources and 98.9% and 100% for
toroidal sources, respectively.194
Based on this literature and observations made when creating the AAPM TG-43U1 report, a gamma index criterion of
2.0% and 2.0 mm with a ≥99% pass rate for clinically relevant points may generally be used to evaluate agreement of
MBDCA-based TPS results with reference treatment plans.
At the same time, setting tolerance levels is a major endeavor
and the set of criteria for acceptability might need to be adjusted depending on the complexity of the case, such as in
Venselaar et al.195 Hence, more research, similar to the study
by Stock et al. is needed to establish clear sets of criteria,196
and further validation and cross comparison with MC and
other MBDCAs should be a major area of research.
V.C.4. Phantom development

Finally, there is a need to design and implement relevant
physical phantom geometries with known materials, possibly
adding various applicator/shield inserts. For these phantoms,
it is necessary to assess the dose distributions experimentally

6228

(e.g., using TLDs, radiochromic film, or GEL dosimeters) and
compare the results with a virtual representation within a MBDCA TPS.72 This process would generate sets of “true” independent reference data against which clinical medical physicists can validate their TPS and for which new systems can
be benchmarked. Again, the proposed Registry would play a
central role in this process.

VI. OTHER ISSUES AND LIMITATIONS
VI.A. Uncertainties related to MBDCA

There are several sources of MBDCA dosimetric uncertainties; many are common to all calculation methods. In
this section, both general and method-specific dosimetric uncertainties are identified. A list of dosimetric uncertainty
components in approximate chronological order is given in
Table IV, and includes several items and expands upon
those from the joint AAPM/ESTRO TG-138 report for direct
MC simulations of brachytherapy source dosimetry.197 While
quantitative uncertainties are not recommended due to the
paucity of the literature on this topic and the variability of results based on different possibilities of applicator/source/site,
an indication of which items are generally guided by MBDCA
design or the physicist is made available. Based on presently
available choices within the TPS, responsibility for some of
these components may fall to the medical physicist.
For all MBDCA approaches to brachytherapy treatment
planning, Type B dosimetric uncertainties (nonstatistical or
systematic) are present. Specific to MC methods, statistical,
or Type A, uncertainties become more pronounced with
limited particle histories, while Type B uncertainties may
occur if certain variance reduction techniques are used,
which introduce biases, such as the MC condensed-history
algorithm for charged particle transport. Specific to GBBS

TABLE IV. Dosimetric uncertainties for MBDCA, with control over a given uncertainty component indicated by the responsible party.
#

Dosimetric uncertainty components

Responsible party

1

Source (seed) modeling such as geometry, material specifications, etc. For HDR and PDR 192 Ir sources, the length of
cable modeled with the source also leads to uncertainties (Ref. 71). Also for HDR 192 Ir sources, often times virtual
sources are used where such geometric approximations can lead to dosimetric uncertainties.
Applicator modeling (if applicable) such as geometries, material specifications (especially denser materials such as lead
or tungsten alloys).
Source and applicator characterization grid size resolution if not explicitly modeled.
Source and/or applicator positioning in the patient anatomy, which is extremely important for shadowing effects behind
dense materials, such as additional seeds (if applicable), dense shielding materials, or light material streaming paths
such as through catheters.
Modeling of brachytherapy source radiation emissions.
Patient geometry and limitations to simulate the realistic geometry.
Material voxels grid resolution size (based on CT scanning).
Determination of patient composition through correlation of CT HU to material and density mapping.
Fundamental material interaction data used (cross sections).
MBDCA model and potential simplifications away from realistic physics models.
Use of collision kerma versus absorbed dose, especially in tissue areas where CPE assumption is not true (near
interfaces of applicator and gas/tissue interface).
Output voxel grid resolution size.

Vendor

2
3
4

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

Vendor
Physicist
Physicist

Vendor
Physicist
Physicist
Vendor and physicist
Vendor
Vendor
Vendor
Physicist

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6228

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

methods, systematic uncertainties arise from spatial, angular,
and energy discretization due to use of a finite grid. Specific
to CC methods, systematic uncertainties arise from the use
of angular discretization (i.e., collapsed point-spread kernels)
combined with a finite grid.
MBDCAs using MC or GBBS methods are similar
as both methods converge to the LBTE solution. Therefore, uncertainties for MC and GBBS can be reduced by
increasing the number of particles or the resolution in
space, angle, and energy, respectively. Based on point-kernel
superposition,9, 10, 16, 57, 58, 198, 199 the CC method involves no
approximations up to and including the dose from once scattered photons. However, dose from multiply scattered photons calculated by CC involves an approximation related to
phantom size from initial generation of point kernels for multiply scattered photons and use of rectilinear methods to scale
the multiple-scatter kernel for material heterogeneities. Dosimetric uncertainties for MC, GBBS, and CC usually increase
with increasing distance from the source and with decreasing
voxel dimensions, and can be reduced at the expense of increased calculation time through use of more histories (MC)
or denser grids (GBBS, CC).
In trying to limit some of these uncertainties, a calculation voxel size no larger than (2 mm)3 should be used at all
times. If allowed by the imaging data set resolution, smaller
voxel sizes [< (1 mm)3 ] could be used. This would be of
particular interest in close proximity to sources and interfaces. Furthermore, dose uncertainties obtained using MC
MBDCAs for the volume of interest (e.g., CTV, PTV, etc.)
should be reported systematically. For the time being, the approach of Sec. III.D.1 of TG-105 (Ref. 85) is recommended,
with a threshold of using voxels with dose values 25% or
greater than the prescription dose. This change in threshold
is needed since brachytherapy has steeper dose gradients than
EBRT.

VI.B. Limitations

There may be certain limitations imposed by each of the
MBDC engines as implemented in TPS software. Examples
of such limitations include:
(1) Limits on which brachytherapy seeds are supported.
(2) Limits on the types of brachytherapy sources supported (i.e., HDR or PDR versus LDR).
(3) Limits on the applicators supported (if applicable).
(4) Limits on the materials (and associated compositions)
that can be assigned.
(5) Nonchangeable CT HU to material and density conversions.
(6) Only dose reporting as Dm,m or Dw,m may be supported
and not both.
(7) Upper and lower limits may be placed on the dose grid
resolution size.
(8) Limits on the extent of the patient geometry may be
imposed.
(9) User control over algorithm parameters may be
limited.
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6229

Through coordination amongst clinical professional societies, TPS vendors, and source manufacturers, it is hoped that
many of the current limitations will be overcome in the near
future.
VI.C. Considerations for changing brachytherapy
dose prescriptions

There is a long history in the field of brachytherapy of
safely changing prescriptions based on dosimetric advancements. Source strength units have evolved from mg-Ra-eq
to apparent activity to air-kerma strength, SK and reference air-kerma rate, the currently accepted two measures of
source strength for LE and HE photon-emitting brachytherapy
sources.200 These changes have primarily resulted in prescriptions using absorbed dose instead of specification in terms of
source strength and implant duration. More recently, establishment of the AAPM TG-43 formalism and migration of
the LE SK standard to the NIST WAFAC has resulted in prescription dose changes of about −10% for LDR 125 I seeds,
with permanent prostate implant prescriptions changing from
160 Gy to 145 Gy,201 and COMS eye plaque application prescriptions from 100 Gy to 85 Gy.202 Further, when accounting
for COMS eye plaque material heterogeneities and radiation
scatter conditions between Dw,w-TG43 and Dw,m , the prescribed
dose of 85 Gy corresponds to an administered dose of 76 Gy
for 125 I (−11%) and 67 Gy for 103 Pd (−21%) sources.191 Such
large dose changes are not expected for HE photon-emitting
brachytherapy sources.
A dose tolerance of ±5% was adopted by the ABS
for addressing dosimetric changes upon implementing
dosimetry recommendations of the 2004 AAPM TG-43U1
report.4, 5, 203, 204 As more data become available on differences between prescribed and administered doses, the
brachytherapy community will be better positioned to evaluate whether prescription changes are warranted for specific
disease-sites.
Based on the significance of heterogeneity effects, the
AAPM, ESTRO, ABS, and ABG recommend for those clinics that have the necessary resources that dose calculations
be performed not only according to the TG-43 formalism,
but also using the more accurate heterogeneous calculations.
For the latter, the recommendations made in the previous sections should be followed closely. These dose estimates should
be kept on file for a clinical evaluation in anticipation of
sufficient heterogeneity-enabled brachytherapy TPS. While
there remain significant dosimetric uncertainties and limitations as examined in Subsections VI.A and VI.B, the capabilities of MBDCAs to account for material heterogeneities,
patient scatter conditions, and attenuation amongst sources
and by high-Z applicators require the radiation oncologist to
assess the clinical practice of brachytherapy using MBDCAbased dosimetry. Until sufficient clinical data become available to issue specific societal recommendations on dose prescriptions, the AAPM, ESTRO, ABS, and ABG recommend
that prescriptions based on the TG-43 dose calculation formalism remain in effect. Similarly, for the time being MBDCAs are generally impractical (from a computational time

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6229

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

perspective) for dose optimization and the TG-43 formalism
remains the standard of practice for this task.

APPENDIX A: GLOSSARY OF TERMS
AAPM

VII. CONCLUSIONS
The AAPM TG-43 dose calculation formalism has provided the brachytherapy community with clear processes in
terms of source strength specification and efficient dose calculations that made it easier to compare dose-outcome relationships among different institutions. For the time being, the
TG-43 formalism will remain an important part of clinical
brachytherapy. This report recognizes the benefit of the current standard and has built upon the developed infrastructure
with specific recommendations to help move the brachytherapy field towards greater adoption of more accurate, advanced
model-based dose calculation algorithms. Application of TG186 guidance should help to ensure that the shared worldwide experience in using the TG-43 formalism is not lost in
the process of seeking better brachytherapy dose calculation
tools. The report also underlines specific research areas that
brachytherapy physicists and physicians should tackle expeditiously, perhaps through consortium efforts to provide data
required to move forward with MBDCAs.
Furthermore, it is important to acknowledge that the bulk
of clinical brachytherapy dosimetry experience is with radiation transport and energy deposition in water, with dose to water reported (as calculated under the TG-43 approach). Hence,
for the time being the recommendation that TG-43 calculations be performed in parallel with model-based dose calculations is crucial. Only in this way will the radiation therapy
community become familiar with dose differences, including
the impact on prescription dose and doses to points, organs,
and regions of interest. This will enable assessment of the implications of adopting MBDCAs for treatment planning, and
help the brachytherapy community to understand new study
results and place them in the context of previous dose calculations, treatment planning, and research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to acknowledge the contribution to comments and reviews by Dr. Annette Haworth on behalf of the
Australasian Brachytherapy Group. The authors further acknowledge Dr. Jack Venselaar (liaison between GEC-ESTRO
and AAPM-BTSC) and Dr. Frank-André Siebert (chair of
BRAPHYQS) for pursuing the review effort within ESTRO.
The final approval of this document by ESTRO would not
have been possible without the support of Dr. Christine HaieMeder (Chair of GEC-ESTRO) and Dr. Jean Bourhis (former President of ESTRO). Similarly, the authors acknowledge
Mr. Zoubir Ouhib as chair of the ABS physics committee for
seeking support of this report within the ABS. The authors finally wish to thank Dr. Facundo Ballester, Dr. Joseph Bucci,
Dr. José Perez-Calatayud, Dr. Dean Cutajar, Dr. Martin Ebert,
Dr. Moyed Miften, Dr. Jean Moran, Dr. Panagiottis Papagiannis, Dr. Niko Papanikolaou, Dr. Chet Reft, Dr. Theadore
Robin, Jr., Dr. Ronald Sloboda, and Dr. Ning J. Yue for the
careful review of this report.
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6230

ABS
ABG
BV
BT
CBCT
CC
COMS
CPE
CSDA
CT
DECT
DICOM

DICOM-RT
DVH
EBRT
EBS
ESTRO
ESTRO-EIR
GBBS
GEC-ESTRO

GYN
HDR
HU
ICRU
ICRP
kV
LBTE
LDR
MC
MBDCA

MRI
MV
NIST
PDR
POI
Primary dose

American Association of Physicists in
Medicine
American Brachytherapy Society
Australasian Brachytherapy Group
BrachyVision
brachytherapy
Cone beam computed tomography
Collapsed cone
Collaborative Ocular Melanoma Study
Charged particle equilibrium
Continuous slowing down approximation
Computed tomography
Dual-energy CT
Digital imaging and communications in
medicine, the standard used for medical images and many other forms of digital data in
radiotherapy
An extension of the DICOM standard that
handles the radiotherapy modality
Dose-volume histogram
External beam radiation therapy
Electronic brachytherapy source
European Society for Radiotherapy and Oncology
European Institute of Radiotherapy; A
standing committee of ESTRO
Grid-based Boltzmann equation solver,
R
system
such as used by the Acuros
Groupe Européen de Curiethérapie; A
standing committee of ESTRO; representing brachytherapy
Gynecological
High dose-rate
Hounsfield unit
International Commission on Radiation
Units and Measurements
International Commission on Radiological
Protection
Kilovoltage
Linear Boltzmann transport equation
Low dose-rate
Monte Carlo
Model-based dose calculation algorithm
An algorithm that uses source models and
details of the patient and applicator geometry to calculate a three-dimensional dose
distribution in the patient as opposed to
look-up tables based on a water geometry
Magnetic resonance imaging
Megavoltage
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Pulsed dose rate
Point of interest
Dose contributed by direct, nonscattered
photons

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6230

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

QA
QC
ROI
RPC
Scatter dose
Segmentation

TLD
TPS
TG
US
VBD
WAFAC

Quality assurance
Quality control
Region of interest
Radiological Physics Center
Dose contributed by scattered photons
When applied to tissues, the spatial delineation of different regions of a 3D image
dataset and assignment of elemental compositions and mass (or electron) densities
Thermoluminescent dosimeter
Treatment planning system
Task group
Ultrasound (imaging)
Volume breast density, defined as the fractional volume of glandular tissue
Wide-angle free-air chamber

a) Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Electronic mail:

beaulieu@phy.ulaval.ca
1 B. R. Thomadsen, J. F. Williamson, M. J. Rivard, and A. S. Meigooni,

“Anniversary paper: Past and current issues, and trends in brachytherapy
physics,” Med. Phys. 35, 4708–4723 (2008).
2 B. S. Hilaris, U. K. Henschke, and J. G. Holt, “Clinical experience with
long half-life and low-energy encapsulated radioactive sources in cancer
radiation therapy,” Radiology 91, 1163–1167 (1968).
3 R. Nath, L. L. Anderson, G. Luxton, K. A. Weaver, J. F. Williamson, and
A. S. Meigooni, “Dosimetry of interstitial brachytherapy sources: Recommendations of the AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No.
43,” Med. Phys. 22, 209–234 (1995).
4 M. J. Rivard, B. M. Coursey, L. A. DeWerd, W. F. Hanson, M. S. Huq,
G. S. Ibbott, M. G. Mitch, R. Nath, and J. F. Williamson, “Update of AAPM Task Group No. 43 Report: A revised AAPM protocol for brachytherapy dose calculations,” Med. Phys. 31, 633–674
(2004).
5 M. J. Rivard, W. M. Butler, L. A. DeWerd, M. S. Huq, G. S. Ibbott,
A. S. Meigooni, C. S. Melhus, M. G. Mitch, R. Nath, and J. F. Williamson,
“Supplement to the 2004 update of the AAPM Task Group No. 43 Report,”
Med. Phys. 34, 2187–2205 (2007).
6 J. F. Williamson, “The Sievert integral revisited: Evaluation and extension
to 125 I, 169 Yb, and 192 Ir brachytherapy sources,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 36, 1239–1250 (1996).
7 H. Meertens and R. van der Laarse, “Screens in ovoids of a Selectron
cervix applicator,” Radiother. Oncol. 3, 69–80 (1985).
8 K. J. Weeks and J. C. Dennett, “Dose calculation and measurements for a
CT compatible version of the Fletcher applicator,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 18, 1191–1198 (1990).
9 Å. K. Carlsson and A. Ahnesjö, “The collapsed cone superposition algorithm applied to scatter dose calculations in brachytherapy,” Med. Phys.
27, 2320–2332 (2000).
10 J. F. Williamson, R. S. Baker, and Z. Li, “A convolution algorithm for
brachytherapy dose computations in heterogeneous geometries,” Med.
Phys. 18, 1256–1265 (1991).
11 J. F. Williamson, Z. Li, and J. W. Wong, “One-dimensional scattersubtraction method for brachytherapy dose calculation near bounded heterogeneities,” Med. Phys. 20, 233–244 (1993).
12 M. J. Rivard, J. L. M. Venselaar, and L. Beaulieu, “The evolution of brachytherapy treatment planning,” Med. Phys. 36, 2136–2153
(2009).
13 N. Papanikolaou, J. J. Battista, A. L. Boyer, C. Kappas, E. Klein, T.
R. Mackie, M. Sharpe, and J. Van Dyk, “AAPM Report No. 85: Tissue inhomogeneity corrections for megavoltage photon beams,” AAPM Report
No. 85 (Medical Physics, Madison, WI, 2004), pp. 1–135.
14 A. Ahnesjö and M. M. Aspradakis, “Dose calculations for external photon
beams in radiotherapy,” Phys. Med. Biol. 44, R99–R155 (1999).
15 A. Ahnesjö, “Collapsed cone convolution of radiant energy for photon dose calculation in heterogenous media,” Med. Phys. 16, 577–592
(1989).
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6231

16 T. R. Mackie, J. W. Scrimger, and J. J. Battista, “A convolution method of

calculating dose for 15-MV x rays,” Med. Phys. 12, 188–196 (1985).
17 D. W. O. Rogers, “Fifty years of Monte Carlo simulations for medical

physics,” Phys. Med. Biol. 51, R287–R301 (2006).
18 K. A. Gifford, J. L. Horton, Jr., T. A. Wareing, G. Failla, and F. Mourtada,

“Comparison of a finite-element multigroup discrete-ordinates code with
Monte Carlo for radiotherapy calculations,” Phys. Med. Biol. 51, 2253–
2265 (2006).
19 O. N. Vassiliev, T. A. Wareing, J. McGhee, G. Failla, M. R. Salehpour, and
F. Mourtada, “Validation of a new grid-based Boltzmann equation solver
for dose calculation in radiotherapy with photon beams,” Phys. Med. Biol.
55, 581–598 (2010).
20 International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements, “Tissue
substitutes in radiation dosimetry and measurement,” ICRU Report No. 44
(ICRU Publications, Bethesda, MD, 1989).
21 R. E. P. Taylor, “Monte Carlo calculations for brachytherapy,” M.Sc. thesis, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada, 2006.
22 R. M. Thomson, R. E. P. Taylor, and D. W. O. Rogers, “Monte Carlo
dosimetry for 125 I and 103 Pd eye plaque brachytherapy,” Med. Phys. 35,
5530–5543 (2008).
23 O. Chibani, J. F. Williamson, and D. Todor, “Dosimetric effects of seed
anisotropy and interseed attenuation for 103 Pd and 125 I prostate implants,”
Med. Phys. 32, 2557–2566 (2005).
24 J. F. Carrier, L. Beaulieu, F. Therriault-Proulx, and R. Roy, “Impact of
interseed attenuation and tissue composition for permanent prostate implants,” Med. Phys. 33, 595–604 (2006).
25 J. F. Carrier, M. D’Amours, F. Verhaegen, B. Reniers, A. G. Martin, E. Vigneault, and L. Beaulieu, “Postimplant dosimetry using a Monte Carlo
dose calculation engine: A new clinical standard,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 68, 1190–1198 (2007).
26 Y. Yang and M. J. Rivard, “Evaluation of brachytherapy lung implant dose
distributions from photon-emitting sources due to tissue heterogeneities,”
Med. Phys. 38, 5857–5862 (2011).
27 J. G. H. Sutherland, K. M. Furutani, Y. I. Garces, and R. M. Thomson,
“Model-based dose calculations for 125 I lung brachytherapy,” Med. Phys.
39, 4365–4377 (2012).
28 G. Lymperopoulou, P. Papagiannis, A. Angelopoulos, P. Karaiskos,
E. Georgiou, and D. Baltas, “A dosimetric comparison of 169 Yb and 192 Ir
for HDR brachytherapy of the breast, accounting for the effect of finite patient dimensions and tissue inhomogeneities,” Med. Phys. 33, 4583–4589
(2006).
29 P. Papagiannis, P. Karaiskos, E. Georgiou, D. Baltas, G. Lymperopoulou,
E. Pantelis, and L. Sakelliou, “On the use of high dose rate 192 Ir and 169 Yb
R
radiation therapy system,” Med. Phys. 34,
sources with the Mammosite
3614–3619 (2007).
30 G. Anagnostopoulos, D. Baltas, E. Pantelis, P. Papagiannis, and L. Sakelliou, “The effect of patient inhomogeneities in oesophageal 192 Ir HDR
brachytherapy: A Monte Carlo and analytical dosimetry study,” Phys.
Med. Biol. 49, 2675–2685 (2004).
31 E. Poon, J. F. Williamson, T. Vuong, and F. Verhaegen, “Patient-specific
Monte Carlo dose calculations for high-dose-rate endorectal brachytherapy with shielded intracavitary applicator,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol.,
Phys. 72, 1259–1266 (2008).
32 X. Yan, E. Poon, B. Reniers, T. Vuong, and F. Verhaegen, “Comparison of dose calculation algorithms for colorectal cancer brachytherapy treatment with a shielded applicator,” Med. Phys. 35, 4824–4830
(2008).
33 E. Poon and F. Verhaegen, “Development of a scatter correction technique
and its application to HDR 192 Ir multicatheter breast brachytherapy,” Med.
Phys. 36, 3703–3713 (2009).
34 G. X. Ding, D. M. Duggan, and C. W. Coffey, “Accurate patient dosimetry
of kilovoltage cone-beam CT in radiation therapy,” Med. Phys. 35, 1135–
1144 (2008).
35 G. X. Ding and C. W. Coffey, “Radiation dose from kilovoltage cone beam
computed tomography in an image-guided radiotherapy procedure,” Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 73, 610–617 (2009).
36 B. R. B. Walters, G. X. Ding, R. Kramer, and I. Kawrakow, “Skeletal
dosimetry in cone beam computed tomography,” Med. Phys. 36, 2915–
2922 (2009).
37 J. F. Williamson, “Semiempirical dose-calculation models in brachytherapy,” in Brachytherapy Physics, 2nd ed., edited by B. R. Thomadsen,
M. J. Rivard, and W. M. Butler (Medical Physics, Madison, WI, 2005),
pp. 201–232.

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6231

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

38 J.

F. Williamson and M. J. Rivard, “Quantitative dosimetry methods for brachytherapy,” in Brachytherapy Physics, 2nd ed., edited by
B. R. Thomadsen, M. J. Rivard, and W. M. Butler (Medical Physics, Madison, WI, 2005), pp. 233–294.
39 Y. Yu, L. L. Anderson, Z. Li, D. E. Mellenberg, R. Nath, M. C. Schell,
F. M. Waterman, A. Wu, and J. C. Blasko, “Permanent prostate seed implant brachytherapy: Report of the American Association of Physicists in
Medicine Task Group No. 64,” Med. Phys. 26, 2054–2076 (1999).
40 F. Ballester, D. Granero, J. Pérez-Calatayud, C. S. Melhus, and M. J.
Rivard, “Evaluation of high-energy brachytherapy source electronic disequilibrium and dose from emitted electrons,” Med. Phys. 36, 4250–4256
(2009).
41 C. C. Ling and E. D. Yorke, “Interface dosimetry for I-125 sources,” Med.
Phys. 16, 376–381 (1989).
42 E. D. Yorke, Y. C. D. Huang, M. C. Schell, R. Wong, and C. C. Ling,
“Clinical implications of I-125 dosimetry of bone and bone-soft tissue interfaces,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 21, 1613–1619 (1991).
43 J. F. Williamson, “Dose calculations about shielded gynecological colpostats,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 19, 167–178 (1990).
44 R. Nath, C. H. Park, C. R. King, and P. Muench, “A dose computation model for 241 Am vaginal applicators including the source-to-source
shielding effects,” Med. Phys. 17, 833–842 (1990).
45 A. S. Kirov and J. F. Williamson, “Two-dimensional scatter integration
method for brachytherapy dose calculations in 3D geometry,” Phys. Med.
Biol. 42, 2119–2135 (1997).
46 G. M. Daskalov, A. S. Kirov, and J. F. Williamson, “Analytical approach to
heterogeneity correction factor calculation for brachytherapy,” Med. Phys.
25, 722–735 (1998).
47 G. Anagnostopoulos, D. Baltas, P. Karaiskos, E. Pantelis, P. Papagiannis,
and L. Sakelliou, “An analytical dosimetry model as a step towards accounting for inhomogeneities and bounded geometries in 192 Ir brachytherapy treatment planning,” Phys. Med. Biol. 48, 1625–1647 (2003).
48 R. Wang and R. S. Sloboda, “Brachytherapy scatter dose calculation in
heterogeneous media: I. A microbeam ray-tracing method for the singlescatter contribution,” Phys. Med. Biol. 52, 5619–5636 (2007).
49 R. Wang and R. S. Sloboda, “Brachytherapy scatter dose calculation in
heterogeneous media: II. Empirical formulation for the multiple-scatter
contribution,” Phys. Med. Biol. 52, 5637–5654 (2007).
50 C. Furstoss, B. Reniers, M. J. Bertrand, E. Poon, J. F. Carrier, B. M. Keller,
J.-P. Pignol, L. Beaulieu, and F. Verhaegen, “Monte Carlo study of LDR
seed dosimetry with an application in a clinical brachytherapy breast implant,” Med. Phys. 36, 1848–1858 (2009).
51 J. Markman, J. F. Williamson, J. F. Dempsey, and D. A. Low, “On the
validity of the superposition principle in dose calculations for intracavitary implants with shielded vaginal colpostats,” Med. Phys. 28, 147–155
(2001).
52 M. D’Amours, J. Carrier, E. Lessard, J. Pouliot, F. Verhaegen, and
L. Beaulieu, “A new approach for afterloading brachytherapy inverse
planned dose optimization based on the accurate Monte Carlo method,”
Med. Phys. 35, 2969 (2008) (abstract).
53 M. D’Amours, J. Pouliot, A. Dagnault, F. Verhaegen, and L. Beaulieu,
“Patient-specific Monte Carlo-based dose-kernel approach for inverse
planning in afterloading brachytherapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys.
81, 1582–1589 (2011).
54 M. J. Rivard, C. S. Melhus, D. Granero, J. Perez-Calatayud, and
F. Ballester, “An approach to using conventional brachytherapy software for clinical treatment planning of complex, Monte Carlo-based
brachytherapy dose distributions,” Med. Phys. 36, 1968–1975 (2009).
55 M. J. Price and F. Mourtada, “A 3D forward treatment planning algorithm using pre-calculated Monte Carlo data sets for HDR/PDR tandem
and ovoid intracavitary systems,” Brachytherapy 6, S89 (2007) (abstract).
56 Y. Yang, C. S. Melhus, S. Sioshansi, and M. J. Rivard, “Treatment planning of a skin-sparing conical breast brachytherapy applicator using conventional brachytherapy software,” Med. Phys. 38, 1519–1525 (2011).
57 Å. K. Carlsson and A. Ahnesjö, “Point kernels and superposition methods
for scatter dose calculations in brachytherapy,” Phys. Med. Biol. 45, 357–
382 (2000).
58 Å. K. Carlsson Tedgren and A. Ahnesjö, “Accounting for high Z shields
in brachytherapy using collapsed cone superposition for scatter dose calculation,” Med. Phys. 30, 2206–2217 (2003).
59 Å. K. Carlsson Tedgren and A. Ahnesjö, “Optimization of the computational efficiency of a 3D, collapsed cone dose calculation algorithm for
brachytherapy,” Med. Phys. 35, 1611–1618 (2008).
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6232

60 J. E. O’Connor, “The variation of scattered x-rays with density in an irra-

diated body,” Phys. Med. Biol. 1, 352–369 (1957).
61 K. R. Russell, Å. K. Carlsson Tedgren, and A. Ahnesjö, “Brachytherapy

source characterization for improved dose calculations using primary and
scatter dose separation,” Med. Phys. 32, 2739–2752 (2005).
62 B. van Veelen, “Collapsed cone dose calculations for model
based brachytherapy utilizing Monte Carlo source characterization data,” in Proceedings of the International Workshop on Recent Advances in Monte Carlo techniques for radiation therapy,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada (2011), available at
http://www.medphys.mcgill.ca/~ws2011/Abstract_book.html.
63 E. E. Lewis and W. F. Miller, Computational Methods of Neutron Transport (Wiley, New York, 1984).
64 C. Zhou and F. Inanc, “Integral-transport-based deterministic brachytherapy dose calculations,” Phys. Med. Biol. 48, 73–93 (2003).
65 R. E. Alcouffe, R. S. Baker, F. W. Brinkley, D. R. Marr, R. D. O’Dell,
and W. F. Walters, “DANTSYS: a diffusion accelerated neutral particle
transport code system,” Los Alamos National Laboratory Report No. LA12969-M, Los Alamos, NM, 1995.
66 G. M. Daskalov, R. S. Baker, D. W. O Rogers, and J. F. Williamson,
“Dosimetric modeling of the microselectron high-dose rate 192 Ir source
by the multigroup discrete ordinates method,” Med. Phys. 27, 2307–2319
(2000).
67 G. M. Daskalov, R. S. Baker, D. W. O. Rogers, and J. F. Williamson,
“Multigroup discrete ordinates modeling of 125 I 6702 seed dose distributions using a broad energy-group cross section representation,” Med. Phys.
29, 113–124 (2002).
68 F. Mourtada, T. Wareing, J. L. Horton, Jr., J. McGhee, D. Barnett, K. Gifford, G. Failla, and R. Mohan, “A deterministic dose calculation method
applied to the dosimetry of shielded intracavitary brachytherapy applicators,” Med. Phys. 31, 1807–1808 (2004) (abstract).
69 K. A. Gifford, M. J. Price, J. L. Horton, Jr., T. A. Wareing, and F. Mourtada, “Optimization of deterministic transport parameters for the calculation of the dose distribution around a high dose-rate 192 Ir brachytherapy
source,” Med. Phys. 35, 2279–2285 (2008).
70 K. Zourari, E. Pantelis, A. Moutsatsos, L. Petrokokkinos, P. Karaiskos,
L. Sakelliou, E. Georgiou, and P. Papagiannis, “Dosimetric accuracy of a
deterministic radiation transport based 192 Ir brachytherapy treatment planning system. Part I: Single sources and bounded homogeneous geometries,” Med. Phys. 37, 649–661 (2010).
71 J. K. Mikell and F. Mourtada, “Dosimetric impact of an 192 Ir brachytherapy source cable length modeled using a grid-based Boltzmann transport
equation solver,” Med. Phys. 37, 4733–4743 (2010).
72 L. Petrokokkinos, K. Zourari, E. Pantelis, A. Moutsatsos, P. Karaiskos,
L. Sakelliou, I. Seimenis, E. Georgiou, and P. Papagiannis, “Dosimetric
accuracy of a deterministic radiation transport based 192 Ir brachytherapy
treatment planning system. Part II: Monte Carlo and experimental verification of a multiple source dwell position plan employing a shielded
applicator,” Med. Phys. 38, 1981–1992 (2011).
73 K. Bush, I. M. Gagne, S. Zavgorodni, W. Ansbacher, and W. Beckham,
R
XB with Monte Carlo methods for
“Dosimetric validation of Acuros
photon dose calculations,” Med. Phys. 38, 2208–2221 (2011).
74 T. Han, J. K. Mikell, M. Salehpour, and F. Mourtada, “Dosimetric comparison of Acuros XB deterministic radiation transport method with Monte
Carlo and model-based convolution methods in heterogeneous media,”
Med. Phys. 38, 2651–2664 (2011).
75 A. Fogliata, G. Nicolini, A. Clivio, E. Vanetti, P. Mancosu, and L. Cozzi,
“Dosimetric validation of the Acuros XB advanced dose calculation algorithm: Fundamental characterization in water,” Phys. Med. Biol. 56, 1879–
1904 (2011).
76 J. F. Williamson, “Monte Carlo evaluation of kerma at a point for photon
transport problems,” Med. Phys. 14, 567–576 (1987).
77 J. F. Williamson and M. J. Rivard, “Thermoluminescent detector and
Monte Carlo techniques for reference-quality brachytherapy dosimetry,”
in Clinical Dosimetry Measurements in Radiotherapy, edited by D. W.
O. Rogers and J. E. Cygler (Medical Physics, Madison, WI, 2009),
pp. 437–499.
78 H. Hedtjärn, G. Alm Carlsson, and J. F. Williamson, “Accelerated Monte
Carlo based dose calculations for brachytherapy planning using correlated
sampling,” Phys. Med. Biol. 47, 351–376 (2002).
79 A. Sampson, Y. Le, D. Todor, and J. F. Williamson, “Using correlated sampling to accelerate CT-based Monte Carlo dose calculations
for brachytherapy treatment planning,” in Proceedings from the World

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6232

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

Congress on Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering (11th International Congress of the IUPESM), Munich, Germany, edited by
O. Dössel and W. C. Schlegel (Springer, Chennai, India, 2009), Vol. 25,
pp. 311–314.
c
80 O. Chibani and J. F. Williamson, “MCPI
: A sub-minute Monte Carlo
dose calculation engine for prostate implants,” Med. Phys. 32, 3688–3698
(2005).
81 R. E. P. Taylor, G. Yegin, and D. W. O. Rogers, “Benchmarking BrachyDose: Voxel based EGSnrc Monte Carlo calculations of TG-43 dosimetry
parameters,” Med. Phys. 34, 445–457 (2007).
82 R. M. Thomson, G. Yegin, R. E. P. Taylor, J. G. H. Sutherland, and D. W.
O. Rogers, “Fast Monte Carlo dose calculations for brachytherapy with
BrachyDose,” Med. Phys. 37, 3910 (2010) (abstract).
83 H. H. Liu, “D rather than D should be used in Monte Carlo treatment
m
w
planning: For the proposition,” Med. Phys. 29, 922–923 (2002).
84 P. Keall, “D rather than D should be used in Monte Carlo treatm
w
ment planning: Against the proposition,” Med. Phys. 29, 923–924
(2002).
85 I. J. Chetty, B. Curran, J. E. Cygler, J. J. DeMarco, G. Ezzell, B. A. Faddegon, I. Kawrakow, P. J. Keall, H. Liu, C.-M. C. Ma, D. W. O. Rogers, J.
Seuntjens, D. Sheikh-Bagheri, and J. V. Siebers, “Report of the AAPM
Task Group No. 105: Issues associated with clinical implementation of
Monte Carlo-based photon and electron external beam treatment planning,” Med. Phys. 34, 4818–4853 (2007).
86 V. Gregoire, T. R. Mackie, W. De Neve, M. Gospodarowicz, J. A. Purdy,
M. van Herk, A. Niemierko, A. Ahnesjö, M. Goitein, N. Gupta, and
T. Landberg, “ICRU Report 83: Prescribing, recording, and reporting
photon-beam intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT),” J. ICRU 10,
1–106 (2010).
87 C.-M. Ma and J. Li, “Dose specification for radiation therapy: Dose to
water or dose to medium?,” Phys. Med. Biol. 56, 3073–3089 (2011).
88 B. R. B. Walters, R. Kramer, and I. Kawrakow, “Dose to medium versus
dose to water as an estimator of dose to sensitive skeletal tissue,” Phys.
Med. Biol. 55, 4535–4546 (2010).
89 J. V. Siebers, P. J. Keall, A. E. Nahum, and R. Mohan, “Converting
absorbed dose to medium to absorbed dose to water for Monte Carlo
based photon beam dose calculations,” Phys. Med. Biol. 45, 983–995
(2000).
90 J. V. Siebers, P. J. Keall, A. E. Nahum, and R. Mohan, “Reply to: ‘Comments on “Converting absorbed dose to medium to absorbed dose to water
for Monte Carlo based photon beam dose calculations”’,” Med. Phys. 45,
L18–L19 (2000).
91 M. Fippel and F. Nüsslin, “Comments on ‘Converting absorbed dose to
medium to absorbed dose to water for Monte Carlo based photon beam
dose calculations’,” Phys. Med. Biol. 45, L17–L18 (2000).
92 N. Dogan, J. V. Siebers, and P. Keall, “Clinical comparison of head and
neck and prostate IMRT plans using absorbed dose to medium and absorbed dose to water,” Med. Phys. 51, 4967–4980 (2006).
93 H. Paganetti, “Dose to water versus dose to medium in proton beam therapy,” Phys. Med. Biol. 54, 4399–4421 (2009).
94 M. J. Berger, J. S. Coursey, M. A. Zucker, and J. Chang, ESTAR , PSTAR ,
and ASTAR: Computer programs for calculating stopping-power and range
tables for electrons, protons, and helium ions (version 1.2.3, online), National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, 2005
(available URL: http://physics.nist.gov/Star).
95 E. J. Hall and A. J. Giaccia, Radiobiology for the Radiologist, 7th ed.
(Lippincott, Philadelphia, PA, 2012).
96 R. M. Thomson, A. Carlsson Tedgren, and J. Williamson, “Comparison of bulk medium dose descriptors and cellular absorbed doses for
brachytherapy,” in Proceedings of the International Workshop on Recent Advances in Monte Carlo techniques for radiation therapy, McGill
University, Quebec, Canada, (2011), available at http://www.medphys.
mcgill.ca/~ws2011/Abstract_book.html.
97 S. A. Enger, A. Ahnesjö, F. Verhaegen, and L. Beaulieu, “Dose to tissue medium or water cavities as surrogate for the dose to cell nuclei
at brachytherapy photon energies,” Phys. Med. Biol. 57, 4489–4500
(2012).
98 G. Landry, B. Reniers, J.-P. Pignol, L. Beaulieu, and F. Verhaegen, “The
difference of scoring dose to water or tissues in Monte Carlo dose calculations for low energy brachytherapy photon sources,” Med. Phys. 38,
1526–1533 (2011).
99 M. J. Rivard, L. Beaulieu, and F. Mourtada, “Enhancements to commissioning techniques and quality assurance of brachytherapy treatment planMedical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6233

ning systems that use model-based dose calculation algorithms,” Med.
Phys. 37, 2645–2658 (2010).
100 A. Sampson, Y. Le, and J. F. Williamson, “Fast patient-specific Monte
Carlo brachytherapy dose calculations via the correlated sampling variance reduction technique,” Med. Phys. 39, 1058–1068 (2012).
101 I. Kawrakow, E. Mainegra-HIng, D. W. O. Rogers, F. Tessier, and
B. R. B. Walters, “The EGSnrc code system: Monte Carlo simulation
of photon and electron transport,” Technical Report No. PIRS-701 (National Research Council Canada, Ottawa, ON, 2011) (available URL:
http://irs.inms.nrc.ca/software/egsnrc/documentation/pirs701/).
102 P. R. Almond and H. Svensson, “Ionization chamber dosimetry for photon
and electron beams. Theoretical considerations,” Acta Radiol. Ther. Phys.
Biol. 16, 177–186 (1977).
103 F. H. Attix, Introduction to Radiological Physics and Radiation Dosimetry
(Wiley, New York, 1986).
104 E. Poon and F. Verhaegen, “A CT-based analytical dose calculation
method for HDR 192 Ir brachytherapy,” Med. Phys. 36, 3982–3994 (2009).
105 D. Y. C. Huang, M. C. Schell, K. A. Weaver, and C. C. Ling, “Dose distribution of 125 I sources in different tissues,” Med. Phys. 17, 826–832
(1990).
106 A. S. Meigooni and R. Nath, “Tissue inhomogeneity correction for
brachytherapy sources in a heterogeneous phantom with cylindrical symmetry,” Med. Phys. 19, 401–407 (1992).
107 B. Reniers, F. Verhaegen, and S. Vynckier, “The radial dose function of
low-energy brachytherapy seeds in different solid phantoms: Comparison
between calculations with the EGSnrc and MCNP4C Monte Carlo codes
and measurements,” Phys. Med. Biol. 49, 1569–1582 (2004).
108 J. F. Williamson, S. Li, S. Devic, B. R. Whiting, and F. A. Lerma, “On twoparameter models of photon cross sections: Application to dual-energy CT
imaging,” Med. Phys. 33, 4115–4129 (2006).
109 International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements, “Photon, electron, proton and neutron interaction data for body tissues,” Report
No. 46 (ICRU Publications, Bethesda, MD, 1992).
110 H. Q. Woodard and D. R. White, “The composition of body tissues,” Br.
J. Radiol. 59, 1209–1218 (1986).
111 M. J. Yaffe, J. M. Boone, N. Packard, O. Alonzo-Proulx, S.-Y. Huang,
C. L. Peressotti, A. Al-Mayah, and K. Brock, “The myth of the 50-50
breast,” Med. Phys. 36, 5437–5443 (2009).
112 J. H. Suh, J. M. Gardner, K. H. Kee, S. Shen, A. G. Ayala, and J. Y. Ro,
“Calcifications in prostate and ejaculatory system: A study on 298 consecutive whole mount sections of prostate from radical prostatectomy
or cystoprostatectomy specimens,” Ann. Diagn. Pathol. 12, 165–170
(2008).
113 B. Kassas, F. Mourtada, J. L. Horton, Jr., and R. G. Lane, “Contrast effects
on dosimetry of a partial breast irradiation system,” Med. Phys. 31, 1976–
1979 (2004).
114 K. J. Weeks, “Monte Carlo dose calculations for a new ovoid shield system
for carcinoma of the uterine cervix,” Med. Phys. 25, 2288–2292 (1998).
115 M. J. Price, E. F. Jackson, K. A. Gifford, P. J. Eifel, and F. Mourtada,
“Development of prototype shielded cervical intracavitary brachytherapy
applicators compatible with CT and MR imaging,” Med. Phys. 36, 5515–
5524 (2009).
116 M. J. Price, J. L. Horton, K. A. Gifford, P. J. Eifel, A. Jhingran,
A. A. Lawyer, P. A. Berner, and F. Mourtada, “Dosimetric evaluation
of the Fletcher-Williamson ovoid for pulsed-dose-rate brachytherapy: A
Monte Carlo study,” Phys. Med. Biol. 50, 5075–5087 (2005).
117 G. Leclerc, M.-C. Lavallée, R. Roy, E. Vigneault, and L. Beaulieu, “Prostatic edema in 125 I permanent prostate implants: Dynamical dosimetry
taking volume changes into account,” Med. Phys. 33, 574–583 (2006).
118 G. Landry, B. Reniers, L. Murrer, L. Lutgens, E. Bloemen-Van Gurp,
J.-P. Pignol, B. Keller, L. Beaulieu, and F. Verhaegen, “Sensitivity of low
energy brachytherapy Monte Carlo dose calculations to uncertainties in
human tissue composition,” Med. Phys. 37, 5188–5198 (2010).
119 International Commission on Radiological Protection, “Report on the Task
Group on Reference Man,” ICRP Publication No. 23 (Pergamon, Oxford,
1975).
120 International Commission on Radiological Protection, “Basic anatomical
and physiological data for use in radiological protection: Reference values,” ICRP Publication No. 89 (Pergamon, Oxford, 2002).
121 M. Desbiens, M. D’Amours, H. Afsharpour, I. Thibault, E. Vigneault, and
L. Beaulieu, “Monte Carlo dosimetry of high dose rate gynecologic interstitial brachytherapy,” in Proceedings of the International Workshop
on Recent Advances in Monte Carlo techniques for radiation therapy,

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6233

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

McGill, Quebec, Canada (2011), available at http://www.medphys.
mcgill.ca/~ws2011/Abstract_book.html.
122 J. K. Mikell, A. H. Klopp, G. M. N. Gonzalez, K. D. Kisling, M. J. Price,
P. A. Berner, P. J. Eifel, and F. Mourtada, “Impact of heterogeneitybased dose calculation using a deterministic grid-based Boltzmann equation solver for intracavitary brachytherapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol.,
Phys. 83, e417–e422 (2012).
123 W. Kilby, J. Sage, and V. Rabett, “Tolerance levels for quality assurance
of electron density values generated from CT in radiotherapy treatment
planning,” Phys. Med. Biol. 47, 1485–1492 (2002).
124 S. J. Thomas, “Relative electron density calibration of CT scanners for
radiotherapy treatment planning,” Br. J. Radiol. 72, 781–786 (1999).
125 B. Schaffner and E. Pedroni, “The precision of proton range calculations in
proton radiotherapy treatment planning: Experimental verification of the
relation between CT-HU and proton stopping power,” Phys. Med. Biol.
43, 1579–1592 (1998).
126 U. Schneider, E. Pedroni, and A. Lomax, “The calibration of CT
Hounsfield units for radiotherapy treatment planning,” Phys. Med. Biol.
41, 111–124 (1996).
127 F. Verhaegen and S. Devic, “Sensitivity study for CT image use in Monte
Carlo treatment planning,” Phys. Med. Biol. 50, 937–946 (2005).
128 W. Schneider, T. Bortfeld, and W. Schlegel, “Correlation between CT
numbers and tissue parameters needed for Monte Carlo simulations of
clinical dose distributions,” Phys. Med. Biol. 45, 459–478 (2000).
129 F. C. P. du Plessis, C. A. Willemse, M. G. Lötter, and L. Goedhals, “The
indirect use of CT numbers to establish material properties needed for
Monte Carlo calculation of dose distributions in patients,” Med. Phys. 25,
1195–1201 (1998).
130 N. Kanematsu, N. Matsufuji, R. Kohno, S. Minohara, and T. Kanai, “A CT
calibration method based on the polybinary tissue model for radiotherapy
treatment planning,” Phys. Med. Biol. 48, 1053–1064 (2003).
131 B. Vanderstraeten, P. W. Chin, M. Fix, A. Leal, G. Mora, N. Reynaert,
J. Seco, M. Soukup, E. Spezi, W. De Neve, and H. Thierens, “Conversion
of CT numbers into tissue parameters for Monte Carlo dose calculations:
A multi-centre study,” Phys. Med. Biol. 52, 539–562 (2007).
132 Y. Watanabe, “Derivation of linear attenuation coefficients from CT numbers for low-energy photons,” Phys. Med. Biol. 44, 2201–2211 (1999).
133 R. A. Rutherford, B. R. Pullan, and I. Isherwood, “Measurement of effective atomic number and electron density using an EMI scanner,” Neuroradiology 11, 15–21 (1976).
134 F. A. Dilmanian, X. Y. Wu, E. C. Parsons, B. Ren, J. Kress, T. M. Button, L. D. Chapman, J. A. Coderre, F. Giron, D. Greenberg, D. J. Krus,
Z. Liang, S. Marcovici, M. J. Petersen, C. T. Roque, M. Shleifer,
D. N. Slatkin, W. C. Thomlinson, K. Yamamoto, and Z. Zhong, “Singleand dual-energy CT with monochromatic synchrotron x-rays,” Phys. Med.
Biol. 42, 371–387 (1997).
135 B. J. Kirby, J. R. Davis, J. A. Grant, and M. J. Morgan, “Extracting material parameters from x-ray attenuation: A CT feasibility study using kilovoltage synchrotron x-rays incident upon low atomic number absorbers,”
Phys. Med. Biol. 48, 3389–3409 (2003).
136 E. D. Yorke, P. Keall, and F. Verhaegen, “Anniversary paper: Role of medical physicists and the AAPM in improving geometric aspects of treatment
accuracy and precision,” Med. Phys. 35, 828–839 (2008).
137 C. J. Moore, A. Amer, T. Marchant, J. R. Sykes, J. Davies, J. Stratford,
C. McCarthy, C. MacBain, A. Henry, P. Price, and P. C. Williams, “Developments in and experience of kilovoltage x-ray cone beam image-guided
radiotherapy,” Br. J. Radiol. 79, S66–S78 (2006).
138 J. Hatton, B. McCurdy, and P. B. Greer, “Cone beam computerized tomography: The effect of calibration of the Hounsfield unit number to electron
density on dose calculation accuracy for adaptive radiation therapy,” Phys.
Med. Biol. 54, N329–N346 (2009).
139 J. H. Siewerdsen and D. A. Jaffray, “Cone-beam computed tomography
with a flat-panel imager: Magnitude and effects of x-ray scatter,” Med.
Phys. 28, 220–231 (2001).
140 Y. Yang, E. Schreibmann, T. Li, C. Wang, and L. Xing, “Evaluation of
on-board kV cone beam CT (CBCT)-based dose calculation,” Phys. Med.
Biol. 52, 685–705 (2007).
141 B. Reniers and F. Verhaegen, “3D image-guided brachytherapy using cone
beam CT,” Brachytherapy 7, 155–156 (2008) (abstract).
142 H. Al-Halabi, L. Portelance, M. Duclos, B. Reniers, B. Bahoric, and
L. Souhami, “Cone beam CT-based three-dimensional planning in highdose-rate brachytherapy for cervical cancer,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol.,
Phys. 77, 1092–1097 (2010).
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6234

143 R. E. Alvarez and A. Macovski, “Energy-selective reconstructions in x-ray

computerized tomography,” Phys. Med. Biol. 21, 733–744 (1976).
144 J. Giersch, D. Niederlöhner, and G. Anton, “The influence of energy

weighting on x-ray imaging quality,” Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res.
A 531, 68–74 (2004).
145 P. V. Granton, S. I. Pollmann, N. L. Ford, M. Drangova, and
D. W. Holdsworth, “Implementation of dual- and triple-energy cone-beam
micro-CT for postreconstruction material decomposition,” Med. Phys. 35,
5030–5042 (2008).
146 J. P. Schlomka, E. Roessl, R. Dorscheid, S. Dill, G. Martens, T. Istel, C. Bäumer, C. Herrmann, R. Steadman, G. Zeitler, A. Livne, and
R. Proksa, “Experimental feasibility of multi-energy photon-counting Kedge imaging in pre-clinical computed tomography,” Phys. Med. Biol. 53,
4031–4047 (2008).
147 J. F. Sutcliffe, “A review of in vivo experimental methods to determine
the composition of the human body,” Phys. Med. Biol. 41, 791–833
(1996).
148 T. Xu, J. L. Ducote, J. T. Wong, and S. Molloi, “Feasibility of real time
dual-energy imaging based on a flat panel detector for coronary artery
calcium quantification,” Med. Phys. 33, 1612–1622 (2006).
149 A. Laidevant, S. Malkov, C. I. Flowers, K. Kerlikowske, and J. A. Shepherd, “Compositional breast imaging using a dual-energy mammography
protocol,” Med. Phys. 37, 164–174 (2010).
150 B. J. Heismann, J. Leppert, and K. Stierstorfer, “Density and atomic number measurements with spectral x-ray attenuation method,” J. Appl. Phys.
94, 2073–2079 (2003).
151 C. Rizescu, C. Beşliu, and A. Jipa, “Determination of local density and
effective atomic number by the dual-energy computerized tomography
method with the 192 Ir radioisotope,” Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res.
A 465, 584–599 (2001).
152 W. A. Kalender, W. H. Perman, J. R. Vetter, and E. Klotz, “Evaluation
of a prototype dual-energy computed tomographic apparatus. I. Phantom
studies,” Med. Phys. 13, 334–339 (1986).
153 M. Bazalova, J. F. Carrier, L. Beaulieu, and F. Verhaegen, “Dual-energy
CT-based material extraction for tissue segmentation in Monte Carlo dose
calculations,” Phys. Med. Biol. 53, 2439–2456 (2008).
154 G. Landry, B. Reniers, P. V. Granton, B. van Rooijen, L. Beaulieu,
J. E. Wildberger, and F. Verhaegen, “Extracting atomic numbers and electron densities from a dual source dual energy CT scanner: Experiments
and a simulation model,” Radiother. Oncol. 100, 375–379 (2011).
155 G. Landry, P. V. Granton, B. Reniers, M. C. Öllers, L. Beaulieu, J. E. Wildberger, and F. Verhaegen, “Simulation study on potential accuracy gains
from dual energy CT tissue segmentation for low-energy brachytherapy
Monte Carlo dose calculations,” Phys. Med. Biol. 56, 6257–6278 (2011).
156 T. Pawlicki and C.-M. Ma, “Effect of CT streaking artifacts in Monte
Carlo dose distributions for head and neck cancer,” in The Use of Computers in Radiation Therapy: XIIIth International Conference, edited by
W. Schlegel and T. Bortfeld (Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 2000), pp. 414–
416.
157 W. A. Kalender, R. Hebel, and J. Ebersberger, “Reduction of CT artifacts
caused by metallic implants,” Radiology 164, 576–577 (1987).
158 J. C. Roeske, C. Lund, C. A. Pelizzari, X. Pan, and A. J. Mundt, “Reduction of computed tomography metal artifacts due to the Fletcher-Suit
applicator in gynecology patients receiving intracavitary brachytherapy,”
Brachytherapy 2, 207–214 (2003).
159 M. Yazdi, L. Gingras, and L. Beaulieu, “An adaptive approach to metal
artifact reduction in helical computed tomography for radiation therapy
treatment planning: Experimental and clinical studies,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 62, 1224–1231 (2005).
160 J. Hsieh, “Adaptive streak artifact reduction in computed tomography resulting from excessive x-ray photon noise,” Med. Phys. 25, 2139–2147
(1998).
161 B. De Man, J. Nuyts, P. Dupont, G. Marchal, and P. Suetens, “An iterative
maximum-likelihood polychromatic algorithm for CT,” IEEE Trans. Med.
Imaging 20, 999–1008 (2001).
162 P. J. Keall, L. B. Chock, R. Jeraj, J. V. Siebers, and R. Mohan, “Image
reconstruction and the effect on dose calculation for hip prostheses,” Med.
Dosim. 28, 113–117 (2003).
163 D. Xia, J. C. Roeske, L. Yu, C. A. Pelizzari, A. J. Mundt, and X. Pan,
“A hybrid approach to reducing computed tomography metal artifacts in
intracavitary brachytherapy,” Brachytherapy 4, 18–23 (2005).
164 R. Murphy, D. L. Snyder, B. R. Whiting, D. G. Politte, and
J. F. Williamson, “Incorporating known information into image

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6234

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

reconstruction algorithms for transmission tomography,” Proc. SPIE 4684,
29–37 (2002).
165 J. F. Williamson, B. R. Whiting, J. Benac, R. J. Murphy, G. J. Blaine,
J. A. O’Sullivan, D. G. Politte, and D. L. Snyder, “Prospects for quantitative computed tomography imaging in the presence of foreign metal
bodies using statistical image reconstruction,” Med. Phys. 29, 2404–2418
(2002).
166 M. Bazalova, L. Beaulieu, S. Palefsky, and F. Verhaegen, “Correction of
CT artifacts and its influence on Monte Carlo dose calculations,” Med.
Phys. 34, 2119–2132 (2007).
167 C. Xu, F. Verhaegen, D. Laurendeau, S. A. Enger, and L. Beaulieu, “An algorithm for efficient metal artifact reductions in permanent seed implants,”
Med. Phys. 38, 47–56 (2011).
168 P. S. Basran, A. Robertson, and D. Wells, “CT image artifacts from
brachytherapy seed implants: A postprocessing 3D adaptive median filter,” Med. Phys. 38, 712–718 (2011).
169 A. K. H. Robertson, P. S. Basran, S. D. Thomas, and D. Wells, “CT, MR,
and ultrasound image artifacts from prostate brachytherapy seed implants:
The impact of seed size,” Med. Phys. 39, 2061–2068 (2012).
170 C. Ménard, R. C. Susil, P. Choyke, G. S. Gustafson, W. Kammerer,
H. Ning, R. W. Miller, K. L. Ullman, N. Sears Crouse, S. Smith,
E. Lessard, J. Pouliot, V. Wright, E. McVeigh, C. N. Coleman, and
K. Camphausen, “MRI-guided HDR prostate brachytherapy in standard 1.5T scanner,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 59, 1414–1423
(2004).
171 C. Haie-Meder, R. Pötter, E. Van Limbergen, E. Briot, M. De Brabandere, J. Dimopoulos, I. Dumas, T. P. Hellebust, C. Kirisits, S. Lang,
S. Muschitz, J. Nevinson, A. Nulens, P. Petrow, and N. WachterGerstner, “Recommendations from gynaecological (GYN) GEC-ESTRO
Working Group (I): Concepts and terms in 3D image based 3D
treatment planning in cervix cancer brachytherapy with emphasis on
MRI assessment of GTV and CTV,” Radiother. Oncol. 74, 235–245
(2005).
172 R. C. Krempien, S. Daeuber, F. W. Hensley, M. Wannenmacher, and
W. Harms, “Image fusion of CT and MRI data enables improved target
volume definition in 3D-brachytherapy treatment planning,” Brachytherapy 2, 164–171 (2003).
173 M.-S. Chew, J. Xue, C. Houser, V. Misic, J. Cao, T. Cornwell, J. Handler,
Y. Yu, and E. Gressen, “Impact of transrectal ultrasound- and computed
tomography-based seed localization on postimplant dosimetry in prostate
brachytherapy,” Brachytherapy 8, 255–264 (2009).
174 G. Fichtinger, E. C. Burdette, A. Tanacs, A. Patriciu, D. Mazilu,
L. L. Whitcomb, and D. Stoianovici, “Robotically assisted prostate
brachytherapy with transrectal ultrasound guidance—Phantom experiments,” Brachytherapy 5, 14–26 (2006).
175 I. B. Tutar, L. Gong, S. Narayanan, S. D. Pathak, P. S. Cho, K. Wallner,
and Y. Kim, “Seed-based transrectal ultrasound-fluoroscopy registration
method for intraoperative dosimetry analysis of prostate brachytherapy,”
Med. Phys. 35, 840–848 (2008).
176 J. Boda-Heggemann, F. M. Köhler, B. Küpper, D. Wolff, H. Wertz, S. Mai,
J. Hesser, F. Lohr, and F. Wenz, “Accuracy of ultrasound-based (BAT)
prostate-repositioning: A three-dimensional on-line fiducial-based assessment with cone-beam computed tomography,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol.,
Phys. 70, 1247–1255 (2008).
177 D. Fraser, Y. Chen, E. Poon, F. L. Cury, T. Falco, and F. Verhaegen, “Dosimetric consequences of misalignment and realignment in prostate 3DCRT
using intramodality ultrasound image guidance,” Med. Phys. 37, 2787–
2795 (2010).
178 M. Krix, C. Plathow, M. Essig, K. Herfarth, J. Debus, H.-U. Kauczor, and
S. Delorme, “Monitoring of liver metastases after stereotactic radiotherapy
using low-MI contrast-enhanced ultrasound—Initial results,” Eur. Radiol.
15, 677–684 (2005).
179 J. Zhou, P. Zhang, K. S. Osterman, S. A. Woodhouse, P. B. Schiff, E.
J. Yoshida, Z. F. Lu, E. R. Pile-Spellman, G. J. Kutcher, and T. Liu, “Implementation and validation of an ultrasonic tissue characterization technique for quantitative assessment of normal-tissue toxicity in radiation
therapy,” Med. Phys. 36, 1643–1650 (2009).
180 J. G. H. Sutherland, R. M. Thomson, and D. W. O. Rogers, “Changes in
dose with segmentation of breast tissues in Monte Carlo calculations for
low-energy brachytherapy,” Med. Phys. 38, 4858–4865 (2011).
181 H. Afsharpour, G. Landry, B. Reniers, J.-P. Pignol, L. Beaulieu, and F. Verhaegen, “Tissue modeling schemes in low energy breast brachytherapy,”
Phys. Med. Biol. 56, 7045–7060 (2011).
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

6235

182 M. J. Rivard, “Monte Carlo calculations of AAPM Task Group Report No.

43 dosimetry parameters for the MED3631-A/M 125 I source,” Med. Phys.
28, 629–637 (2001).
183 J. F. Williamson, “Dosimetric characteristics of the DRAXIMAGE model
LS-1 I-125 interstitial brachytherapy source design: A Monte Carlo investigation,” Med. Phys. 29, 509–521 (2002).
184 S.-Y. Huang, J. M. Boone, K. Yang, N. J. Packard, S. E. McKenney,
N. D. Prionas, K. K. Lindfors, and M. J. Yaffe, “The characterization
of breast anatomical metrics using dedicated breast CT,” Med. Phys. 38,
2180–2191 (2011).
185 G. J. Kutcher, L. Coia, M. Gillin, W. F. Hanson, S. Leibel, R. J. Morton, J. R. Palta, J. A. Purdy, L. E. Reinstein, G. K. Svensson, M. Weller,
and L. Wingfield, “Comprehensive QA for radiation oncology: Report of
AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 40,” Med. Phys. 21,
581–618 (1994).
186 R. Nath, L. L. Anderson, J. A. Meli, A. J. Olch, J. A. Stitt, and
J. F. Williamson, “Code of practice for brachytherapy physics: Report
of the AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 56,” Med.
Phys. 24, 1557–1598 (1997).
187 H. D. Kubo, G. P. Glasgow, T. D. Pethel, B. R. Thomadsen, and
J. F. Williamson, “High dose-rate brachytherapy treatment delivery: Report of the AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 59,”
Med. Phys. 25, 375–403 (1998).
188 J. Perez-Calatayud, F. Ballester, R. K. Das, L. A. DeWerd, G. S. Ibbott, A. S. Meigooni, Z. Ouhib, M. J. Rivard, R. S. Sloboda, and
J. F. Williamson, “Dose calculation for photon-emitting brachytherapy
sources with average energy higher than 50 keV: Report of the AAPM
and ESTRO,” Med. Phys. 39, 2904–2929 (2012).
189 A. Angelopoulos, P. Baras, L. Sakelliou, P. Karaiskos, and P. Sandilos,
“Monte Carlo dosimetry of a new 192 Ir high dose rate brachytherapy
source,” Med. Phys. 27, 2521–2527 (2000).
190 C. S. Melhus and M. J. Rivard, “COMS eye plaque brachytherapy dosimetry simulations for 103 Pd, 125 I, and 131 Cs,” Med. Phys. 35, 3364–3371
(2008).
191 M. J. Rivard, S.-T. Chiu-Tsao, P. T. Finger, A. S. Meigooni, C. S. Melhus,
F. Mourtada, M. E. Napolitano, D. W. O. Rogers, R. M. Thomson, and
R. Nath, “Comparison of dose calculation methods for brachytherapy of
intraocular tumors,” Med. Phys. 38, 306–316 (2011).
192 D. A. Low and J. F. Dempsey, “Evaluation of the gamma dose distribution
comparison method,” Med. Phys. 30, 2455–2464 (2003).
193 D. A. Low, J. M. Moran, J. F. Dempsey, L. Dong, and M. Oldham,
“Dosimetry tools and techniques for IMRT,” Med. Phys. 38, 1313–1338
(2011).
194 E. A. Bannon, Y. Yang, and M. J. Rivard, “Accuracy assessment of the
superposition principle for evaluating dose distributions of elongated and
curved 103 Pd and 192 Ir brachytherapy sources,” Med. Phys. 38, 2957–2963
(2011).
195 J. Venselaar, H. Welleweerd, and B. Mijnheer, “Tolerances for the accuracy of photon beam dose calculations of treatment planning systems,”
Radiother. Oncol. 60, 191–201 (2001).
196 M. Stock, B. Kroupa, and D. Georg, “Interpretation and evaluation of the
γ index and the γ index angle for the verification of IMRT hybrid plans,”
Phys. Med. Biol. 50, 399–411 (2005).
197 L. A. DeWerd, G. S. Ibbott, A. S. Meigooni, M. G. Mitch, M. J. Rivard,
K. E. Stump, B. R. Thomadsen, and J. L. M. Venselaar, “A dosimetric
uncertainty analysis for photon-emitting brachytherapy sources: Report of
AAPM Task Group No. 138 and GEC-ESTRO,” Med. Phys. 38, 782–801
(2011).
198 R. Mohan, C. Chui, and L. Lidofsky, “Differential pencil beam dose computation model for photons,” Med. Phys. 13, 64–73 (1986).
199 A. Ahnesjö, P. Andreo, and A. Brahme, “Calculation and application of
point spread functions for treatment planning with high energy photon
beams,” Acta Oncol. 26, 49–56 (1987).
200 R. Nath, L. Anderson, D. Jones, C. Ling, R. Loevinger, J. Williamson,
and W. Hanson, “Specification of brachytherapy source strength: Report
of AAPM Task Group No. 32,” AAPM Report No. 21 (American Institute
of Physics, New York, 1987).
201 S. Nag, D. Beyer, J. Friedland, P. Grimm, and R. Nath, “American
Brachytherapy Society (ABS) recommendations for transperineal permanent brachytherapy of prostate cancer,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys.
44, 789–799 (1999).
202 R. Kline and J. Earle, “Implications of TG-43 for dose prescription and
calculation for I-125 eye plaques,” Med. Phys. 23, 1054 (1996) (abstract).

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6235

Beaulieu et al.: TG-186: Model-based dose calculation techniques in brachytherapy

203 J. F. Williamson, W. Butler, L. A. Dewerd, M. S. Huq, G. S. Ibbott, Z. Li,

M. G. Mitch, R. Nath, M. J. Rivard, and D. Todor, “Recommendations
of the American Association of Physicists in Medicine regarding the impact of implementing the 2004 Task Group 43 report on dose specification
for 103 Pd and 125 I interstitial brachytherapy,” Med. Phys. 32, 1424–1439
(2005).

Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 10, October 2012

204 M.

6236

J. Rivard, W. M. Butler, P. M. Devlin, J. K. Hayes Jr.,
R. A. Hearn, E. P. Lief, A. S. Meigooni, G. S. Merrick, and
J. F. Williamson, “American Brachytherapy Society recommends
no change for prostate permanent implant dose prescriptions
using iodine-125 or palladium-103,” Brachytherapy 6, 34–37
(2007).

24734209, 2012, 10, Downloaded from https://aapm.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1118/1.4747264, Wiley Online Library on [02/05/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6236

