High dose-rate brachytherapy treatment delivery: Report of the AAPM
Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 59
H. Dale Kubo
Department of Radiation Oncology, University of California Davis Cancer Center, Sacramento,
California 95817

Glenn P. Glasgow
Department of Radiotherapy, Loyola University of Chicago, Maywood, Illinois 60153

Timothy D. Pethel
Department of Radiation Oncology, Athens Regional Medical Center, Athens, Georgia 30606

Bruce R. Thomadsen
Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53792

Jeffrey F. Williamsona)
Department of Radiation Oncology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63110

~Received 10 December 1997; accepted for publication 28 January 1998!
The goals of this task group are to examine the current high dose-rate ~HDR! treatment delivery
practices and to prepare a document to assure safe delivery of HDR treatments. The document
consists of detailed HDR procedures for design of an HDR brachytherapy program, staffing and
training, treatment specific quality assurance, and emergency procedures. The document provides
an extensive quality assurance ~QA! check list. It reviews all aspects of HDR treatment delivery
safety, including prescription, treatment plan, treatment delivery, and radiation safety. © 1998
American Association of Physicists in Medicine. @S0094-2405~98!01604-6#
Key words: HDR brachytherapy, staffing and training, treatment delivery safety, quality
assurance, emergency procedures

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A. Literature review. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B. Summary of NUREG/CR-6125. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C. Advantages and disadvantages of HDR. . . . . . .
II. DESIGN OF AN HDR BRACHYTHERAPY
PROGRAM. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A. HDR treatment delivery misadventures and
types of errors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1. Systematic errors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2. Random errors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B. Principles of an HDR brachytherapy program
design. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1. Use written documentation. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2. Develop a formal procedure. . . . . . . . . . . . .
3. Exploit redundancy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4. Exploit quality improvement
techniques. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C. Treatment documentation, procedure
checklists, and forms. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
III. STAFFING AND TRAINING. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A. Staffing requirements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B. Training requirements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C. Recommended training schedule. . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV. TREATMENT SPECIFIC QUALITY
ASSURANCE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A. Applicator preparation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
375

Med. Phys. 25 „4…, April 1998

376
376
376
377
378
378
378
378
379
379
379
379
379
379
381
381
383
385
386
386

B. Applicator insertion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C. Implant localization and simulation. . . . . . . . . . .
D. Treatment prescription. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E. Implant design and evaluation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1. Localization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2. Computer treatment planning. . . . . . . . . . . . .
3. Pretreatment review of HDR treatment
plan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4. Manual verification of HDR computer
calculations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5. Patient preparation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6. Patient setup and treatment. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7. Post-treatment quality assurance. . . . . . . . . .
V. EMERGENCY PROCEDURES FOR
HDR REMOTE AFTERLOADING
UNITS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A. Routine emergency equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B. Emergencies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1. Physical plant emergencies. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2. Minor emergencies involving
the RAU. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3. Major emergencies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C. Practical concerns. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
D. Conclusions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
APPENDIX: RECOMMENDED CHECK-OFF
LIST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

0094-2405/98/25„4…/375/29/$10.00

© 1998 Am. Assoc. Phys. Med.

386
386
387
388
388
388
389
389
391
392
393

393
393
393
393
393
394
396
396
397
402
403
375

376

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

I. INTRODUCTION
The formation of this task group was prompted by the following developments: ~1! a death related to personnel errors
and malfunction during a high dose-rate ~HDR! treatment,1
~2! greater use of HDR brachytherapy units, ~3! the United
States Nuclear Regulatory Commission’s ~USNRC! proposal
to rewrite 10 CFR 35 to include HDR brachytherapy quality
assurance and safety guidelines, and ~4! the need for education on comprehensive HDR safe-treatment-delivery procedures. The goals of this task group are to examine the current
HDR treatment delivery practices and to prepare a document
to assure safe delivery of HDR treatments. The document
consists of detailed HDR procedures and an extensive quality assurance ~QA! check list. It reviews all aspects of HDR
treatment delivery safety, including prescription, treatment
plan, treatment delivery, and radiation safety.
There are several reported incidents related to HDR
brachytherapy treatments. The USNRC has reviewed these
incidents and analyzed their causes.2 The USNRC is considering new rules and regulations for HDR treatments. The
USNRC prefers that users, through professional associations,
provide recommendations and practical guidelines.
Three models of HDR units are currently available in the
United States; a microSelectron HDR from NucletronOdelft, a model 12~i! from GammaMed, and Varisource
from Varian Associates. Each unit has unique output formats
for printouts, plots, and information transfer. One goal was
to generate a general suggested QA check form applicable to
all units. The task group members and consultants are a diversified group of experienced users and the vendors representing each different unit.
Terms used in the report are defined below:
RAU: remote afterloading unit. A brachytherapy treatment unit which delivers from a remote control station radioactive sources to predesignated locations via catheters,
needles, or applicators.
RAB: Remote afterloading brachytherapy. Brachytherapy
treatment using a remote afterloading unit.
HDRB: High dose-rate brachytherapy. HDRB in this report indicates RAB using an In-192 source of up to 10 Ci
(3.731011 Bq) producing the dose-rate of 12 Gy/h or higher
at the prescription point.
LDRB: Low dose-rate brachytherapy, where a typical
treatment dose rate is approximately 50 cGy per hour.
Shall and should are used throughout the report to indicate the level of recommendation: Shall indicates a recommendation needs to be adhered in order to meet the currently
accepted standards of HDR treatment delivery. Should indicates a recommendation for a prudent practice.
Operating room or special procedure room: room where
applicator insertion is performed.
A. Literature review

American Association of Physicists in Medicine ~AAPM!
Task Group ~TG! Report No. 413 describes HDR units.
Chapter 7 ‘‘Quality Assurance for High Dose Rate Brachytherapy’’ by Williamson et al.4 describes HDR quality assurMedical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

376

ance and provides many references. AAPM TG Report No.
405 offers some QA recommendations while AAPM TG 566
offers a code of practice for brachytherapy including HDRB.
However, none addresses the details and issues related to the
safe delivery of HDR treatments.
Of over 350 remote afterloading units sold in North
America, about 325 are HDR units, most of which use a
nominal 10 Ci lr-192 source. Institutions replace the 73.8 day
half-life lr-192 source three or four times a year.7 Source
activity at replacement is 3 to 4 Ci. A typical dose rate at
treatment distance is 5 Gy in 5 – 10 min, or 0.5– 1.0 Gy per
min for a new source. While RAUs reduce personnel exposure of those performing brachytherapy, this is only one of
several factors that account for their popularity. The technology of RAUs and related issues of licensure, quality assurance, source calibration, their medical use, and quality management and regulatory issues are the subject of recent
publications.4,8–11
B. Summary of NUREG/CR-6125 „Ref. 2…

Even as RAUs have successfully reduced brachytherapy
personnel radiation exposures, a few significant medical incidents have resulted in substantial unplanned radiation exposure to patients and brachytherapy personnel.2 In 1992
four ‘‘misadministrations’’ with RAUs were reported in the
21 states under United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission jurisdiction. An additional four misadministrations were
reported in 1993, three in 1994, and two in 1995. A misadministration by USNRC-standards consists of delivering
treatment to the wrong patient, using the wrong radioisotope,
treating the wrong site, using leaking sources, failing to remove a temporary implant, or delivering a radiation dose
differing more than 20% from the prescribed dose.
The human and mechanical factors contributing to these
incidents and to other less serious incidents are the subject of
a recent comprehensive multiple volume report.2 ‘‘Human
Factors Evaluation of Remote Afterloading Brachytherapy’’
is a 526 page document, in three volumes, published in May,
1995, by the USNRC as NUREG/CR-6125. The document
reports the findings of a project in 1994 designed to ~1! identify ‘‘root causes’’ of human error in the use of RAB, ~2!
evaluate the effects these errors had on performance of RAB
functions and tasks, ~3! identify and rank tasks with significant safety problems, and ~4! identify and evaluate alternative approaches for resolving these problems. Volume 1,
‘‘Human Error and Critical Tasks in Remote Afterloading
Brachytherapy and Approaches for Improving System Performance,’’ reports the significant findings; Volume 2,
‘‘Function and Task Analysis,’’ explains the individual tasks
identified; and Volume 3, ‘‘Supporting Analysis of Human
System Interfaces, Procedures and Practices, Training and
Organizational Practices, and Policies,’’ describes RAB units
in detail, and their use. Executive Summaries, totaling 13
pages, offer cogent summaries of each volume.
Volume 1 offers an overview of the contents and conclusions contained in the other two volumes. Twenty-six opportunities for human error were identified in RAB. Thirty-six

377

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

alternate approaches or suggestion to performing tasks are
offered as a means to reduce human error. Appendix A presents error tables identifying 76 possible human errors in 14
categories, such as applicator placement. Appendix B offers
an extensive literature review of brachytherapy, misadministration and error reports, as well as key literature in the field
of human-system interfaces and human factors.
Volume 2 notes that the function and task analysis of
RAB are characterized by 13 items, including task and step
sequence, RAB system used, equipment arrangement, task
performers and supervisors, equipment used, task performance times, input requirements, system feedback, possible
errors and their likelihood, staff workload assessment, distraction levels and effects, and skills required. An error
analysis was performed for each of the above. Skills assessment identified 19 skills needed to perform the RAB functions and tasks. A total of 27 tasks were identified for the
major functions of patient preparation, treatment planning
and delivery, post-treatment, and quality assurance and
maintenance procedures. Extensive tables provide details
about each task and identify possible errors and their likelihood. Treatment planning was identified as requiring the
greatest skills. Human-systems interface problems identified
included confusing computer menus and work process structures. This volume is useful in understanding how RAB programs often are organized and the process of treatment.
Volume 3 focuses on human-system interfaces and notes
that users often were unfamiliar with the RAB units they
operate. Often operators could not see, during RAB, critical
controls and displays and system status information often
was unavailable. Linkages between sequential tasks often
were overlooked and contributed to errors in execution of
tasks. Verification procedures often were lacking. Training
practices varied widely and little written training material
was available. Most facilities with RAB programs lacked
formal training and retraining courses. Furthermore, the materials provided in these courses offered minimal information. Few written procedures and guidelines existed in most
of the facilities included in the study.
Information presented in the 526 pages of these three volumes indicates numerous opportunities for human errors in
clinical practice. However, suggested alternate approaches to
human system interfaces, job performance aids, procedures,
and improved training can reduce the likelihood of errors in
most of the critical tasks. Suggested organizational modifications could improve quality assurance and increase the opportunity for detecting and correcting human errors.
Those willing to study these volumes will find numerous
suggestions that, if incorporated into an RAB program, likely
will improve the program and markedly reduce the potential
for human error.
C. Advantages and disadvantages of HDR

There are many advantages to HDR. They include:
~1! Dose optimization capability. Allowing better optimization of the isodose distributions to the shape of the treatment volume than LDR.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

377

~2! Outpatient treatment. Shorter HDR procedures treating
most ambulatory patients as outpatients, eliminating expensive overnight hospital costs.
~3! More stable positioning. Reduced positioning uncertainty between localization and the completion of treatment due to better immobilization of applicators.
~4! Adding distance to normal tissue. Short duration of the
procedure allowing some retractors to move normal tissue away from the source track.
~5! Smaller applicators. HDR gynecological tandems’ diameter being approximately 3 mm, compared with 7 mm
for LDR applicators: This smaller size means greater
comfort ~less pain! for the patient during insertion.
~6! Immediate treatment after changes in operating room
rather than waiting for a shipment of sources. Differences between an executed implant and that planned
only requiring replanning prior to treatment, rather than
ordering a new set of sources.
~7! Better documentation. HDR unit printing out detailed
treatment parameters rather than relying on the diligence
of the person inserting the sources to write in a chart.
~8! Reduction of radiation exposure to health care providers.
Providing better radiation protection for all health care
workers.
Offsetting these advantages, HDRB carries with it the potential for serious errors due to more unforgiving nature in comparison to LDRB: ~1! technical difficulty; and ~2! compressed time frame for a large fraction dose. Specifically;
~1! Relatively complicated treatments system. Because HDR
treatments give large doses in as very short time, HDR
systems require safety interlocks. This makes the units
more complicated and difficult to operate, and requires
longer training periods for physicists, dosimetrists, and
radiation therapists as discussed in next chapter. Convenient dose optimization codes can be difficult for even
experienced physicists to understand.
~2! Compressed time frame. Since each fraction may deliver
a large dose, errors can lead to severe consequences. The
entire procedure often must proceed quickly to prevent
patient movement, to reduce the probability for thrombosis due to patient immobility, and, in cases using general anesthesia, to minimize the expense and risk to the
patient. Often, an HDR unit coexists with an external
beam treatment machine in the same room. When either
schedule is delayed, those involved in both HDR and
external beam treatments tend to rush.
~3! Radiobiological disadvantages. Radiobiologically, HDR
treatment may be expected to result in more normaltissue toxicity than LDR treatments, if the same tumor
effect is maintained with no change in geometry. Many
years of use will be required to determine the successful
use of HDR.
~4! Increased need for accurate dosimetric, anatomic and
geometric information. Maintaining doses below levels
that would compromise healthy tissues ~being more at
risk than with LDRB! requires more accurate anatomic
and geometric information. Optimization, as practiced

378

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

with HDR brachytherapy, requires a better knowledge of
the dose distribution desired than most LDR treatments.
~5! The potential for very high radiation doses to patients
and unit operators following failure of the source to retract.
II. DESIGN OF AN HDR BRACHYTHERAPY
PROGRAM
The Task Group believes that the most effective and practical strategy for minimizing treatment delivery errors and
other safety hazards is by carefully designing the treatment
delivery process with treatment delivery accuracy and patient
safety end points in mind as well as more traditional design
end points such as clinical efficacy, cost effectiveness, physician convenience, and patient throughput. The treatment
delivery process encompasses applicator selection and insertion, implant planning and dosimetric evaluation along with
delivery of the treatment itself. The design process includes
developing step-by-step treatment procedures, specification
of personnel along with required credentials and duties, and
design procedure-specific training curricula as well as defining use of the treatment delivery and planning equipment. In
this approach, the quality assurance program is not an extra
set of activities and checks imposed upon the treatment delivery process, but is built in to the process.
A. HDR treatment delivery misadventures and types
of errors

The Task Group prefers the term ‘‘misadventure’’ to describe treatments which deviate from the safety or accuracy
criteria at the foundation of the institution’s QA program. An
event or incident is a misadventure if it has the potential to
compromise the patient’s clinical outcome, safety of the patient, caregivers; or public, or if uncorrected, has the potential to compromise safety or clinical efficacy of future treatments. A misadventure may be a treatment delivery error,
delivery of an incorrect or unintended therapeutic dose, or
failure to adhere to established procedures, which if repeated
could result in future delivery errors. The Task Group believes good clinical judgment must be used to identify misadventures; it is neither useful nor possible to set exact criteria for such events. Most HDR brachytherapy
misadventures are caused by human errors or misjudgments
made during treatment planning and delivery, rather than by
failure or malfunction of equipment. Generally, treatment delivery errors fall into systematic and random errors.

1. Systematic errors
A treatment delivery error is systematic if it is caused by
following treatment delivery procedures based upon incorrect assumptions regarding the properties of the treatment
planning or delivery systems. Such errors are systematic because ~1! no individual lapse of judgment or failure to adhere
to procedure was the cause and ~2! all patients treated according to these flawed procedures are at risk for similar
treatment delivery errors. Examples include assuming: ~1!
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

378

that a 1.8 cm diameter colpostat has a diameter of 2 cm; ~2!
that the remote afterloader timer is consistent with the time
standard used for source calibration when, in fact, there is a
10% discrepancy; and ~3! that a 709 mm long source transfer
tube is 712 mm long. The cause of this class of errors often
is inadequate acceptance testing or periodic quality assurance
~QA!. The QA program should be designed to ensure that all
systems and devices associated with treatment delivery, including applicators, simulation aids, and treatment planning
aids, are functioning correctly with respect to safety, positional accuracy, temporal accuracy, and dose delivery accuracy end points. The device-oriented component of the QA
program should ensure that all devices are functioning correctly and consistently with the procedures followed by the
treatment delivery team. The recommendations this document provides assume that an appropriate device-oriented
QA program is in place and treatment delivery procedures
are based upon an accurate picture of device function. Any
institution practicing HDR brachytherapy shall develop a
device-oriented QA program consistent with the AAPM
Task Group 56 Report, ‘‘Code of practice for brachytherapy
physics,’’ on guidelines on acceptance testing, commissioning, and periodic QA of brachytherapy devices.6

2. Random errors
Minimizing randomly occurring treatment delivery errors
is the main subject of this document. Such errors are due to
individual mistakes, lapses in judgment, or device malfunctions rather than to a false belief, shared by the treatment
delivery team, regarding the function of a device. Such errors
may be due to: ~1! transient malfunction of a device ~afterloader, applicator, or planning system!; ~2! failure of a team
member to follow established policies; ~3! making a mistake
while following policies; and ~4! relying on policies and procedures which inadequately define each team member’s duties and responses to deviations from normally expected outcomes. The most important causes of misadventures are ~2!,
~3!, and ~4!.
Failure to follow procedures may be caused by inadequate
training, inadequate supervision, or excessive time pressure.
Making mistakes while following policies is often a consequence of inadequate documentation or training, poor intrateam communication, poorly designed treatment-planning
and remote-afterloader interfaces, an inexperienced or incompetent team member, suboptimal working conditions, or
excessive time pressure. The Task Group strongly recommends that institutions make minimization of treatment delivery errors a high priority in designing both the HDR
brachytherapy working environment and procedure flow. In
the final analysis, one must accept that individual random
errors and mistakes will occur even when the staff is well
trained and experienced and when the working environment
is ergometrically sound. Only by building redundant checks
at each key decision point in the treatment planning and
delivery process can the incidence of misadventures be reduced to an acceptable level.

379

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

B. Principles of an HDR brachytherapy program
design

Usually the physicist’s role is to define the organization
and responsibilities of the treatment delivery team members
and to provide for their training. HDR brachytherapy is often
hectic since the time the applicator remains in the patient
must be minimized, creating an environment in which errors
and miscommunications easily occur. In developing a robust,
error-free HDR treatment delivery program, the following
basic principles should be followed.

1. Use written documentation
Accurate HDR treatment planning and delivery presumes
accurate information transfer among delivery team members
working in the operating room, simulator room, and the
treatment planning and treatment delivery areas. The radiation oncologist, physicist, medical radiation safety officer,
dosimetrist, and treatment unit operator must cooperate
closely and communicate accurately and unambiguously. All
critical information, including applicator types used, relation
of target volume to applicators, dose prescription, simulator
localization information, etc., should be recorded on appropriate forms by the individual team member primarily responsible for each corresponding activity. These forms
should accompany the patient chart and film jacket as the
patient proceeds through applicator insertion, treatment planning, and treatment delivery.

2. Develop a formal procedure
For each type of HDR treatment, the procedures and duties of each team member should be carefully defined. A
radiation therapist, dosimetrist, or physicist assisting the physician during the applicator placement should document the
applicators used, and whether bony anatomy, surface markers, applicator geometry, or surgical clips will be used to
select the active dwell position. For each QA check, the individual responsible for performing the check and evaluating
the outcome, the item to be tested, the method used, the
expected outcome, and actions to be taken in event of an
undesired outcome should be well understood. To ensure
compliance and to guide the staff, QA check lists should be
used.

3. Exploit redundancy
The physicist should review the proposed treatment delivery process and isolate the vulnerable actions and decision
points where mistakes could result in serious dose delivery
errors. Each key step and essential piece of information
should be independently verified. How exhaustive, logically
complete, and specific the QA test is depends on the physicist’s estimate on the incidence of the target error and how
serious the consequences are to the patient and staff.

4. Exploit quality improvement techniques
The essential characteristic of a quality improvement or
comprehensive QA program is some mechanism by which
HDR brachytherapy experience is reviewed to ~1! confirm
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

379

compliance with the stated program; ~2! assess program adequacy and completeness; and ~3! to introduce improvements
to address any identified weaknesses. All HDR brachytherapy programs should have a formal comprehensive QA
programs as described in the Task Group 40 Report No. 465
‘‘Comprehensive QA for Radiation Oncology.’’
C. Treatment documentation, procedure checklists,
and forms

Good documentation is essential to a well-organized HDR
facility. This report recommends that each facility shall develop written procedures which address the issues listed below. For functions ~1!, ~2!, ~3!, and ~5! specially designed
forms to be filled out for each patient treatment are strongly
recommended.
~1! Written prescription and daily treatment record.
~2! Treatment day remote afterloader QA protocol.
~3! QA procedure flow checkoff list.
~4! Physicist’s treatment plan/documentation review.
~5! Depending on the complexity and frequency of each specific type of procedure, forms to document implant geometry, simulation data, and verification of computerized dwell-time calculations.
~6! Written protocols or policies of treatment for commonly
treated disease sites, including treatment technique, dose
specification criterion, and dose prescriptions.
Each brachytherapy practice shall develop written procedures and patient-specific documentation for each major type
of procedure, as described above. Treatment documentation
should aim for completeness, such that treatment could be
retrospectively reconstructed if necessary. This treatment
documentation should be filled out as the information becomes available during the procedure as its main purpose is
to minimize miscommunication by replacing verbal transfer
of key information by written communication. In addition,
each institution should develop a mechanism, formal or informal, for confirming compliance with the written QA program. Formalizing treatment execution by means of QA
check-off forms is often a worthwhile enhancement of the
basic ‘‘integrated’’ QA program. Developing such forms
forces one to systematically conceptualize the treatment delivery process. In addition to documenting compliance with
QA requirements, check-off forms are useful for training
new team members, and for guiding the flow of infrequently
performed procedures. However, the Task Group recognizes
that formal documentation of all QA checks constitutes a
significant burden and may not be the only approach to confirming QA. For example, a small, highly experienced treatment delivery team, which frequently performs brachytherapy procedures and supports an adequate level of
redundancy, may not find comprehensive QA checklists useful.
Probably no form is more critical to the safe execution of
HDR brachytherapy as the treatment prescription and daily
treatment record. In many institutions a separate prescription
is written by the physician for each fraction. A radiation

380

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

FIG. 1. Example of a prescription form that combines the written prescription, a generic implant diagram, implant description, and daily treatment
record on a single sheet of paper.

therapy summary sheet reflects the current status of treatment
~total dose and number of fractions given so far! and the
written prescription that drives the whole process: more detailed descriptions of individual fractions, e.g., dwell time
distributions, should be filed in separate sections of the chart.
A form could be designed to include the prescription and all
QA procedures. The form should be general so that at a
glance, critical questions such as ‘‘is another fraction
needed?’’ can be quickly answered. Figure 1 illustrates such
a form. Each facility should adapt a similar design to their
individual needs.
The Task Group recommends that the prescription/daily
treatment record form ~The NRC 10 CFR 35.32~1! requires
that a written directive be prepared prior to any HDR treatment and signed and dated by the authorized user. 10 CFR
35.2 requires that the written directive specify the radioisotope, treatment site, and total dose.! should provide the following information for each course of therapy:
~1! An unambiguous method of identifying the patient’s
identity on all treatment records, forms, and radiographs.
At minimum, this should include the patient’s name and
hospital number or radiation oncology patient number.
~2! A clearly defined written prescription, including the fraction size, number of fractions, total absorbed dose, and
dose specification criterion, e.g., dose to Point A, as well
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

380

as a well-defined space for the authorized physician to
sign and date. Either by means of a diagram, illustrating
the approximate location of applicator system relative to
the patient’s anatomy, or by means of an anatomic description, the site of the implant must be included. An
approximate indication of the desired time interval between fractions and/or total duration of the treatment
time may be useful. Some means of clearly indicating
revisions to the written prescription should be included.
~3! For each fraction, a brief description of the applicators
used. For intracavitary gynecologic implants, the colpostat or cylinder diameter should be documented along
with the tandem curvature. The type of applicator system
~e.g., ‘‘Fletcher-Suit,’’ ‘‘ring’’! should be indicated. For
interstitial or transluminal implants, the number and type
of catheters should be indicated, e.g., ‘‘two 6 French 100
cm endobronchial applicators.’’ If different HDR treatment modalities or machines are available, the identity
of the desired device ~e.g., the afterloader serial number!
should be included.
~4! A daily treatment record, showing the delivery date of
each fraction, the absorbed dose ~or other quantity delivered!, the cumulative total dose, the source strength, total
dwell time, and integrated reference air-kerma ~IRAK:
see Ref. 12!. Integrated Reference Air Kerma, or IRAK,
is defined as the product of Air-kerma strength ~in units
of m Gym2 /s21! and dwell time ~units of seconds!,
summed over all dwell positions in the implant. The
units of IRAK are m Gym2 ~equivalently cGycm2!. IRAK
is the quantity endorsed by the American Brachytherapy
Society ~Ref. 12!, then the American Endocurietherapy
Society, to replace the obsolete quantity mgRaEq-h. The
ICRU, in its Report 38,13 has recommended a conceptually equivalent quantity, Reference Air Kerma. For HDR
brachytherapy, IRAK is a useful parameter since it
should remain constant as the source decays for a fixedgeometry implant. In addition, the daily treatment record
should contain signature blocks for the physicist and
physician to document their pretreatment checks of the
plan and remote afterloader input parameters and a signature block for the treatment unit operator to sign following treatment delivery.
Preferably, this above information should be contained on
a single page valid for the entire treatment course with separate sections or pages for each fraction. Other general
fraction-independent information that should be available, either on the prescription form or on other summary forms, are
~1! the diagnosis, including site and stage of disease, and ~2!
if HDRB is to be combined with external beam treatment, an
overall description of the integrated treatment ~e.g., 40 Gy
whole pelvis, 10 Gy split field, 45 Gy periaortics, and 6
HDRB fractions for a total point A dose of 70 Gy!. The latter
information is useful for physicists and other personnel who
review the proposed HDR treatment so that significant deviations from department policies of treatment can be noticed. The American Brachytherapy Society brachytherapy
dose specification recommendations14 contain many useful

381

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

suggestions for documenting target volume location and
shape, prescription criteria, and applicator characteristics that
are applicable to HDR brachytherapy.
In addition, the Task Group recommends that all documentation specific to each fraction be filed in a clearly
marked section in the chart. All documents must bear the
patient’s name and date of treatment. At minimum, this information should include:
~1! For multicatheter interstitial implants, a detailed crosssection diagram of the implant, documenting the catheter
numbering system relative to externally identifiable
anatomy. The channel number ~if different from the
catheter number!, the identity of the simulation marker,
and any information recorded at the time of simulation
~simulation marker pull-back distances, insertion depths,
catheter lengths, or offsets between most distal active
position and catheter tip! needed to compute positional
programming parameters should be described. Throughout this report, ‘‘distal’’ is used to refer to the direction
towards the applicator tip and away from the treatment
unit head while ‘‘proximal’’ denotes the direction towards the applicator orifice closest to the treatment unit
head.
~2! For all implants, a complete catheter-by-catheter description giving the insertion depth, the active dwell positions, distance between adjacent dwell positions, and all
dwell times. ‘‘Insertion depth’’ is a general term used to
describe the location of the active dwell-position sequence relative to the closed end or orifice of the implanted catheter. Insertion depth is specified differently
by the competing HDR remote afterloader manufacturers. This list should contain all information needed to
manually program the treatment unit but should be independent of the afterloader so it can be used as the basis
for verifying the accuracy of the program. At least some
treatment planning systems include this information in
the printed documentation associated with each graphic
treatment plan.
~3! Any information needed to identify the active dwell positions and the programming parameters needed to define
the location of each along the catheter track. For many
treatments, the active dwell positions must be manually
identified from radiographs, prior to the computer planning and evaluation process. In these cases, the task
group strongly recommends that at least the first and last
dwell position in each catheter, along with any offsets
needed to calculate the programmed insertion depths or
treatment lengths,4,15 be recorded on a separate form ~see
Fig. 1 for an example! as it is extracted from the radiographs. This document can then serve as the basis for
entering data into the planning system and later verifying
its output. For intracavitary surface-dose applicators in
which active dwell positions are fixed in advance, the
desired active dwell distribution should be permanently
defined in applicator-specific forms or written procedures which are used as the basis of entering data into
the planning system.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

381

~4! The graphic treatment plan ~isodose plots and associated
documentation! itself, if distinct from ~2! above.
~5! Second calculations, as described in Sec. IV E 4, used as
the basis of remote-afterloader programming or to verify
computer-based calculations. The calculation should include the prescribed dose, source strength, and all assumptions made.
~6! QA check-off list, which is discussed further in the Appendix. All critical QA checks and redundant observations should be listed on the form. It serves to remind all
treatment delivery personnel of essential checks, provides a simple and easily auditable record for demonstrating compliance, and is a useful tool for training
newcomers in system operation.
~7! Any hardcopy printout generated by the treatment delivery device which documents its performance during
treatment delivery.
III. STAFFING AND TRAINING
A. Staffing requirements

Because HDR brachytherapy planning and treatments
proceed rapidly, the staff needs to be adequately trained with
the system to notice errors in planning or setup before they
actually become treatment-delivery errors. The operational
organization of a treatment facility must also provide coverage in sufficient depth to intercept errors. Each facility must
determine what constitutes appropriate balance between procedures to prevent errors, redundancy, and staffing levels.
The level and intensity of quality assurance procedures often
depends on the complexity of the application and the training
and experience of the team members. The need to intercept
errors quickly, and to provide independent verification, can
stress radiation oncology staffs.
Physicians, department heads, and administrators must realize that development and maintenance of a safe and effective HDR program requires a significant time commitment
for all staff involved, especially the medical physicist on
whom the burden of acceptance testing the equipment, developing procedures, and training other staff falls. Adequate
staffing and equipment resources must be provided. For example, planning a facility, selecting appropriate equipment,
acceptance testing and commissioning equipment, and developing procedures may take as much time as installing and
accepting a linear accelerator.
For an experienced HDR medical physicist, 2–4 months
of full time equivalent effort, depending on program complexity, should be budgeted for starting up a new program.
For a qualified medical physicist without prior HDR experience, additional time should be allowed. Once the program is
operating, demands for physics effort are less consuming,
but still significant. For example, performing four procedures
back-to-back can easily total 4–8 h of medical physicist
time, including treatment supervision and treatment plan review. For an average load of 10 fractions per week, including periodic QA, staff training and treatment record audits, 1
FTE of a qualified medical physicist should be allocated.
Departmental management should be aware that efficient ex-

382

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

382

FIG. 2. HDR procedure flow: One medical physicist model.

ecution of several back-to-back treatments in a single day
may require participation of more than one treatment team:
one team to cover applicator insertion, while the other performs treatment planning and delivery.
Figure 2 shows one model for managing an HDR brachytherapy case. In this model, a dosimetrist performs the dosimetry ~including reconstruction, dose calculation, and optimization!. The medical physicist and a radiation oncologist
perform verification checks on the results of the planning.
The medical physicist performs an independent verification,
and checks that the resultant plan satisfies the prescription,
passes tests for likely correctness, and that the program transfer device, card, or disk contains the correct settings for the
treatment unit. The physician checks that the isodose distribution satisfies the goals of the treatment, and performs some
simple, quick checks that could detect some more-likely errors.
The medical physicist and the physician verify that the
program in the treatment unit matches those settings derived
during the planning session.
Depending on the organization of the department and the
rules of the particular state, the medical physicist, the dosimetrist, the therapist, or the physician could operate the unit
during the treatment. One of the persons attending the treatment, preferably the operator, shall be trained, willing, and
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

ready to enter the room when a high-activity source is exposed in the event of a retraction failure. After the treatment,
the operator must check the patient and unit to assure that the
source completely retracted, and check the record for any
mistakes.
Basically, one physicist model is the central recommendation for minimum safety requirements. However, additional QA benefits may be acquired by a two physicist
model: A dosimetrist entering the data under the direct observation of a medical physicist who watches for correct data
entry. A typical case may require the entry of about 350
pieces of information ~systems that use less information generally allow less flexibility and/or may make inappropriate
assumptions about application geometry!. At facilities using
the two-person data entry model, correction of errors at the
time of entry by the second person is a common event. In
this model, the medical physicist and dosimetrist leave the
room after completion of the planning, and a second medical
physicist and a radiation oncologist enter to perform verification checks on the results of the planning. The second
medical physicist does not attend the planning session so as
not to be influenced by discussions between the planners,
who could convince themselves that a decision was correct
when it was really in error. The second medical physicist
performs the independent verification and checks as the

383

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

383

sitions to recalculate an isodose distribution for comparison
with that generated by the primary computer system, rather
than regenerating a new, freshly optimized set of dwell
times. This procedure really checks only that the primary
computer’s dose calculational algorithm matches that of the
checking computer, and that the primary computer made no
calculational errors. Such errors are rare, and acceptance testing of the computer system should check the correctness of
the algorithm. Relying of such a comparison to check the
correctness of the HDR plan fails to intercept the most common human errors, such as mistaken data entries in the optimization routine, or incorrectly specified lengths. It is not
clear that verification of isodose distributions on particular
cases using a second computer system serves any purpose.
Table I outlines a typical division of labor for an HDR
brachytherapy program. It should be noted that some labor
will be shared by nurses who assist in assisting equipment
package, applicator insertions and removal, post-treatment
patient care, and equipment cleansing and resterilization.
B. Training requirements

FIG. 3. HDR procedure flow: Two medical physicist model.

single medical physicist does in the previous model.
Figure 3 schematically illustrates the flow of events with
the two-medical physicist model. This model requires five
persons ~two medical physicists, a physician, a dosimetrist,
and a therapist! just for treatment planning, neglecting any
nursing assistance needed through the procedure. This really
adds only one person ~a medical physicist! to the crew that
normally develops and treats an LDR case, and does so to
reduce the likelihood of repeating the treatment planning and
dose calculations due to an error found during a check. During an LDR treatment, such repetition adds little to the total
treatment duration, with the patient somewhat comfortable in
bed. For an HDR treatment, the dosimetry can account for a
large portion of the treatment duration, and the patient may
be constrained to a rather uncomfortable position, and, thus,
the proceedings move very quickly.
Figure 3 shows a department with a resident in radiation
oncology, but the presence of a resident is not integral to the
model.
Departments with limited staff, say with one medical
physicist and one radiation oncologist, and a radiographer for
the imaging, must meet the independent verification requirement using a second computer system, or some form of
manual calculation. While both the second computer system
and manual calculations assist in the verification when a second medical physicist checks the plans ~or a physicist after a
dosimetrist generates a plan!, they form the only basis when
one medical physicist performs all roles.
Verification using a second computer system usually entails entering the source activity, dwell times, and dwell poMedical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

A successful program requires a qualified and integrated
treatment delivery team with substantial experience. Additional expertise, required above and beyond board certification, can often be acquired through focused self-study, careful planning and preparation, and extensive practice with the
devices. All participating members of a HDR brachytherapy
team shall be trained for emergency procedures for each type
of application, with instruction on what to do when the emergency procedures do not go according to the plan. Credentials suggested by this Task Group include:
Radiation Oncologist. A broad-certified radiation oncologist with special expertise in brachytherapy, preferably HDR
brachytherapy, is required. The physician must be licensed
by the USNRC or an Agreement State to use the HDR unit.
As HDR brachytherapy remains a continuously evolving
technique, this experience should include following patients
and quantifying clinical outcome. This, in turn, requires appropriate biometry resources. Before beginning a HDR practice on patients, time should be spent visiting facilities with
ongoing programs. In a busy HDR practice, it may not be
practical for the attending radiation oncologist to be available during each treatment. For example, the radiation oncologist may be occupied inserting applicators in the second
patient while the first patient is being treated. In such cases,
an appropriately trained and supervised physician, e.g., resident radiation oncologist, may take on certain duties, such as
checking setups, attending treatments, and removing applicators.
Medical physicist. A board-certified medical physicist in
radiation oncology physics or therapeutic radiological physics ~or radiological physics!, with expertise in brachytherapy
is required. The medical physicist should spend 1–3 weeks
visiting at an established HDR program. At minimum, the
medical physicist shall have received vendor-supplied training for both the treatment unit and the radiotherapy
treatment-planning computer system. A medical physicist

384

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

384

TABLE I. One model HDR treatment delivery organization.
Activity

Radiation
oncologist

Pretreatment
preparation

Reviews patient
history
Defines
procedure, selects
applicators
Schedules patient

Applicator insertion

Performs procedure

Simulation/
localization

Operator

Dosimetrist

Medical
physicist
Consults with
physician
Commissions new
applicators
Designs
procedure for
novel treatment

Schedules
patienta
Tests and
packages
applicatorsa
Contacts medical
physicist if nonroutine
treatment
Assists
physiciana
Documents
implant
Performs daily
QAb
Label applicators
Record simulation
marker identity
Measure
localization
parameters

Prescription/
localization

Defines active
dwell positionsb
Defines target
volumeb
Writes
prescription
Defines
optimization
criteria

Reviews
radiographs,
prescription

Verifies positional
parameters

Treatment
planning

Reviews treatment
plan

Plans treatment

Supervises
planning
Does manual
calculation
Checks
calculation
Reviews plan

Prepares transfer
medium

Treatment unit
preparation

Treatment delivery

Post-treatment

a

Connects unit to
the catheters

Authorizes
treatment
responds to
emergencies as
directed by the
physicist

Disconnects
patient and
removes
applicatora

Operates
treatment unit
Monitors
treatment
progress
Programs HDR
Sets up patient
Compares
treatment
program to
prescription
Surveys patient
and room
Removes patient
from room
Completes daily
treatment record
Checks paperwork
completeness
Secures
treatment device

May be performed by or with the assistance of a nurse.
May be performed by or with the assistance of a medical physicist.

b

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

Calculates HDR
positional
programming
parameters
Checks setup
Reviews daily QA
Check treatment
unit program
Monitors
treatment
progress
Reviews
emergency
procedures
Supervises
emergency
procedures

385

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

new to HDR brachytherapy should carefully work through
extensive commissioning tests for both the treatment unit
and the planning system, and become competent at operating
both systems. The medical physicist should carefully work
out procedures for each item mentioned in Table I.
Dosimetrist. An individual with two years training in
brachytherapy treatment planning is required. Formal qualifications include certification as a medical dosimetrist, certification as a radiation therapist with experience in dosimetry,
or an undergraduate degree in physics or radiological sciences with experience in dosimetry. This individual should
have vendor-supplied training operating the treatment planning system. HDR computerized treatment planning systems
generally are functionally much more sophisticated than their
LDR counterparts. Such systems offer several choices for
reconstructing the implant geometry from radiographic images, have several dwell-weight optimization options, and
have more sophisticated dose specification procedures, dose
display options, and methods for quantifying implant quality.
Some available systems have poorly designed user interfaces
that contribute to difficulty in learning system operation and
increase the likelihood of making errors. Prior to treating
patients, the dosimetrist should practice extensively with the
system, with the goal of learning to plan treatments independently of the medical physicist. For each type of procedure
anticipated, the medical physicist and dosimetrist should
work together closely to develop detailed written procedures
that specify which program options are to be used.
Treatment-unit Operator. This individual should have
vendor-supplied training on the HDR unit, or the equivalent
from an in-house trainer if that expertise exists in the facility,
and must spend extensive time practicing with the unit before treating patients. If assisting the physician during applicator insertion, this individual needs a good working knowledge of the clinical aspects of the proposed treatment,
including applicator properties, operation and selection, target volume localization strategies, and a good knowledge of
afterloader-imposed geometric limitations on applicator insertion. A medical physicist, dosimetrist, radiation therapist,
nurse, or physician may be designated to deliver the treatment. Some states may require HDR operators to be licensed
radiation therapists. The operator must be trained to
promptly enter the room and follow the emergency procedures should the source fail to retract into its shielded position.
Radiation Safety Officer ~RSO!. The RSO has final responsibility for the safe use of radiation at an institution, and
is responsible for all communications to regulatory agencies
flow. While often the RSO may not be involved in daily
operations of an HDR unit, this person must review and approve the operational procedures and emergency plans.
As mentioned above, the persons involved in the planning
and execution of an HDR treatment must be able to recognize readily when some aspect of the treatment looks wrong.
All persons involved should be certified by their respective
certifying bodies, unless they are in training ~such as residents! and under close supervision by one who is certified.
Each of the persons involved needs additional training in
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

385

HDRB. Initially, one person in each of the disciplines should
spend time at a facility that has been performing HDR procedures to gain an understanding of the nature of HDRB. In
addition, all manufacturers of HDR units provide training
that prospective users should attend at the manufacturer’s
training center and/or the user’s site.

C. Recommended training schedule

One person at an institution should be responsible for the
subsequent training and examination of other staff members.
Sample training schedules include:
Operator
~1! Training in programming and operating the unit.
~2! Training in daily quality assurance and safety procedures.
~3! Training in emergency procedures for each type of patient treated, with instruction on what to do when the
emergency procedures do not go according to plan.
~4! Training in monitoring the unit and patient during a patient treatment.
~5! Training in detecting errors and potential problem situations.
~6! Supervised practice.
~7! Unsupervised practice.
~8! Supervised operation during a patient’s treatment.
Radiation therapist
~1! Review of treatment planning system requirements for
localization and imaging.
~2! Practice treatment delivery with a dummy patient.
~3! Supervised operation during a patient’s treatment.
Dosimetrist
~1! Observation of planning for a patient’s treatment.
~2! Introduction to the treatment planning program.
~3! Walking through a sample case.
~4! Practice on sample cases.
~5! Exploration of all parts of the planning software, and
how to recover from inadvertent deviations from the normal protocol.
~6! Recognition of when optimization has failed to produce
a desirable dose distribution, and interventional techniques.
~7! Supervised operation during a patient’s treatment.
Planning medical physicist
~1! All of the training for a dosimetrist and participation in a
patient’s treatment planning performing the dosimetrist’s
function.
~2! Training in evaluation of all information returned from
the planning computer.
~3! Practice in the use of the nonroutine parts of the software.
~4! Practice in optimization in nonroutine situations.

386

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

~5! Recognition of when optimization has failed to produce
a desirable dose distribution, and interventional techniques.
~6! Supervised operation during a patient’s treatment.
Verifying medical physicist
~1! All of the training for the planning medical physicist.
~2! Exploration of possible paths of errors.
~3! Sampling technique to verify accuracy of a treatment
plan.
~4! Instruction in the use of evaluation tools ~e.g., forms!.
~5! Supervised operation during a patient’s treatment.
Radiation oncologist
~1! Training in the nature of the applicators
~2! Observation of the placement of an applicator.
~3! Supervised placement of applicators.
~4! Discussion of desired dose distributions.
~5! Instruction on the interpretation of the resultant information for a treatment plan ~e.g., computer printouts, isodose distributions!.
~6! Instruction in the use of evaluation tools ~e.g., forms!.
~7! Supervised operation during a patient’s treatment.
Once certified, a team member must remain active or undergo refresher retraining. The NRC requires annual retraining for all operators, but persons performing other functions
may also need periodic reviews. Departmental guidelines requiring all authorized persons to participate in at least one
procedure per month help keep the staff current.
IV. TREATMENT SPECIFIC QUALITY ASSURANCE
The following sections describe examples of QA checks
for each phase of the treatment delivery process. General
descriptions of checks recommended by this report are tabulated. Implementation of such measures by a specific facility
will necessarily be individualized taking into account procedure complexity and frequency, staff availability, skill level
of available personnel, and the type of available devices.
A. Applicator preparation

Upon scheduling a procedure, the appropriate applicator
kit should be assembled, reviewed for correct operation and
completeness, and sent for appropriate sterilization. It is useful to make a list of required kit components for each procedure type so that appropriate localization dummies, adapters,
etc., are not forgotten. If single-use applicators are used, they
should be checked for correct and error-free operation on the
HDR and their depths sounded if the localization procedure
requires them to have a fixed length. Until operating room
support personnel become accustomed to the special equipment needs of various HDR procedures, e.g., fluoroscopic
examination table, a particular bronchoscope, topical anesthetic, etc., these items should be ordered in advance for each
procedure. Care should be taken to label and sort applicators
of similar appearance. For example, interstitial HDR applicators are frequently of larger diameter ~1.9 mm o.d. versus
1.7 mm o.d.! than their LDR manually afterloaded counterMedical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

386

parts. All accessories ~buttons, transfer tubes, adapters, etc.!
should be carefully checked for compatibility.
B. Applicator insertion

Insertion of intracavitary and interstitial applicators is the
responsibility of the radiation oncologist. For transluminal
applicators, the placement is often done by a pulmonologist.
The physics team involvement in the operative procedure
depends on procedure complexity, physician familiarity with
the equipment, and the receptivity of physician to physicist
participation. The Task Group recommends that a member of
the physics team ~experienced radiation therapist or dosimetrist for routine procedures or a physicist for complex or
unfamiliar ones! attend the operative procedure. The essential operating room responsibilities of the physics team are to
~1! ensure that the appropriate applicators and accessories are
present, handed to the physician in proper order, and installed in a fashion compatible with the mechanical and geometric requirements of the afterloading device, ~2! ensure
that tumor localization data ~direct visualization, fluoroscopy, bronchoscopy, etc.! available only in the operating
room are properly recorded and correlated with dwell position settings for later use in defining the treatment volume,
~3! document the applicators used and their location on the
prescription form, and ~4! for catheters, after the depth is
sounded the ends should be marked so that it will be noted
later if they have been cut shorter by someone. Physics attendance in the operating room can prevent errors such as
cutting catheters too short for attachment to the afterloader
transfer tubes, neglecting to remove the solid plastic inserts
inside flexible implant catheters used to form 180° loops,
placing miniovoid caps on the applicator tubes with their 4
mm thick rather than 8 mm thick sides directed laterally, and
preventing insertion of LDR- rather than HDR-compatible
gynecological applicators. Especially, in a teaching hospital
in which senior residents or junior staff with limited brachytherapy experience perform procedures under the supervision
of an attending radiation oncologist, providing an experienced technical support person is an essential quality assurance measure.
After insertion, all applicators should be marked near the
point of insertion on the patient so that dislocation of the
system during the insertion-to-treatment interval can be detected. For example, endobronchial applicators can be
marked by a tape where they enter the patient’s nares, or the
distance from the applicator orifice to the entry point on the
patient can be measured and recorded. If a gynecological
intracavitary insertion patient is to be moved between localization and treatment, a mark can be placed on the patient’s
inner thigh opposite the proximal aspect of the applicator
assembly.
C. Implant localization and simulation

During radiographic examination of the implant, several
key steps influence positional accuracy of the treatment. For
multiple-catheter transluminal implants or interstitial implants, each applicator should be labeled externally with the

387

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

387

FIG. 4. Example of a form used for recording localization information obtained in the simulator room for calculating positional treatment-unit programming
parameter. This form is intended for interstitial implants using 30 cm long simulation markers marketed by Nucletron. This localization method assumes that
all transfer tubes are of a known uniform length.

corresponding channel number. A correctly labeled sketch of
the implant should be drawn on the prescription form or
other document. Generally, each applicator is loaded with a
radiographically distinct or recognizable sequence of dummy
seeds. The identity of each simulation marker should be
carefully recorded on the implant diagram to facilitate
matching of corresponding dwell positions and catheters on
orthogonal or variable-angle radiographs. Finally, the localization procedure may require the depth of each catheter or
catheter-transfer tube combination to be sounded, the results
of which must be correctly recorded on the localization form.
For large interstitial implants, a form ~see Fig. 4! that clearly
defines the needed information is recommended. Incorrect
execution of these steps may deliver the wrong sequence of
dwell positions and times to a catheter. Two persons should
work together to gather the localization information and
verify its correctness, one to perform the labeling and measurement functions and a second to record the information
and check the accuracy of the first person.
Radiographic visualization of plastic intracavitary applicators, e.g., vaginal cylinders, can be achieved by inserting
small radio opaque seeds or spacers near the surface of such
applicators. Such marking systems not only improve anatomic localization of applicator surfaces, but supports radiographic verification of colpostat and vaginal cylinder diameter as well.
Finally, care should be taken to obtain radiographs that
~1! facilitate accurate manual matching of corresponding images on the two views and ~2! are consistent with input requirements of the selected implant reconstruction algorithm.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

For large interstitial implants, oblique views are sometimes
useful for maximizing separation of the projected simulation
markers, which aids manual matching. In contrast to many
LDR interstitial implants, consisting of ribbons of uniform
strength, length, and insertion depth, dwell weight optimization always results in unique sequences of dwell times in
each catheter. Accurate reconstruction of the correspondence
between channel number and the radiographic image of each
catheter is essential to ensure delivery of each dwell-time
sequence to the intended catheter. To more easily correlate
the implanted catheters with radiographic anatomy, oblique
radiographs should always be supplemented by anatomical
lateral and AP views. Both a physicist ~and/or dosimetrist!
and a radiation oncologist should approve the radiographs as
adequate for implant reconstruction and clinical evaluation
before the patient leaves the table.
D. Treatment prescription

Following simulation, the radiation oncologist reviews the
radiographs along with other pertinent localization data and
~1! defines the target volume or dwell positions to be activated, ~2! defines where the prescribed dose is to be delivered or specified, and ~3! selects the prescribed dose and
fractionation scheme, and completes and signs the prescription. Unless procedure frequency is high enough to allow
this procedure to be unambiguously routinized, this activity
should involve consultation between the physician and the
physicist. The physicist’s role is to confirm that all relevant
tumor imaging studies and localization data are correctly

388

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

correlated with the simulation marker images, to aid the physician in articulating clinical intent in terms of quantitative
end points, and to develop a clear strategy for optimizing the
implant dose distribution, e.g., does the volume outlined on
the radiographs indicate the dwell positions to be activated or
a target surface with the dwell positions to be selected to
achieve a compromise between dose nonuniformity and target volume coverage? Generally, an experienced physicist
should be able to recommend a combination of prescription
criterion and margin of implanted volume about the target
surface necessary to achieve this goal without lengthy computer planning. Verifying that the selected dwell positions
cover the target volume may take some persistence. For example, in a transluminal treatment of the esophagus, the distal and proximal tumor margins can be identified by esophagoscopy ~and stated in terms of insertion depth from the
incisors!, from barium-swallow radiographs, or from CT.
Having identified the method of target localization, the
physicist should verify that this volume is covered by the
selected dwell positions.
The task group strongly recommends that detailed stepby-step procedures, describing the simulation, treatment volume localization, dose prescription, and treatment planning
processes, be written. These procedures should address:
~1! The clinical indications for treatment, including disease
stage, site, previous surgical management, and pathological findings ~example, definitive radiation therapy for
medically inoperable Stage IB carcinoma of the endometrium!.
~2! The overall treatment strategy including external beam
and HDR total doses and fractionation.
~3! The applicator type and geometry to be used.
~4! The dose specification and optimization strategy.
~5! The method of treatment planning including: source geometry reconstruction ~e.g., pre-entered coordinates, orthogonal radiographs, or combination!, placement of
dose optimization and dose specification points, dose
prescription, stopping points where physicist and physician input are needed, relationship between manual and
computer calculations, and orientation and location of
isodose calculations.
E. Implant design and evaluation

1. Localization
The first step in the planning phase of treatment delivery
is to describe the active dwell positions in terms of input
parameters used by the treatment planning system and treatment delivery unit, e.g., dwell position numbers and treatment lengths. For intracavitary and transluminal treatments,
such localization calculations may be very straightforward,
e.g., looking up the active dwell position number and treatment lengths in the treatment policies ~See Fig. 4 for an
example!. As discussed in Sec. IV C, interstitial implants are
more complex. Whenever optimization is used, accurate
planning and treatment of interstitial implants requires accurately matching the radiographic images of each catheter
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

388

with its channel number as defined by the label attached to
its orifice during simulation. If the implanted applicators are
not of uniform length or implanted to the same depth relative
to the target volume boundary, then the positional programming parameter may vary from catheter-to-catheter as well.
The matching process can be a time consuming, error prone
activity requiring intense concentration and freedom from
interruptions. To ameliorate the impact of mismatching,
uniform-length catheters should be used whenever possible
and every effort made by the radiation oncologist to insert
catheters to a uniform depth with respect to the distal margin
of the target volume. For such implants, one person, e.g., the
dosimetrist, should perform the matching and a second person, e.g., the physicist, should verify the catheter imagechannel number correspondence and localization calculations. For endobronchial implants consisting of two to three
transluminal applicators, each applicator should be labeled in
the operating room and its anatomic location recorded ~e.g.,
no. 25right upper lobe! so that channel numberradiographic image correspondence can be independently
checked.
Several methods are available for assuring that the treatment unit settings needed to position the radioactive source
at the desired position on a simulator radiograph are correctly calculated.4,15 The details depend on the afterloader
design, the applicator type ~interstitial versus intracavitary!,
the type of simulator marker used, and whether the marker is
referenced to the applicator orifice or its distal closure. Other
factors, e.g., the constancy and uniformity of transfer tube
length, also influence the choice of localization method. For
each type of implant, an appropriate localization method
must be selected and tested in advance. Any additional information that must be obtained from radiographs or measured in the simulator must be defined, and methods developed, e.g., Fig. 4 for capturing and verifying this data.
Testing involves using a single applicator to compare the
location of selected seeds on a radiographic marker to the
autoradiographically defined HDR source center for the programming settings defined by the localization calculation.

2. Computer treatment planning
Treatment planning begins with a consultation between
the dosimetrist and physicist regarding the basic approach to
treatment planning. For intracavitary implants, treatment
length settings and active dwell positions may be fixed in
advance or a standard plan, containing the fixed Cartesian
coordinates of each catheter trajectory may be used. For endobronchial or interstitial implants, the catheter numbers and
radiograph images may have to be matched by the dosimetrist and physicist. Other issues include the choice of optimization algorithm and selection of dose calculation points
used to specify the prescribed dose and to define the optimization criteria. Well-defined optimization and doseprescription protocols which limit the options available to
the dosimetrist should be used. For example, one approach to
standardizing interstitial implant planning on the Nucletron
planning system is to permit only geometric optimization

389

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

~eliminating the need for dose point placement! and requiring dose to be prescribed as a fixed fraction ~0.75–0.90! of
the central minimum dose defined by placing dose calculation points in the central transverse plane of implant at a
specified point in the program flow.

3. Pretreatment review of HDR treatment plan
The physicist charged with reviewing the treatment planning process should ensure that the physician’s clinical intent
has been communicated accurately to the dosimetrist, and
that the resulting plan is consistent with that intent. For example, it may not be clear whether a volume marked by the
physician on the localization radiographs describes the treatment volume or the target volume to be enclosed by the
prescription isodose or whether the prescription distance is
specified relative to the applicator center or its surface. It
may seem self-evident that clear communication between
physician, physicist, and planner is necessary, but over time
expectations and assumptions can become implicit and unstated, leading to misunderstandings in the event of staff
changes, etc. An effective physics review encompasses much
more than verification of computer plan accuracy: it includes
assessment of clinical appropriateness and consistency of the
final treatment program with target localization data, simulation radiographs, treatment prescription, and a computer
treatment plan.
The specific review of each plan should begin with verification of input data, including:
~1! name of patient and date of treatment;
~2! source strength matches the decayed value;
~3! correct system file ~including, e.g., calibration data!
used;
~4! magnification factors, source-film distances, etc.;
~5! source position reconstruction algorithm used was consistent with the simulation radiograph geometry;
~6! units of all quantities;
~7! step size ~or length!;
~8! optimization scheme and prescription criterion chosen
are consistent with implant geometry and clinical intent;
~9! dose per fraction matches the treatment prescription;
~10! reconstructed implant geometry matches radiographic
projections;
~11! distance from machine reference point to distal-most
dwell location;
~12! dwell times and locations programmed in the treatment
unit match those on the plan;
~13! Correctness of treatment unit programs recalled for
treatment of subsequent fractions, including handling of
decay corrections. The GammaMed HDR Treatment
Planning and Treatment Delivery system handles
source decay in a unique way. All treatment plans created by the GammaMed computer planning system utilize a 10 Ci (3.731011 Bq) source for all calculations.
These nominal dwell time are based on a 10 Ci source.
The treatment console is programmed with the nominal
dwell times based on a 10 Ci source and these appear as
entered. When treatment begins, a factor is automatiMedical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

389

cally applied to each nominal dwell time to correct for
actual source activity. This factor is equal to 100
310 Ci actual activity. For example, the factor is 100
for a 10 Ci source. For a 5 Ci (1.8531011 Bq) source,
the factor is 200. This factor is calculated by the physicist during initial calibration of a source and entered
with the date. The system subsequently automatically
adjusts the factor to correct for source decay. The net
result is approximately a 1% increase in this factor each
day. This factor is thus an indicator of actual source
activity. This factor is indicated on treatment console,
and on treatment record printed during treatment.
Especially with respect to positional parameters ~active dwell
positions chosen, spacing, dwell train location within each
catheter, etc.!, the simulation radiographs, graphical plan
representation, localization form, and treatment unit printout
should all be intercompared. For those planning systems that
do not completely document the implant reconstruction process, e.g., algorithm chosen and radiograph orientation used,
Item ~10! is extremely important as an indirect verification of
appropriate reconstruction algorithm selection and operation.
Finally, the plan should be checked for ‘‘reasonableness’’
using the previous plan, if available, and an appropriate figure of merit. Just as mgRaEq-h/dose ratio is a useful parameter for judging low dose-rate implants using radium substitutes, the ~source strength3dwell time!/dose, or IRAK/dose,
ratio should fall within the range expected for the given implant geometry. Quantitative verification of computergenerated dwell time calculations is reviewed below.
The plan should also be assessed for clinical adequacy.
The selected applicator, dose specification criterion, prescribed dose, and choice of optimization approach should be
checked against the department’s policies of treatment or, at
least, customary practices for the given site and stage of
disease. In performing this review, the physicist should be
aware of all treatments previously given to the patient and
check that the cumulative total doses to critical structures
~vaginal mucosa, bladder neck, anterior rectal wall! are
within tolerances. Any significant deviation from these expectations should be brought to the radiation oncologist’s
attention for their review.
Prior to initiating treatment, the attending physician
should review the treatment plan, treatment unit programming, and associated documentation. The physicist’s signature documenting plan review, the fraction size, dose prescription site, consistency of dose distribution size and
location with target volume coverage should be reviewed
along with any other factors influencing clinical appropriateness. Satisfactory physician and physicist review should be
documented by signature on the daily treatment record or
QA checkoff list.

4. Verification of HDR computer calculations
As discussed in Sec. III A, relying on a second computer
to check the correctness of the HDR plan fails to intercept
the most common human errors, such as mistaken data entries in the optimization routine, or incorrectly specified

390

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

TABLE II. Manual dose verification methods for optimized implants @reproduced from Williamson ~Ref. 4! with permission#. Expected values of dose
index 10 cm from implant in its central transverse plane ~Ref. 17!, where the
dose index is defined as, Dose index5@1003Average of doses at
110 cm and 210 cm~cGy!#/@Activity~Ci!3Total time~s!#.
Implant type

Expected range of dose index

Pulmonary
Vaginal cylinder
Long esophagus

1.05–1.20 ~lower if highly elongated, higher if curved!
1.10–1.20 ~i.e., short single catheter!
0.95–1.10 ~i.e., long single catheter!

lengths. It is not clear that verification of isodose distributions on particular cases using a second computer system
serves any purpose. This section presents an alternative
means of verification. Stepping source remote afterloading
technology allows the treatment time at each active dwell
position to be independently programmed. Mathematically
elegant and clinically appealing optimization algorithms are
widely available that vary the relative dwell times ~or
weights! of each activated dwell position to maximize dose
uniformity, target coverage, or other dosimetric constraints
chosen by the user. The result is often a highly nonuniform
distribution of dwell times. When such algorithms are applied to conventional implant geometries, dose homogeneity
is often improved and the length of the implanted volume
needed to adequately cover the target volume may be
reduced.16 Such flexibility creates a number of quality assurance problems, many of which have been discussed elsewhere in this report. An important issue is how to verify the
accuracy of optimized calculations with verification calculation techniques. In many cases verification can easily be
done manually, but also it can be done by small computer
codes. ‘‘Practical’’ in this context requires that the assessment take only a few minutes. In addition, the calculation
check must have a high probability of detecting significant
errors.
A standard technique is to evaluate some characteristic
parameter of the plan and compare it to an expected value.
For example, at distances sufficiently far from the implant,
the dose is determined primarily by the source strength and
total treatment time and is insensitive to local dwell time
variations. One group17 calculates the dose at points 610 cm
from the approximate center of the implant in the direction
most orthogonal to the treatment applicators. The mean dose,
divided by the current source activity and total treatment
time, is then, compared to expected values which depend on
the type of implant geometry. Table II lists representative
numbers. Readers are cautioned that the specific values depend on many variables, such as the quantity used to specify
source strength, single-source dosimetry data selected, and
optimization scheme applied. At such long distances, the
specific form of the tissue attenuation and scatter factor ~radial dose factor! used by the planning computer needs to be
considered, since some expressions may extrapolate poorly.
The ‘‘dose at a large distance’’ method can detect errors
in source strength input, unauthorized changes in physical
dose factors, or calculation ‘‘bugs’’ which can globally afMedical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

390
TABLE III. Expected total treatment time for volume implants, calculated by
Total time5Reference dose ~cGy!3R V 3elongation factor/Activity ~Ci!.
Note: Reference dose chosen to be 90%–95% of central minimum dose for
geometrically optimized volume implants.
Volume (cm3)

R V @Ci s/Gy#

Length/diameter

Elongation factor

50
60
80
100
140
180
220
260
300
340
380

287
323
391
434
569
672
768
859
945
1027
1105

1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0

1.03
1.06
1.10
1.15

fect dose-calculation accuracy. Its insensitivity to local dose
variations means that it is not capable of detecting some
errors which determine the dose at clinically relevant distances. For example, consider a situation in which the planner intended to place active dwell positions at 1.0 cm intervals but inadvertently specified 0.5 cm spacing. If the
number of dwell positions were not doubled then the implant
would be smaller than desired. The next logical step is to
develop expectation values based on doses at typical prescription distances which are sensitive to implant geometry.
The group at the University of Wisconsin has developed
dose indices for a variety of implant types: endobronchial,
gynecological ~tandem and ovoids, ovoids only, vaginal cylinder!, and volume implants. For example, Ref. 18 describes
two indices for tandem and ovoid treatments based on the
ratio of dose at the primary prescription point to ~1! the dwell
time in one particular position in the tandem and ~2! the total
dwell time.
Table III also illustrates the University of Wisconsin
method of verifying total treatment time for volume
implants.4,19 This table was derived from the original
Manchester volume implant table,20 by applying the current
values for the exposure rate constant and conversion from
exposure to dose ~1.065!, adjusting for the ratio of stated to
minimum dose ~1.11!, and conversion from mgRaEq h to
Ci s. The table gives R V , the number of Ci s per Gy required
to the volume enclosed by the implant. When applied to
geometrically optimized ~distance option! volume implants,
the table has an accuracy of better than 8% when the reference dose is defined to be 90%–95% of the central minimum
dose.
Kubo21 and Kubo and Chin22 have reported simple mathematical formulas for checking single catheter treatments
when the dose is prescribed at distances of 7.5 or 10 mm
from the catheter center. For 10 mm dose prescription, the
total treatment time was found to be within 62%:
T5a

D
~ 2.67•L178.6! ,
S

~1!

where T is the expected treatment time in seconds, a is the

391

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

391

conversion constant and is 0.01 Ci s/~cGy mm!, D is the prescribed dose in cGy, S is the source activity in Ci, and L is
the total treatment length in millimeters.
For example, the treatment time for the prescribed dose of
1000 cGy and source strength of 7.5 Ci (2.7731011 Bq) for
the treatment length of 55 mm is 300.6 s from Eq. ~1!. The
planned treatment time was 303.9 s, 1.1% more than the
expected time. Again, the numerical values in the formula
depend on the specifics of the dose calculation data and the
optimization algorithm assumed. This single catheter approach is further expanded so that the prescription distance
and length can be combined into one equation.23 From the
treatment plans generated with treatment lengths of 50, 100,
150, and 200 mm and treatment distances of 2–14 mm with
a step of 2 mm, it was found that the total treatment time
increased linearly with the treatment length whereas the
treatment time varied supralinearly with the treatment distance. Therefore, using the prescription dose of 500 cGy and
a source strength of 10 Ci (3.731011 Bq) as a reference, the
treatment time was first fit with a second-order polynomial as
a function of a treatment distance, d. For the smallest treatment length of L 1 550 mm, the best fit for treatment time
was obtained with
T ~ d,L 1 550! 525.2418.80•d10.263•d 2 .

T ~ d,L 2 5200! 5214.9131.2•d10.236•d .

~3!

The correlation coefficient for Eqs. ~2! and ~3! was better
than 0.999.
Using a linear relation between the treatment time and
treatment length, a total treatment time formula for treatment
length of L and treatment distance of d is generated,
T ~ d,L ! ref5T ~ d,L 1 ! 1

S

D

L2L 1
• @ T ~ d,L 2 ! 2T ~ d,L 1 !# .
L 2 2L 1
~4!

For nonreference cases where source strength is S ~Ci! and
the prescription dose is D p ~cGy!, the total treatment time
can be calculated by,
T ~ d,L ! nonref5T ~ d,L ! ref•

D p ~ cGy! •10 Ci
.
500 cGy•S ~ Ci!

~5!

A different formulation for checking total treatment time has
been used by Ezzell at Wayne State University,24 where a
simple dwell time pattern for single catheter implants was
developed using film dosimetry instead of a mathematical
optimization scheme. Ezzell’s relationship between the same
parameters defined in Eq. ~1! is given by
T5

S

D

L
D
•
.
S
0.0537•L123.09

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

d @cm#

A

B

C

1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0

0.402
20.258
20.619
20.822

0.923
0.836
0.751
0.673

20.0171
20.0148
20.0126
20.0106

Equation ~6! assumes anisotropy corrections, active lengths
of 50–230 mm, a 5 mm separation between adjacent dwell
positions and the following pattern of relative dwell weights:
1.5,1.4,1.3,1.2,1.1,1.0,...,1.0,1.1,1.2,1.3,1.4,1.5.
Optimized square and rectangular single-plane implants
have also been systematically analyzed and dose indices developed in support of dose calculation verification.25 Define
the dose index I as

~2!

Similarly, for the largest treatment length of L 2 5200 mm,
the best fit was obtained with,
2

TABLE IV. Expected values of dose index for geometrically optimized planar implants, where the dose index is defined as, Dose index I5@dose at
distance d from plane ~cGy!•area (cm2!# /@activity ~Ci!•total time ~s!#.
Equivalent side E is E52• @ L•W/(L1W) # (cm), where L and W are
length and width in cm of the implanted area L•W. I5A1B•E1C•E 2 ,
where A, B, and C depend on d. Note: for a curved implant surface, increase I by 10%; for implants with deviated catheters and significant cold
spots, decrease I by 5%.

~6!

I5

D•A
,
S•T

~7!

where D is the dose in cGy at a distance d from the plane of
the implant, A is the area of the implant in cm2, S is the
source activity in Ci, and T is the total dwell time in seconds.
The expected value of I is a simple quadratic function of
the side, E, of the equivalent square implanted area which, in
turn, is calculated from the familiar area/perimeter rule.
Table IV gives the quadratic coefficients A, B, and C for
several different reference distances d assuming inter catheter spacings of 1–1.5 cm and geometric optimization. For
idealized implants, ranging in area from 3.033.5 cm2 to
25.5322.5 cm2, Table IV provided the index, I, to within
5%. The index I was calculated for a series of clinical implants, most of which were used to treat the tumor bed following surgical excision of extremity sarcomas. Despite significant deviation from ideal planar geometry following
closure of the operative wound, the observed index agreed
with the predicted value within 10% for all cases.
In practice, applying these methods requires that the implant dimensions be determined independently from the localization radiographs and the activity be taken from a precalculated table. If these parameters are taken directly from
the computer output, errors in the computation may go unnoticed ~see the first paragraph of this section!.

5. Patient preparation
Prior to patient treatment the applicators must be installed
and treatment planning and treatment unit programming
must be complete. This usually necessitates that the patient
lie on a table or stretcher for times on the order of minutes, to
possibly an hour. This wait time is often directly related to

392

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

the treatment planning and unit programming time required.
Patients should be cared for and kept as comfortable as possible while maintaining applicator positioning. Upon
completion of treatment planning and treatment unit programming, the patient applicators are connected to the treatment unit. Applicator positioning should be verified and all
connections verified. It is the strong recommendation of this
Task Group that treatment planning and treatment unit programming activities not be routinely subject to time constraints.

6. Patient setup and treatment
While the physician and physicist are reviewing the treatment documentation, the radiation therapist can move the
patient into the HDR room and proceed with positioning and
connection of the applicators to the indexer. The radiation
therapist should verify that all emergency equipment is
present, that the survey meter @Geiger–Mueller ~GM! detector and/or ion chamber survey instrument# is present and in
good operating order, and that informed consent forms are
properly signed and filed in the chart. The Task Group notes
that some GM meters register zero exposure in response to
saturation-level radiation fields: the selected instrument
should have a range from 0.1 mR/h to at least 1000 mR/h
and should be checked by the medical physicist for appropriate response near the exposed HDR source. This check
can be performed by placing a survey instrument at specific
distances from the source, say, 100 cm, 200 cm, etc., and by
taking the readings using a TV camera. A good practice is to
know the radiation level just inside the entrance door to the
treatment room when the source is exposed. This measurement can also be done using a TV camera. This measurement
most likely excludes the meter saturation problem since the
reading inside the door should be substantially low. If the
upper range of the available GM meters is 100 mR/h, or if
false readings in high intensity fields are of concern, an ion
chamber should be used to cover the upper extreme of the
exposure-rate range. Before each treatment, the detectors
should be checked for correct function using the classical
three-step process ~battery function, acceptable background
reading when no radiation exposure is present, and correct
response to a radioactive check source!.
The identity of the patient shall be confirmed by an appropriate method. The USNRC Quality Management
Program10 has adopted a more rigorous and inflexible standard, requiring that the patient be identified by two means:
~1! by comparing the patient’s appearance with a photograph; and ~2! by asking the patient’s name or social security
number and comparing this response with the chart. A second individual, e.g., physicist, should check that transfer
tubes are free of kinks and that the applicator-treatment unit
channel number correspondence agrees with the source localization documentation. In addition, the physicist should
check that transfer tubes of the correct length ~for the Nucletron system, 1500 or 1000 mm transfer tubes are available
for interstitial and intracavitary applicators! have been selected. Finally, applicator positioning in the patient should be
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

392

checked against the marks or measurements obtained in the
operating room.
At this point, all treatment documentation should be fully
reviewed and available to the machine operator, including
the written prescription, a table of dwell times and position
settings, and the treatment plan. Prior to initiating treatment,
the operator should check that ~1! a signed prescription is
available, ~2! physicist and physician have signed off on plan
review, ~3! the fraction size listed on the computer plan and
the prescription agree, ~4! the treatment to be given is consistent with the written prescription and the cumulative dose
delivered by previous fractions, and ~5! dwell times, length
settings, and step sizes programmed into the treatment unit
agree with the computer plan listing or table prepared by the
physicist. It is helpful for one individual to read the dwell
times from the HDR printout, while the other compares these
values to the treatment plan. Since manual keyboard entry of
the treatment parameters describing a complex implant may
require several hundred keystrokes, the likelihood of data
entry error is high. Meticulous checking of such manually
entered data is essential: whenever possible, prestored standard configurations or direct entry from the treatment planning computer should be used. In any case, at least one person ~usually the physicist! must check the printed treatment
program against the treatment plan.
The Task Group recommends that the physicist and an
individual qualified to remove the applicators from the patient under emergency conditions shall attend the treatment
and be prepared to detect emergency conditions and implement the appropriate responses. This second person will usually be the attending radiation oncologist who shall be responsible for safe and rapid execution of applicator removal.
However, the attending radiation oncologist may delegate
this duty to an appropriate medical professional, e.g., nurse
or resident physician, who has appropriate training in applicator removal and radiation safety procedures. The recommended approach is more flexible than that imposed by the
USNRC in May 1993. USNRC requires that both an authorized user ~a radiation oncologist authorized to prescribe
brachytherapy! and a medical physicist ~or radiation safety
officer! be physically present at all HDR treatments.11 The
Task Group strongly condemns the use of any health professionals, who are not properly trained with HDR device operation and treatment delivery as an alternative to staffing
HDR treatments by a qualified medical physicist. If warranted by the patient’s medical condition, a nurse and proper
monitoring equipment should be present. Emergency procedures should be planned and reviewed annually by the team
including how and under what conditions applicators are to
be removed and who is responsible for what. Upon initiating
treatment, the physicist should observe the treatment console
and should be aware of which catheter is involved should an
alarm condition interrupt treatment. Whenever treatment is
interrupted, it is essential to check the area monitor to confirm that the source has been retracted.

393

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

393

7. Post-treatment quality assurance

1. Physical plant emergencies

After treatment is completed and the area monitor indicates no exposure in the room, the room and patient should
be surveyed with an appropriate hand-held detector to confirm that the source is fully retracted into its shielded storage
position. As a final check of treatment accuracy, the administered dwell times listed on the treatment unit printout,
should be compared to the originally programmed time. All
QA checklists and documentation should be reviewed for
completeness and filed away in the chart along with the treatment history printed out by the HDR unit. The room and
HDR key should be secured as specified by the user’s license.

These emergencies include fire, physical disasters
~storms, tornadoes, floods, earthquakes, etc.!, and transient
power interruptions or longer power failures. All medical
facilities will have planned responses to physical plant emergencies. These are usually well established separate response
sequences for fire, storms, and power failures that generally
involve, not necessarily always in this sequence, removing
the patient from the area, securing the area, reporting the
problem to the appropriate authorities in the medical facility,
and then recovery from the incident. RAUs meet FDA standards and are well designed to withstand physical damage
during these conventional emergencies; however, those responding to the emergency must know, generally through
posted signs, that the area contains a radioactive device, requiring certain additional precautions. Generally confirmation ~by inspection or radiation survey! by knowledgeable
staff that the RAU is in a safe condition is usually required.
Conventional emergencies such as power loss or a fire in
the device may well effect operation of the device. Loss of
power is handled differently by each manufacturer. However, usually the RAUs have backup batteries or power packs
designed to retract the source during a power failure and to
provide power to the computer or microprocessor to retain
memory and treatment information on the partially delivered
treatment.

V. EMERGENCY PROCEDURES FOR HDR
REMOTE AFTERLOADING UNITS
Even though the likelihood of major emergencies, i.e.,
source detachment during treatment is exceedingly low, this
report strongly recommends that all HDR brachytherapy
treatment users shall learn and periodically retrain to operate
the devices and to respond properly to emergencies, as recently reviewed.26 For HDRB the USNRC has required that
licensees have ‘‘written emergency procedures describing
actions to be taken, including surgical intervention, should
the source not return to the shielded container at the conclusion of treatment.’’ 9 The USNRC also directs the licensee to
have ‘‘appropriate staff and equipment available in support
of these procedures.’’ 9 This directive, and other USNRC
regulations, applies in the 21 states in which the USNRC has
jurisdiction. In the 29 Agreement States this directive and
other USNRC regulations may not currently apply as each
Agreement State has some time and flexibility in adopting
USNRC directives and regulations. However, it is likely that
more Agreement States will be adopting current and proposed USNRC regulations, perhaps in modified form, for
RAUs in the next few years.
A. Routine emergency equipment

Routine emergency safety precautions require either having an emergency container available in the treatment room,
as well as an emergency kit containing Kelly surgical clamps
and long-handled positive spring action forceps for manipulation of the source guide tubes and applicators if the source
fails to return to the safe. These forceps must be readily
available for use. The emergency container should be placed
close to the patient and should be large enough to accept the
entire applicator assembly, containing the source, removed
from any patient. Additional medical supplies ~described
later! and associated devices to assist with emergency applicator removal should be readily available.
B. Emergencies

What constitutes an emergency? We consider emergencies separated into three categories: conventional physical
plant emergencies not directly related to the RAU, and minor
and major emergencies associated with the RAU.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

2. Minor emergencies involving the RAU
This less serious category constitutes abnormal performance of the device that prevents or interrupts treatment
~e.g., loose source guide tube connector, vault door not properly closed, etc.!, followed by recovery actions that correct
the abnormality allowing treatment to resume to termination.
The more serious category involves operator physical intervention ~e.g., room entry! to retract the radioactive source
into the RAU’s protective safe. While major emergencies
have greater possibility for unplanned radiation exposure to
both the patient and operator personnel, minor emergencies
occur more frequently.
Manufacturers offer the operator, through displayed messages or error codes, instructions on how to respond to an
abnormal occurrences or machine malfunction. The type and
number of these error messages usually varies with the complexity of the equipment. Ideally, operators should immediately recognize the meanings of all status lamps, audible
alarms, and printed or displayed messages that indicate malfunctions. However, if the number of error codes is large,
training should focus on recognizing those most likely to
occur most frequently during routine treatments. However, a
complete status code list must be readily available at the
operator’s console for instant access during emergencies.
Any status messages displayed in numeric code must be
identified in well-understood terms, e.g., kinked tube,
jammed cable, etc. Often, it is useful to recast the vendor’s
numeric status message codes into tables that clearly indicate
the status of all indicators ~lamps, audible signals, printed

394

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

394
TABLE V. Approximate doses ~cGy! delivered at distances ~cm!, from 10 Ci
(3.731011 Bq) and 5 Ci (1.8531011 Bq) Ir-192 sources in elapsed time
~minutes!.
Distances ~cm!

Time
~min!

Activity
~Ci!

1

10

25

50

100

0.5

10
5
10
5
10
5
10
5
10
5

366
183
732
366
1460
730
3660
1830
7320
3660

3.7
1.9
7.5
3.7
15
7.5
37
19
75
37

0.60
0.30
1.2
0.60
2.4
1.2
6.0
3.0
12
6.0

0.15
0.08
0.30
0.15
0.60
0.30
1.5
0.75
3.0
1.5

0.037
0.019
0.075
0.037
0.150
0.075
0.370
0.19
0.75
0.37

1.0
2.0
5.0
10
FIG. 5. Approximate dose rate versus distance for 10 Ci (3.731011 Bq) and
5 Ci (1.8531011 Bq) Ir-192 sources.

tape message, etc.! when the code occurs, and clearly state
the recovery actions.
Operators must recognize messages to answer the question ‘‘Can I recover or must I abort the treatment?’’ Recovery actions and operation sequences must be clearly understood and practiced. One reported misadministration
occurred because operators failed to properly respond to a
minor malfunction. For training it is useful to know which
error codes can be safely and readily simulated by the RAU
so operators can be trained to respond to those codes. However, simulation of the emergency must not place the equipment or the operators at risk. Conversely, those malfunctions
that produce error codes that cannot be simulated on the
RAU must be identified so the operators can be trained to
recognize and respond to these situations. A degree of realism is lost in training sessions when the console display cannot produce the indicators for the emergency.

3. Major emergencies
The more serious emergencies, e.g., source retraction failure, patient medical emergency, total computer failure, etc.,
involve operator physical intervention, and possibly the
physical intervention of the radiation oncologist, operators,
and the physicist to retract the high dose rate source into the
safe or to clean a blockage or system fault that is preventing
proper source retraction.
Establishing emergency procedures ~EPs! for these more
serious emergencies generally involves the following steps:
~1! establishing policy about EPs; ~2! preparing initial action
sequences for written EPs; ~3! identifying and obtaining
equipment necessary to perform EPs; ~4! testing initial written EPs; ~5! revising action sequences and written EPs following tests and written final EPs; ~6! preparation of training
materials and didactic education of staff in EPs; ~7! applied
~hands-on! execution of EPs; ~8! necessary revisions in EPs
identified during training; and ~9! repeat EP training at specified intervals.
The emergency may be observed by activation of emergency indicators at the console, by simple observation that a
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

treatment is too long, by noticing that the computer system
clearly has failed, or that an excessive radiation level exists
after treatment.
In the design of EPs that require personnel intervention
and possible entry into the vault, the procedures must be
designed to reduce the radiation dose to the patient by retracting the source from the patient as soon as possible while
minimizing the radiation exposure to personnel performing
the source retraction. Figure 5 graphs the dose rate, in cGy/
min, as a function of distance, in cm, from 10 and 5 Ci
sources. Table V shows the dose to personnel as a function
of distance and time, for both 10 and 5 Ci sources. Figure 6
shows dose rates at the periphery of the volume of tissue
irradiated by a static 10 Ci source. The dose rate is about 400
cGy/min at the periphery of a sphere of 10 cm3. Clearly
speed is of the essence in removing the source from the
patient in order to limit the dose to small volumes of local
tissue.
Generally, during an emergency, the goal should be to
keep effective dose equivalents to personnel to less than the
5 Sv ~or 5000 mrem! per year limit. As shown in Table V, if
one’s distance is 25 cm from the source during an emer-

FIG. 6. Dose rates at the periphery of volumes of tissue irradiated by a static
10 Ci (3.731011 Bq) Ir-192 source.

395

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

gency, depending on source activity, one would receive a
3–6 cGy dose in about 5 min while resolving the emergency.
However, at 1 cm, the dose to the patient would be about
1830–3660 cGy of undesired dose. Clearly, depending on
source activity, the source must be retracted within 1 to 2
min to keep the dose to the patient to within nominal values
of several hundreds of centigrays normally associated with
various fractionation regimens. While the radiobiology of
dose and fractionation is beyond the scope of this paper, an
unplanned local dose approximately equivalent to a planned
treatment dose fraction, while undesired, is unlikely to cause
serious consequences, such as the death of the patient. Hence
speed is all important in executing emergency procedures to
minimize not only the dose to the patient but also the exposure to personnel.
Manufacturers provide suggested emergency procedures
if the source fails to return to the safe. These generally are
short single page synopsis, suitable for posting, of the necessary sequential steps involved in the emergency procedure.
They assume the physical integrity of the applicator is maintained. These EPs are specific to the RAU but generally involve the following sequence, assuming that if the initial
action fails to lead to recovery, that the following action is
required. The generic sequence is ~1! observation at console
of error message and emergency indicators ~audible and visible alarms!; ~2! recovery at the console ~e.g., pressing an
emergency off button!; ~3! entry into the room with a portable radiation survey meter ~opening the door activates the
interlock that retracts the source!; ~4! observation of radiation levels in the room ~by mounted monitors or portable
survey meters!; ~5! recovery at the RAU ~pressing an emergency off button on the RAU!; ~6! manual retraction of the
source ~using a hand crank!; ~7! patient survey and RAU
survey ~confirming source is in the safe!; ~8! applicator removal and placement in the emergency container; ~9! patient
survey and emergency container survey ~to confirm source is
not in the patient and is in the emergency container!; and
~10! removal of patient from the vault ~with subsequent redundant survey with a GM meter!.
Glasgow26 has described the emergency equipment for a
GammaMed IIi HDR unit, assuming the integrity of the applicator is maintained. The emergency kit consists of equipment ~GM meter, ionization survey meter, Danger: Open
Radiation Source - Keep Out! sign! to be at the operating
console outside the treatment vault and equipment, listed in
Table VI, to be placed in the vault in the emergency kit prior
to the treatment. If, for any reason applicator removal is not
the first choice, then, ~1! extract the source from the applicator ~first attempted from the distal end connection from the
applicator, failing that, from the proximal end connection of
the applicator!; if the source cannot be removed from the
applicator, ~2! remove applicators by a qualified radiation
oncologist. The applicator removal procedures are identified
by applicator type ~e.g., small intraluminal, large intracavitary, and sutured interstitial applicators.! Table VII lists an
abbreviated sequence of general steps for the removal of the
small intraluminal and large intracavitary applicators. Table
VIII lists the explicit steps for the removal of a sutured inMedical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

395
TABLE VI. Suggested components for an emergency kit for an RAU.
A. At the console outside the room:
Sign-‘‘Danger-Open Radiation Source-Keep Out!’’
Geiger–Muller meter ~0.1–100 mR/h range!
Ionization survey meter ~1–1000 mR/h range!
B. Inside the room:
Short handle ~12–15 in.! positive spring action forceps
Long handle ~18–24 in.! positive spring action forceps
Kelly surgical clamps
High quality flashlight and fresh spare batteries
Suture removal kit
Suture kit

terstitialapplicator. Table IX lists the specific components of
the suture removal and resuturing kit.
All of these discussions of emergency procedures assumed that the integrity of the applicator was maintained.
However, applicators can fail, as occurred when a source
jammed in a bent plastic catheter.27 This illustrates the importance of the fundamental rule of EPs: EPs must be pre-

TABLE VII. Physician surgical intervention procedures.
The procedures assume that:
~1! the applicator has not ruptured and that the source is in the
applicator;
~2! all attempts to remove the source drive cable with source from
the applicator failed;
~3! the applicator can be quickly removed in a medically safe
manner;
~4! the physician has direct responsibility for removing any
applicator; other personnel can assist, but minimize the number
of personnel present;
~5! the applicator must be removed as quickly as possible;
~6! all procedures required to protect personnel from blood apply.
SMALL INTRALUMINAL TUBE OR LARGE
INTRACAVITARY APPLICATORS
~1! Release the tube or applicator from any retaining device.
~2! Using the Kelly clamps or other remote manipulators grasp the
tube or applicator near the connection to the source guide tube
to the tube or applicator.
~3! Extract the tube or applicator from the patient. Do NOT grasp
the tube or applicator with your hand. With a second set of
Kelly clamps or remote manipulators grasp the tube or
applicator near its end and place it into the emergency
container.
~4! Place the shield cover on the top of the emergency container.
~5! Remove the patient from the interior of the treatment room to
the maze, away from the emergency container, but still in the
shielded portion of the maze. Survey the patient with the
ionization survey meter to ensure the source is out. Remove the
patient from the room and repeat the survey with the GM
meter.
~6! Lock the door; post the door with the sign ‘‘Danger-Open
Radiation Source-Keep Out!’’. Notify posted list of
personnel.

396

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

396

pared assuming that the initial recovery action sequence
fails, that subsequent recovery action sequences fail, and that
the assumptions on which the EPs are based may be invalidated during the emergency. Emergency procedures should
be prepared, if possible, for the worst case scenarios.
What emergency actions are required if the source separates from the cable and falls on the floor, or, if the source
capsule ruptures and disperses the source element on the
floor? Retrieval of just the source or source element generally may require special retrieval equipment and radiation
precautions, and should not be considered as part of the normal emergency action sequence involving the radiation
therapy operators and radiation oncologists. If radiation surveys reveal the source is not in the patient, the safe, nor the
emergency can, but is elsewhere in the vault, speedy evacuation of the patient and personnel from the room will minimize radiation exposure. However, one must ensure, by careful radiation surveys, that no radioactive material has been
tracked out of the vault on the bottoms of shoes. The vault
should be secured, posted with a Danger: Open Radioactive
Source - Keep Out! sign, and a notification process begun of
those responsible for source retrieval. Normally, the vendor
will assume responsibility for source retrieval.
The ultimate emergency would be to lose a source in a
patient; some accident in which the applicator fails, and the
source breaks loose and lodges in the patient. Theoretically,
this would not occur because the license application commits
the user that they shall not conduct any treatment procedure
for which a decoupled or jammed source could not be removed expeditiously from the patient and placed in the
shielded container.27 Following an emergency procedure, it
is essential that the users know the dose delivered if the
treatment was interrupted and how to program the unit for
the remaining portion of the treatment.

TABLE VIII. Physician surgical intervention procedures.

C. Practical concerns

TABLE IX. Suggested items for removal of sutured applicators and resuturing the anatomic site, if necessary. All items are in sterile packages.

Practice of EPs generally will cause their revision to make
them more practical. The contents of the emergency kit must
be carefully selected and tested. For example, the original
emergency kit contents described by Glasgow26 subsequently
was reduced to the 9 items listed in Table VI. Personnel
should use their wristwatches for estimating all elapsed times
during emergencies, as wall clocks generally display different times in different rooms.
Personnel should know the status of all radiation indicators in the room at the successful completion of an emergency procedure. If radiation alarms are to be activated for
HDRB, they should be off when the source is properly in the
emergency container. They should be tested to ensure that is
the case. The exposure rate around a 4 in. diameter emergency lead can with a 1 in. thick wall, containing a 10 Ci
source, is about 1 mR/h at 0.5 m and exceeds 10 mR/h only
near the edge of the emergency container. A radiation survey
of the radiation exposure rates around an emergency container containing a 10 Ci source should be made to confirm
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

The procedures assume the same assumption as in Table VII.
SUTURED CATHETER OR NEEDLE APPLICATORS
~1! Identify at the console, by display or by visible inspection by
the CCTV of the transparent source guide tubes, the source
guide tube that contains the source drive cable and source and
the catheter or needle to which it is attached.
~2! Use the suture removal kit; working as quickly as possible, cut
all sutures retaining the identified catheter, needle, or, if
necessary, the device holding the catheters and needles.
~3! Using the Kelly clamps or other remote manipulators grasp the
catheter or needle and carefully extract it from the patient and
place it in the emergency container. DO NOT grasp the
catheter or needles with your hand. If the patient could bleed, a
second person should have swabs available to apply
compression.
~4! Place the shield cover on the top of the emergency container.
~5! Institute the patient removal and survey sequence and room
security sequence described in Table VII, steps ~5! and ~6!.

that the container shields properly and that radiation monitors cease alarming when the source is placed in the container.
D. Conclusions

The RAUs are complex devices that require that the personnel operating, using, and caring for patients with these devices be exceptionally well-trained in normal operation of
the units and be equally well-trained to respond to minor and
major emergencies. Properly trained staff must be able to
recognize errors and to recover from minor emergencies
without incident. They must also be able to respond to serious emergencies that involve vault entry and emergency

A. Sutured Applicator Removal Three suture removal kits with
scissors and overwrap
Four betadine swab sticks
Ten 434 in. 12-ply gauze
Ten cotton tip applicators
Six latex glove sets
B. Suture Kit
Small towel clips
Blair brown needle holder
Webster needle holder
5 1/2 in. SB scissors
6 in. tissue forceps
Adson tissue forceps
Curved mosquito forceps
Straight mosquito forceps
434 in. gauze sponge
Drape sheet
Green towel
Chromic gut suture
4-0 silk suture
Proline polypropylene suture

397

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

397

TABLE X. Pretreatment QA checks. For routine applications, these tests can be performed by the radiation
therapist or source curator.
System tested

Test end point

Reusable applicators,
e.g., intracavitary
applicators

Completeness,
operable condition, and
structural integrity

All applicator components, caps, cylinder segments,
clamps, tools, and other accessories available. Plastic
components not cracked or abraded and fit tightly over
metal tubes. Applicator appropriately sterilized.

Single-use interstitial
and transluminal
applicators

Identity
Correct function

Correct diameter and length
Buttons, connectors, etc., fit on applicators. Applicators
not kinked. If indicated, perform simulated treatment on
machine.
All accessories present
If active source positioning requires fixed length, sound
each applicator

Completeness
Positional accuracy

Test methodology

Templates and other
custom devices

Correct function
Identity

Correct hole diameter
Review spacing, dimensions, etc., with physician or
physicist

Operating room
readiness

All required equipment
and medical resources
available

Arrangement in advance. Verify on day of procedure.

Remote afterloader

Correct function of
device and safety
accessories

Execute daily QA protocol the morning of the procedure

source retraction. Staff properly executing recovery actions
during these emergencies are not likely to receive dose
equivalents that exceed annual regulatory limits for whole
body exposure. Unplanned local doses to the patients are
likely to be similar to prescribed doses if recovery actions are
executed promptly. Proper, well tested, readily available
emergency equipment will facilitate speedy recovery during
serious emergencies. Personnel must receive appropriate and
frequent training, including practice sessions with simulated
emergencies, to be properly prepared for emergencies.

Any single major abnormal occurrence or unit malfunction must be thoroughly investigated, usually by contacting
the vendor, and corrected before the unit is used for additional treatment. Thorough quality assurance is required after
such incidents occur.
APPENDIX: RECOMMENDED CHECK-OFF LIST
The TG-59 recommends that institutional HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery procedures address the safety and

TABLE XI. Essential physics and QA duties during applicator insertion.
System tested
Applicator identity

Test end point

Test methodology

Applicator type and dimensions
~e.g., cylinder or colpostat
diameter! consistent with
clinician’s intent

Hand requested applicator to physician, make certain
physician knows which one is inserted into patient and is
compatible with selected modality ~HDR, LDR, Manual,
etc.!

Limitations of afterloader respected

Adequate distal margin and proximal leader to allow
connection to treatment unit. Treatment volume within
programmable range. Catheters not kinked or constricted
during insertion.
Direct visualization

Applicator insertion
All adapters, radiographic
markers, clamps correctly
assembled
Location of target
volume

Operating room data relevant to
defining distal- and proximalmost dwell positions in each
catheter identified

Ask radiation oncologist how target volume/area is
identified. Record all relevant information, e.g., surgical
clip location, bronchoscope insertion depth to tumor
margin, radiographic landmarks, etc.

Treatment record

Inserted applicators accurately
recorded

Verify diagram drawn against observations

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

398

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

398

TABLE XII. Essential physics and QA duties during radiographic examination of the implant.
System tested

Test end point

Applicator identity

Applicator numbering system
matches diagram

One person attaches labels, another observes
and records data on diagram. Recorded data
checked.

Simulation marker
identity

Radiographically distinct
markers distributed so as to
enhance matching on two
radiographs

Consult experienced dosimetrist or physicist for
complex cases

Applicator-marker identity
correctly recorded. Markers
correctly inserted

One person inserts markers, another observes,
verifies, and records data on diagram

Treatment record

Inserted applicators accurately
recorded

Verify diagram drawn against observations

Radiographs

Beam geometry satisfies
reconstruction algorithm,
adequate quality and catheter
separation for matching

Dosimetrist reviews radiographs

Radiograph quality adequate
for clinical evaluation

Radiation oncologist reviews radiographs. AP
and lateral views obtained if oblique views used
for implant reconstruction

QA checks listed below. The Task Group notes that not all
items are applicable to all types of equipment and procedures
and that individual users may wish to augment this list to
reflect their institutional practice patterns, staffing level and
cost-benefit analyses. Individual users should adapt the rec-

Test methodology

ommended QA procedures to suit their needs. The check-off
list summarizes the TG-59 Report recommendations contained in Tables X–XVII.
The central purpose of the check-off list is to define QA
and safety checks to be performed during the execution of

TABLE XIII. Essential elements of the treatment prescription process. The individual listed first is responsible
for executing the activity while the second individual is responsible for verifying the procedure.
Responsible
individual
Radiation oncologist

Physicist

Activity
Complete, sign, and date
prescription
Review radiographs and mark
treatment and/or target
volume and sign
Define dose prescription and
optimization criteria

Radiation oncologist
and physicist

Methodology

Define treatment planning
constraints ~maximum and
minimum doses, normal
tissue tolerances, etc.!

Physicist/Dosimetrist: Question deviations
from treatment policies or customary practice

If high-frequency procedure or clinical indication
for treatment, written treatment policies which
describe the dose specification and optimization
processes should be available
If procedure is infrequent, customized, or
otherwise unusual, physician and physicist
should work together to address these
questions
If standard pattern used ~e.g., intracavitary
implant!, procedure type and protocol identified

Physicist

Active dwell positions selected
and documented

Dosimetrist

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

If identified and marked radiographically
confirm that the all relevant data defining target
volume is consistent with proposed dwell
position distribution

399

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

399

TABLE XIV. Critical steps in the treatment planning process. The individual listed first ~primary! is responsible
for executing the activity while the second individual ~secondary! is responsible for verifying the procedure.
Primary/secondary
individual

Physicist/Dosimetrist

Activity

Review treatment
planningprocedure

Methodology
Physicist reviews with dosimetrist:
which written procedure, if any, to be followed.
or identifies reconstruction, optimization, dose
specification procedures to be used for this case
If standard pattern used ~e.g., intracavitary
implant!, procedure type and protocol identified

Dosimetrist/Physicist

Active dwell positions
localization
Channel numbers matched to radiographic
image, treatment length, and first and last dwell
positions in each catheter calculated. Physicist
to review.

Dosimetrist

Verify plan input data

Radiation oncologist

Assess clinical adequacy of
plan
Accept or reject plan

Compare patient name on prescription,
radiographs, localization data, and HDR
treatment schedule
Confirm date/time displayed on RTP, and that
displayed source strength agrees with source
inventory or chart
Check entered daily dose against prescription,
for each catheter check length, dwell spacing,
and active dwell position numbers against
localization protocol or planning procedure
Check radiograph orientations, distances,
magnifications, and gantry angles against
requirements for selected source position
reconstruction algorithm
Intended volume treated to desired dose

each individual patient treatment. The checklist is intended
not only to maximize safe and accurate execution of each
treatment, but to define the procedure flow. Our recommendations assume that a periodic device-oriented QA program
for the remote afterloader, treatment planning system, applicators, QA test equipment, and other accessories has been
implemented according the AAPM Task Group 56
guidelines.6 TG-56 recommends that QA protocols be executed at annual, quarterly ~following each source exchange!, and daily intervals. The associated tests include
HDR source calibration and other functional parameters testing which ensure that the desired dose distribution and
spatial-temporal distribution of radioactivity are delivered as
intended by the attending radiation oncologist. The device
QA protocol also addresses patient and staff safety, radiation
barrier adequacy, and function of critical safety interlocks
and warning systems. In contrast, the TG-59 report emphasizes day-of-treatment checks. An important component is
the daily QA equipment checks, which are reproduced below
from the AAPM Task Group 56 Report.6 The purpose of this
set of global but nonspecific tests is to confirm the correct
operation of the treatment unit and availability of needed
accessories on the day of treatment. The additional checks
listed below emphasize accuracy and safety of treatment
planning and delivery processes, and are designed to enhance
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

Optimization goals and constraints satisfied

correct execution of assigned tasks by the treatment delivery
team and accurate information transfer from one team member to another, rather than correct operation of equipment.
In order to facilitate correct communication among treatment delivery team members, the use of certain forms may
be recommended. For example;
~1! Prescription Form and Daily Treatment Record. See
Treatment prescription below.
~2! Pre-treatment Physicist Treatment Plan Review, which
should have entries for all input and output to be
checked. See ~2!–~7!.
~3! Daily Equipment QA Protocol as described in 1.
~4! Dwell-Position Localization Form for complex multicatheter implants ~see Fig. 4!.
~5! ‘‘Master QA Checkoff List’’ which describes the QA
test sequence and mentions all tests not covered by the
more specific forms ~2!–~5!.
Additionally, the signed Informed Consent Form and other
critical technical and clinical information should be available
in the patient chart.
In the following, a suggested list of QA checkoff items is
given in order of HDR procedure.

400

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

400

‘TABLE XV. Pretreatment physicist review of HDR treatment plan and dwell-time calculations.
End point

Check methodology

Patient identity

Compare patient names/numbers/dates printed on
prescription, simulator radiographs, chart, and localization
form

Input data

As described in text

Positional accuracy/
Implant geometry

Plan optimization process

Applicators modeled in treatment plan match those of
operating room description and implant diagram
Verify matching and localization calculations against
radiographs if interstitial ortransluminal implant.
Compare active dwell positions, dwell separation, and
treatment length listed on computer plan to localization
form or to appropriate treatment planning procedure.
Compare three orthogonal dimensions of implant measured
from AP and lateral radiographs to corresponding
dimensions of graphic plan. Check radiograph orientations,
distances, magnifications, and gantry anglesagainst
requirements for selected source position reconstruction
algorithm.
Appropriate optimization option used.
Dose optimization and dose specification points in correct
location relative to dwell positions on graphic plan.
Expected isodose curve passes through dose specification
points.
Optimization algorithm produces expected distribution of
dwell weights, coverage of target volume, and distribution/
magnitude of hot spots or peripheral/central
minimum dose ratio. Implant quality parameters derived
from dose-volume histograms, if available and previously
validated, should be checked.

Dose calculation
accuracy

~RAK!/dose ratio falls within expected range.
Assuming distribution of dwell times on computer plan
printout, manually
calculated dose agrees with dose calculated by RTP system
within expected tolerance.
Doses at clinically important points of interest agree with
values interpolated from isodoses.
Isodose curves calculated in appropriate planes.

Clinical adequacy

Prescribed dose, applicator selected, and dose distribution
consistent with Policies of Treatment for patient’s disease
or physicist’s understanding of physician’s clinical intent.
Volume covered by prescription isodose surface consistent
with all known target localization data.
Maximum dose and dose to critical anatomic structures,
including previously administered therapy, within accepted
range.

Daily treatment record

Source strength, total dwell time, total IRAK, no. and type
of applicators correctly entered into daily treatment record.

1. Daily QA checks on the remote afterloader

~a! Correct function of
~1! backup battery;
~2! audible and visual treatment status ~source and cable status! indicators at console and above door;
~3! independent aerial radiation monitor~s!;
~4! audio-visual communication systems;
~5! remote afterloader during a simulated treatment;
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

~6! door interlock and audible/visual error and alarm indicators;
~7! dedicated fluoroscopy/imaging system if available.
~b! Accuracy of
~1! decayed source strength programmed into treatment unit
and planning system;
~2! timer and radiation output using tertiary standard or
timer sport check. ~The AAPM TG-59 recommends, but

401

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

401

TABLE XVI. Pretreatment safety checks to be performed after patient setup and treatment programming.
End point

Individual

Patient identity

Operator

Any method appropriate to patient mental
condition and degree of operator familiarity with
patient. Check patient name against that on
chart and treatment plan.

Prescription followed

Operator

Compare dose/fraction on treatment plan and prescription.
Compare total dose and no. of fractions against treatment
previously given.
Compare source strength on treatment plan and remote
afterloader.
Check: Prescription filled out and signed, physician and
physicist have signed off on treatment documentation.
Correct length transfer tubes used; applicator no.-channel
no. correspondence correct.
Dwell times and positional settings printed by afterloader
match treatment plan.

Setup accuracy

Physicist

Programmed afterloader settings match treatment plan.
Correct length transfer tubes used; applicator no.-channel
no. correspondence correct.
Applicator positioning checked against operating room
measurements, reference marks

Operator

Methodology

does not require, a global test of timer accuracy and
source output by obtaining an integrated reading using a
radiation detector and jig for fixing the source-detector
geometry which has been previously calibrated against
the secondary standard used for quarterly source calibration.!
~3! Source positioning.
~c! Availability, condition, and correct function of
~1! Emergency Procedures Kit and Emergency Safe;
~2! Emergency procedures or instructions;
~3! Treatment unit operator’s manual;
~4! Handheld GM counter and/or survey meter.
2. Applicator preparation

~1! All applicator components and accessory available.
~2! Plastic components in good condition.
~3! Applicators’ correct length and diameters.

~4! Applicator properly sterilized and valid date of sterilization.
3. Applicator insertion

~1! Patient identification.
~2! Label dummy markers.
~3! Hand and check-off requested applicator to physician.
~4! Applicator configuration same as preplan ~predesign or
plan intention!.
~5! Record all relevant information and draw diagram
against observation and compare with preplan.
4. Implant localization and simulator

~1! Patient identification.
~2! Labels on dummy markers.
~3! Compare dummy marker drawing against the plan drawing.
~4! Quality of the localization radiographs.

TABLE XVII. Post-treatment QA checks.
End point

Individual

Patient/personnel
safety

Operator

Treatment accuracy

Operator

Chart order

Operator

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

Methodology
Area monitor checked before entering the room.
Enter room leading with survey instrument to
confirm complete retraction of source
HDR device shut down and secured after
patient removed
Fill in daily treatment record.
Compare total dwell time on treatment unit
printout agrees with calculation.
All forms and checklists complete and properly
filed in chart.

402

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

~5! Label the radiographs.
~6! Depict or draw treatment volume on radiographs or elsewhere.
5. Treatment prescription

~1! Physician’s signature and the date.
~2! Patient identity.
~3! Applicator specifications.
~4! Type of treatment and the treatment site.
~5! Total dose, fraction size, and a number of fractions.
~6! Treatment date and time.
~7! Overall treatment strategy including HDR and external
beam.
~8! Optimization goals and constraints satisfactory.
~9! Check if extra dummy wire test is needed because of
tight bends.
6. Treatment plan

~1! Software version number, source calibration date, source
strength.
~2! Today’s date, and source strength against decayed
strength.
~3! Correct system data file.
~4! Default parameters used for dose calculations.
7. Pretreatment review „independent check…

A. General

402

~6! Source geometry reconstruction.
~7! Start and end dwell positions.
~8! Correct Indexer Length for each catheter.
~9! Radiograph orientation, magnifications, and film-tosource distance.
~10! Applicator points coordinates.
~11! Correct dose optimization points on printout and plot.
~12! Correct prescription-point dose on printout and plot.
~13! Reasonable plot for the positions of the patient points.
~14! Check on the printout that the doses to the patient
points are reasonable.
~15! Reasonable agreement with previous plan.
~16! Smooth dummy wire travel.

D. Program card printout
Check that the information on the program card printout
is correct and the same as that in the prescription and plan
printout.
~1! Same step size as in plan printout.
~2! Total number of catheters agreeing with that in the plan
printout.
~3! Total treatment time agreeing with that in the plan printout.
~4! Indexer length agreeing with that in the plan printout.
~5! Correct channel number~s!.
~6! First and last dwell positions agreeing with the plan
printout.
~7! Correct indexer length and offset for each catheter.

Should have
~1! Physician Prescription Form, completed, signed, and
dated;
~2! HDR Physics Form, filled out, signed, and dated;
~3! all simulator radiographs;
~4! patient chart, including all previous HDR plans;
~5! isodose plot of current plan, signed by physician;
~6! printout of current plan;
~7! printout from the program card for the current plan.

B. Radiographs
~1! Proper set~s! of radiographs.
~2! Correct radiograph orientation on the digitizer.
~3! Correct numbering of catheters and dwell positions.
~4! Information transferred from initial planner to radiographs.
~5! All desired patient dose points properly defined and
marked.
~6! Correct dose origin in the same place on all radiographs.

C. Plan and plot
~1! Patient identification.
~2! Source activities from the table and from the planning
system agree to within 0.5%.
~3! Source strength, ID, date of calibration.
~4! Correct number of catheters.
~5! Step size.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

8. Post-treatment QA

~1! Verify each treatment time on the printout.
~2! Verify radiation level at console ~background!, on patient, and on the unit.
~3! Detach treatment applicator from the unit.
~4! Retrieve metal adapters on bronchial catheter.
~5! Clean all coupling mechanisms.
~6! Return the treatment unit to storage area.
~7! Retrieve treatment printout file appropriately.
~8! Document total treatment interruption time and number
of error conditions.
~9! Turn off control panel and lock keys in designated area.
~10! File daily treatment record.
9. Others

~1! Periodic check on staff annual retraining.
~2! Periodic emergency test.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Task Group appreciates the following consultants,
representing the US Government, the Health Physics community and industries who have contributed to this report:
Ralph E. Shuping, Ph.D., U.S. Food and Drug Administra-

403

Kubo et al.: HDR brachytherapy treatment delivery

tion; James A. Smith, MS., U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission; Marcia B. Hartman, MS., University of California
Davis Medical Center; Dan Hardesty, Varian Associates;
Steve Teague, Nucletron-Odelft Corporation; Steve Woodruff, Frank Barker Associates.
a!

Electronic-mail: williamson_jf@castor.wustl.edu
United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, ‘‘Loss of an Iridium-192
Source and Therapy Misadministration at Indiana Regional Cancer Center, Indiana, Pennsylvania on November 16, 1992,’’ Report NUREG1480, Washington, D.C., 1993.
2
United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, ‘‘Human Factors Evaluation of Remote Afterloading Brachytherapy,’’ J. R. Allan, R. T. Kelley,
M. L. Quinn, J. W. Gwynne III, R. A. Moore, F. A. Muckler, J. Kasumovic, W. M. Saunders, R. P. Lepage, E. Chin, I. Schoenfield, and D. I.
Serig, NUREG/CR-6125 ~Vols. 1, 2, and 3!, United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, D.C., May, 1995.
3
G. P. Glasgow, J. D. Bourland, P. W. Grigsby, J. A. Meli, and K. A.
Weaver, ‘‘Remote Afterloading Technology, Report No. 41 of the American Association of Physicists in Medicine Task Group No. 41’’ ~American Institute of Physics, New York, 1993!.
4
J. F. Williamson, G. A. Ezzell, A. O. Olch, and B. T. Thomadsen, ‘‘Quality Assurance for High Dose Rate Brachytherapy,’’ in Textbook on High
Dose Rate Brachytherapy, edited by S. Nag ~Futura, Armonk, NY, 1994!,
pp. 147–212.
5
G. J. Kutcher, L. Coia, M. Gillin, W. F. Hanson, S. Leibel, R. J. Morton,
J. R. Palta, J. A. Purdy, L. E. Reinstein, G. K. Svensson, M. Weller, and
L. Wingfield, Comprehensive QA for Radiation Oncology: AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 40, AAPM Report No. 46,
American Association of Physicists in Medicine ~American Institute of
Physics, New York, 1994!.
6
R. Nath, L. L. Anderson, J. A. Meli, A. J. Olch, J. A. Stitt, and J. F.
Williamson, ‘‘Code of practice for brachytherapy physics: AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 56,’’ Med. Phys. 24, 1557–1598
~1997!.
7
M. B. Podgorsak, L. A. DeWerd, and B. R. Paliwal, ‘‘The half-life of
high dose rate Ir-192 source,’’ Med. Phys. 20, 1257–1259 ~1993!.
8
United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, ‘‘Enforcement Actions:
Significant Actions Resolved-Medical Licenses,’’ NUREG-094: Vol. 13,
No. 3, Part 2; July–Sept., Washington, D.C., 1994.
9
United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, ‘‘Quality Management in
Remote Afterloading Brachytherapy,’’ United States Nuclear Regulatory
Commission. NUREG/CR-6276, Washington, D.C., 1995.
10
United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, ‘‘Quality Management
Program and Misadministrations,’’ Federal Register 56 ~143!: 34104–
34122, Thursday, 25 July 1991.
11
United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, ‘‘Release of Patients after
Brachytherapy Treatment with Remote Afterloading Devices,’’ NRC Bulletin 93-01 20 April 1993, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, D.C.
12
J. F. Williamson, L. L. Anderson, P. W. Grigsby, A. Martinez, R. Nath,
D. Neblett, A. Olch, and K. Weaver, ‘‘American Endocurietherapy Society recommendations for specification of brachytherapy source strength,’’
1

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 4, April 1998

403
Endocurietherapy/Hyperthermia Oncology 9, 1–7 ~1993!.
International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurement Report
No. 38, ‘‘Dose and volume specification for reporting intracavitary
therapy in gynecology,’’ Bethesda, MD, 1985.
14
L. L. Anderson, R. Nath, A. J. Olch, and J. Roy, ‘‘American Endocurietherapy recommendations for dose specification in brachytherapy,’’
Endocurietherapy/Hyperthermia Oncology 7, 1–12 ~1991!.
15
J. F. Williamson, ‘‘Simulation and source localization procedures for
pulsed and high dose-rate brachytherapy,’’ in Quality Assurance: Activity
Special Report No. 7 ~Nucletron-Odelft International B. V., Veenendaal,
The Netherlands, 1995!, pp. 57–65.
16
B. R. Thomadsen, P. V. Houdek, R. van der Laarse, G. Edmundson, I. K.
Kolkman-Duerloo, and A. G. Vissar, ‘‘Treatment planning and optimization,’’ in Textbook on High Dose Rate Brachytherapy, edited by S. Nag
~Futura, Armonk, NY, 1994!, pp. 79–145.
17
G. A. Ezzell and R. W. Luthmann, ‘‘Clinical implementation of dwelltime optimization techniques for single stepping-source remote afterloaders,’’ in Brachytherapy Physics, edited by J. F. Williamson, B. T. Thomadsen, and R. Nath ~Medical Physics, Madison, 1995!, pp. 617–640.
18
B. R. Thomadsen, S. Shahabi, J. A. Stitt, D. A. Buchler, F. J. Fowler, B.
R. Paliwal, and T. J. Kinsella, ‘‘High dose rate intracavitary brachytherapy for carcinoma of the cervix: the Madison system: II. Procedural
and physical considerations,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 24, 349–
357 ~1992!.
19
B. R. Thomadsen, Chapter 32, ‘‘Clinical implication of remote afterloading, interstitial brachytherapy,’’ in Brachytherapy Physics, edited by J. F.
Williamson, B. R. Thomadsen, and R. Nath ~Medical Physics Publishing,
Madison, 1995!, pp. 647–677.
20
Radium dosage, the Manchester system, edited by W. J. Meredith ~Livingstone, Edinburgh, 1967!.
21
H. Kubo, ‘‘Verification of treatment plans by mathematical formulas for
single catheter HDR brachytherapy,’’ Med. Dosimetry 17, 151–155
~1992!.
22
H. Kubo and R. B. Chin, ‘‘Simple mathematical formulas for quickchecking of single-catheter high dose rate brachytherapy treatment
plans,’’ Endocurietherapy/Hyperthermia Oncol. 8, 165–169 ~1992!.
23
R. D. Rogus, M. J. Smith, and H. D. Kubo, ‘‘An equation to QA check
the total treatment time for single-catheter HDR brachytherapy of known
length and dose prescription depth,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys.
40, 245–248 ~1998!.
24
See, for example, J. F. Williamson, G. A. Ezzell, A. Olch, and B. R.
Thomadsen, ‘‘Quality assurance for high dose rate brachytherapy,’’ in
High dose rate brachytherapy: A textbook, edited by S. Nag ~Futura,
Armonk, NY, 1994!, pp. 147–212.
25
G. A. Ezzell, ‘‘Quality assurance of treatment plans for optimized high
dose rate brachytherapy,’’ Med. Phys. 21, 659–661 ~1994!.
26
G. P. Glasgow, ‘‘Radiation control, personnel training and emergency
procedures for remote afterloading units,’’ Endocurietherapy/
Hyperthermia Oncology 12, 67–79 ~1996!.
27
United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission Informational Notice 9437: ‘‘Misadministration caused by a bent interstitial needle during
brachytherapy procedure,’’ Office of Nuclear Materials Safety and Safeguards, Washington, D.C., 1994.
13

