IAEA Safety Standards
for protecting people and the environment

Radiation Protection and
Safety in Medical Uses
of Ionizing Radiation
Jointly sponsored by

PA H O

WH O

OPS

O MS

Specific Safety Guide
No. SSG-46
O PA S

O MS

IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS AND RELATED PUBLICATIONS
IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS
Under the terms of Article III of its Statute, the IAEA is authorized to establish or adopt
standards of safety for protection of health and minimization of danger to life and property, and
to provide for the application of these standards.
The publications by means of which the IAEA establishes standards are issued in the
IAEA Safety Standards Series. This series covers nuclear safety, radiation safety, transport
safety and waste safety. The publication categories in the series are Safety Fundamentals,
Safety Requirements and Safety Guides.
site

Information on the IAEA’s safety standards programme is available on the IAEA Internet
http://www-ns.iaea.org/standards/

The site provides the texts in English of published and draft safety standards. The texts
of safety standards issued in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian and Spanish, the IAEA Safety
Glossary and a status report for safety standards under development are also available. For
further information, please contact the IAEA at: Vienna International Centre, PO Box 100,
1400 Vienna, Austria.
All users of IAEA safety standards are invited to inform the IAEA of experience in their
use (e.g. as a basis for national regulations, for safety reviews and for training courses) for the
purpose of ensuring that they continue to meet users’ needs. Information may be provided via
the IAEA Internet site or by post, as above, or by email to Official.Mail@iaea.org.
RELATED PUBLICATIONS
The IAEA provides for the application of the standards and, under the terms of Articles III
and VIII.C of its Statute, makes available and fosters the exchange of information relating
to peaceful nuclear activities and serves as an intermediary among its Member States for this
purpose.
Reports on safety in nuclear activities are issued as Safety Reports, which provide
practical examples and detailed methods that can be used in support of the safety standards.
Other safety related IAEA publications are issued as Emergency Preparedness and
Response publications, Radiological Assessment Reports, the International Nuclear Safety
Group’s INSAG Reports, Technical Reports and TECDOCs. The IAEA also issues reports
on radiological accidents, training manuals and practical manuals, and other special safety
related publications.
Security related publications are issued in the IAEA Nuclear Security Series.
The IAEA Nuclear Energy Series comprises informational publications to encourage
and assist research on, and the development and practical application of, nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. It includes reports and guides on the status of and advances in technology,
and on experience, good practices and practical examples in the areas of nuclear power, the
nuclear fuel cycle, radioactive waste management and decommissioning.

RADIATION PROTECTION AND
SAFETY IN MEDICAL USES
OF IONIZING RADIATION

The following States are Members of the International Atomic Energy Agency:
AFGHANISTAN
ALBANIA
ALGERIA
ANGOLA
ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA
ARGENTINA
ARMENIA
AUSTRALIA
AUSTRIA
AZERBAIJAN
BAHAMAS
BAHRAIN
BANGLADESH
BARBADOS
BELARUS
BELGIUM
BELIZE
BENIN
BOLIVIA, PLURINATIONAL
STATE OF
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
BOTSWANA
BRAZIL
BRUNEI DARUSSALAM
BULGARIA
BURKINA FASO
BURUNDI
CAMBODIA
CAMEROON
CANADA
CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC
CHAD
CHILE
CHINA
COLOMBIA
CONGO
COSTA RICA
CÔTE D’IVOIRE
CROATIA
CUBA
CYPRUS
CZECH REPUBLIC
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
OF THE CONGO
DENMARK
DJIBOUTI
DOMINICA
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
ECUADOR
EGYPT
EL SALVADOR
ERITREA
ESTONIA
ESWATINI
ETHIOPIA
FIJI
FINLAND
FRANCE
GABON
GEORGIA

GERMANY
GHANA
GREECE
GRENADA
GUATEMALA
GUYANA
HAITI
HOLY SEE
HONDURAS
HUNGARY
ICELAND
INDIA
INDONESIA
IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
IRAQ
IRELAND
ISRAEL
ITALY
JAMAICA
JAPAN
JORDAN
KAZAKHSTAN
KENYA
KOREA, REPUBLIC OF
KUWAIT
KYRGYZSTAN
LAO PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC
LATVIA
LEBANON
LESOTHO
LIBERIA
LIBYA
LIECHTENSTEIN
LITHUANIA
LUXEMBOURG
MADAGASCAR
MALAWI
MALAYSIA
MALI
MALTA
MARSHALL ISLANDS
MAURITANIA
MAURITIUS
MEXICO
MONACO
MONGOLIA
MONTENEGRO
MOROCCO
MOZAMBIQUE
MYANMAR
NAMIBIA
NEPAL
NETHERLANDS
NEW ZEALAND
NICARAGUA
NIGER
NIGERIA
NORWAY
OMAN
PAKISTAN

PALAU
PANAMA
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
PARAGUAY
PERU
PHILIPPINES
POLAND
PORTUGAL
QATAR
REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA
ROMANIA
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
RWANDA
SAINT VINCENT AND
THE GRENADINES
SAN MARINO
SAUDI ARABIA
SENEGAL
SERBIA
SEYCHELLES
SIERRA LEONE
SINGAPORE
SLOVAKIA
SLOVENIA
SOUTH AFRICA
SPAIN
SRI LANKA
SUDAN
SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND
SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC
TAJIKISTAN
THAILAND
THE FORMER YUGOSLAV
REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
TOGO
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
TUNISIA
TURKEY
TURKMENISTAN
UGANDA
UKRAINE
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
UNITED KINGDOM OF
GREAT BRITAIN AND
NORTHERN IRELAND
UNITED REPUBLIC
OF TANZANIA
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
URUGUAY
UZBEKISTAN
VANUATU
VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN
REPUBLIC OF
VIET NAM
YEMEN
ZAMBIA
ZIMBABWE

The Agency’s Statute was approved on 23 October 1956 by the Conference on the Statute of the
IAEA held at United Nations Headquarters, New York; it entered into force on 29 July 1957.
The Headquarters of the Agency are situated in Vienna. Its principal objective is “to accelerate and enlarge
the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world’’.

IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS SERIES No. SSG-46

RADIATION PROTECTION AND
SAFETY IN MEDICAL USES
OF IONIZING RADIATION
SPECIFIC SAFETY GUIDE
JOINTLY SPONSORED BY THE
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY,
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR OFFICE,
PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION
AND WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY
VIENNA, 2018

COPYRIGHT NOTICE
All IAEA scientific and technical publications are protected by the terms of
the Universal Copyright Convention as adopted in 1952 (Berne) and as revised
in 1972 (Paris). The copyright has since been extended by the World Intellectual
Property Organization (Geneva) to include electronic and virtual intellectual
property. Permission to use whole or parts of texts contained in IAEA publications
in printed or electronic form must be obtained and is usually subject to royalty
agreements. Proposals for non-commercial reproductions and translations are
welcomed and considered on a case-by-case basis. Enquiries should be addressed
to the IAEA Publishing Section at:
Marketing and Sales Unit, Publishing Section
International Atomic Energy Agency
Vienna International Centre
PO Box 100
1400 Vienna, Austria
fax: +43 1 2600 29302
tel.: +43 1 2600 22417
email: sales.publications@iaea.org
http://www.iaea.org/books
© IAEA, 2018
Printed by the IAEA in Austria
October 2018
STI/PUB/1775

IAEA Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Names: International Atomic Energy Agency.
Title: Radiation protection and safety in medical uses of ionizing radiation /
International Atomic Energy Agency.
Description: Vienna : International Atomic Energy Agency, 2018. | Series: IAEA
safety standards series, ISSN 1020–525X ; no. SSG-46 | Includes bibliographical
references.
Identifiers: IAEAL 18-01164 | ISBN 978–92–0–101717–8 (paperback : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Ionizing radiation — Safety measures. | Radiography, Medical —
Safety measures. | Nuclear medicine.
Classification: UDC 614.876 | STI/PUB/1775

FOREWORD
by Yukiya Amano
Director General
The IAEA’s Statute authorizes the Agency to “establish or adopt…
standards of safety for protection of health and minimization of danger to life and
property” — standards that the IAEA must use in its own operations, and which
States can apply by means of their regulatory provisions for nuclear and radiation
safety. The IAEA does this in consultation with the competent organs of the
United Nations and with the specialized agencies concerned. A comprehensive
set of high quality standards under regular review is a key element of a stable and
sustainable global safety regime, as is the IAEA’s assistance in their application.
The IAEA commenced its safety standards programme in 1958. The
emphasis placed on quality, fitness for purpose and continuous improvement
has led to the widespread use of the IAEA standards throughout the world. The
Safety Standards Series now includes unified Fundamental Safety Principles,
which represent an international consensus on what must constitute a high level
of protection and safety. With the strong support of the Commission on Safety
Standards, the IAEA is working to promote the global acceptance and use of its
standards.
Standards are only effective if they are properly applied in practice.
The IAEA’s safety services encompass design, siting and engineering safety,
operational safety, radiation safety, safe transport of radioactive material and
safe management of radioactive waste, as well as governmental organization,
regulatory matters and safety culture in organizations. These safety services assist
Member States in the application of the standards and enable valuable experience
and insights to be shared.
Regulating safety is a national responsibility, and many States have
decided to adopt the IAEA’s standards for use in their national regulations. For
parties to the various international safety conventions, IAEA standards provide
a consistent, reliable means of ensuring the effective fulfilment of obligations
under the conventions. The standards are also applied by regulatory bodies and
operators around the world to enhance safety in nuclear power generation and in
nuclear applications in medicine, industry, agriculture and research.
Safety is not an end in itself but a prerequisite for the purpose of the
protection of people in all States and of the environment — now and in the
future. The risks associated with ionizing radiation must be assessed and
controlled without unduly limiting the contribution of nuclear energy to equitable
and sustainable development. Governments, regulatory bodies and operators
everywhere must ensure that nuclear material and radiation sources are used
beneficially, safely and ethically. The IAEA safety standards are designed to
facilitate this, and I encourage all Member States to make use of them.

PREFACE
In 2006, the IAEA published the Fundamental Safety Principles (IAEA
Safety Standards Series No. SF-1), which sets out the fundamental safety
objective and the principles of protection and safety. Requirements designed
to meet these are established in Radiation Protection and Safety of Radiation
Sources: International Basic Safety Standards (GSR Part 3, 2014).
This Safety Guide provides recommendations and guidance on fulfilling
the requirements of GSR Part 3 with respect to medical uses of ionizing radiation,
addressing all three categories of exposure: medical exposure, primarily of
patients undergoing the radiological procedures but also of carers and comforters
and of volunteers subject to exposure as part of a programme of medical
research; occupational exposure of health professionals performing radiological
procedures; and exposure of members of the public. Recommendations and
guidance are provided on applying a systematic approach to ensure that there is
a balance between utilizing the benefits from medical uses of ionizing radiation
and minimizing the risk of radiation effects on patients, workers and members of
the public.
This Safety Guide supersedes Radiological Protection for Medical Exposure
to Ionizing Radiation (RS-G-1.5, 2002) and three publications of the Safety
Reports Series: namely Applying Radiation Safety Standards in Radiotherapy
(No. 38, 2006); Applying Radiation Safety Standards in Diagnostic Radiology
and Interventional Procedures Using X Rays (No. 39, 2006); and Applying
Radiation Safety Standards in Nuclear Medicine (No. 40, 2005).
This Safety Guide is jointly sponsored by the IAEA, the International
Labour Office, the Pan American Health Organization and the World Health
Organization. The IAEA gratefully acknowledges the contribution of experts
from the European Society for Radiotherapy and Oncology, the International
Organization for Medical Physics, the International Society of Radiographers
and Radiological Technologists, the International Society of Radiology and the
World Federation of Nuclear Medicine and Biology to the drafting and review of
the text.

THE IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS
BACKGROUND
Radioactivity is a natural phenomenon and natural sources of radiation are
features of the environment. Radiation and radioactive substances have many
beneficial applications, ranging from power generation to uses in medicine,
industry and agriculture. The radiation risks to workers and the public and to the
environment that may arise from these applications have to be assessed and, if
necessary, controlled.
Activities such as the medical uses of radiation, the operation of nuclear
installations, the production, transport and use of radioactive material, and the
management of radioactive waste must therefore be subject to standards of safety.
Regulating safety is a national responsibility. However, radiation risks may
transcend national borders, and international cooperation serves to promote and
enhance safety globally by exchanging experience and by improving capabilities
to control hazards, to prevent accidents, to respond to emergencies and to mitigate
any harmful consequences.
States have an obligation of diligence and duty of care, and are expected to
fulfil their national and international undertakings and obligations.
International safety standards provide support for States in meeting their
obligations under general principles of international law, such as those relating to
environmental protection. International safety standards also promote and assure
confidence in safety and facilitate international commerce and trade.
A global nuclear safety regime is in place and is being continuously
improved. IAEA safety standards, which support the implementation of binding
international instruments and national safety infrastructures, are a cornerstone
of this global regime. The IAEA safety standards constitute a useful tool
for contracting parties to assess their performance under these international
conventions.
THE IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS
The status of the IAEA safety standards derives from the IAEA’s Statute,
which authorizes the IAEA to establish or adopt, in consultation and, where
appropriate, in collaboration with the competent organs of the United Nations
and with the specialized agencies concerned, standards of safety for protection of
health and minimization of danger to life and property, and to provide for their
application.

With a view to ensuring the protection of people and the environment
from harmful effects of ionizing radiation, the IAEA safety standards establish
fundamental safety principles, requirements and measures to control the radiation
exposure of people and the release of radioactive material to the environment, to
restrict the likelihood of events that might lead to a loss of control over a nuclear
reactor core, nuclear chain reaction, radioactive source or any other source of
radiation, and to mitigate the consequences of such events if they were to occur.
The standards apply to facilities and activities that give rise to radiation risks,
including nuclear installations, the use of radiation and radioactive sources, the
transport of radioactive material and the management of radioactive waste.
Safety measures and security measures1 have in common the aim of
protecting human life and health and the environment. Safety measures and
security measures must be designed and implemented in an integrated manner
so that security measures do not compromise safety and safety measures do not
compromise security.
The IAEA safety standards reflect an international consensus on what
constitutes a high level of safety for protecting people and the environment
from harmful effects of ionizing radiation. They are issued in the IAEA Safety
Standards Series, which has three categories (see Fig. 1).
Safety Fundamentals
Safety Fundamentals present the fundamental safety objective and principles
of protection and safety, and provide the basis for the safety requirements.
Safety Requirements
An integrated and consistent set of Safety Requirements establishes
the requirements that must be met to ensure the protection of people and the
environment, both now and in the future. The requirements are governed by the
objective and principles of the Safety Fundamentals. If the requirements are not
met, measures must be taken to reach or restore the required level of safety. The
format and style of the requirements facilitate their use for the establishment, in a
harmonized manner, of a national regulatory framework. Requirements, including
numbered ‘overarching’ requirements, are expressed as ‘shall’ statements. Many
requirements are not addressed to a specific party, the implication being that the
appropriate parties are responsible for fulfilling them.

1

See also publications issued in the IAEA Nuclear Security Series.

Safety Fundamentals

Fundamental Safety Principles
General Safety Requirements

Specific Safety Requirements

Part 1. Governmental, Legal and
Regulatory Framework for Safety

1. Site Evaluation for
Nuclear Installations

Part 2. Leadership and Management
for Safety

2. Safety of Nuclear Power Plants

Part 3. Radiation Protection and
Safety of Radiation Sources

2/1 Design
2/2 Commissioning and Operation

Part 4. Safety Assessment for
Facilities and Activities

3. Safety of Research Reactors

Part 5. Predisposal Management
of Radioactive Waste

4. Safety of Nuclear Fuel
Cycle Facilities

Part 6. Decommissioning and
Termination of Activities

5. Safety of Radioactive Waste
Disposal Facilities

Part 7. Emergency Preparedness
and Response

6. Safe Transport of
Radioactive Material

Collection of Safety Guides
FIG. 1. The long term structure of the IAEA Safety Standards Series.

Safety Guides
Safety Guides provide recommendations and guidance on how to comply
with the safety requirements, indicating an international consensus that it
is necessary to take the measures recommended (or equivalent alternative
measures). The Safety Guides present international good practices, and
increasingly they reflect best practices, to help users striving to achieve high
levels of safety. The recommendations provided in Safety Guides are expressed
as ‘should’ statements.
APPLICATION OF THE IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS
The principal users of safety standards in IAEA Member States are
regulatory bodies and other relevant national authorities. The IAEA safety
standards are also used by co-sponsoring organizations and by many organizations
that design, construct and operate nuclear facilities, as well as organizations
involved in the use of radiation and radioactive sources.

The IAEA safety standards are applicable, as relevant, throughout the entire
lifetime of all facilities and activities — existing and new — utilized for peaceful
purposes and to protective actions to reduce existing radiation risks. They can be
used by States as a reference for their national regulations in respect of facilities
and activities.
The IAEA’s Statute makes the safety standards binding on the IAEA in
relation to its own operations and also on States in relation to IAEA assisted
operations.
The IAEA safety standards also form the basis for the IAEA’s safety review
services, and they are used by the IAEA in support of competence building,
including the development of educational curricula and training courses.
International conventions contain requirements similar to those in
the IAEA safety standards and make them binding on contracting parties.
The IAEA safety standards, supplemented by international conventions, industry
standards and detailed national requirements, establish a consistent basis for
protecting people and the environment. There will also be some special aspects
of safety that need to be assessed at the national level. For example, many of
the IAEA safety standards, in particular those addressing aspects of safety in
planning or design, are intended to apply primarily to new facilities and activities.
The requirements established in the IAEA safety standards might not be fully
met at some existing facilities that were built to earlier standards. The way in
which IAEA safety standards are to be applied to such facilities is a decision for
individual States.
The scientific considerations underlying the IAEA safety standards provide
an objective basis for decisions concerning safety; however, decision makers
must also make informed judgements and must determine how best to balance
the benefits of an action or an activity against the associated radiation risks and
any other detrimental impacts to which it gives rise.
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS FOR THE IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS
The preparation and review of the safety standards involves the IAEA
Secretariat and five safety standards committees, for emergency preparedness
and response (EPReSC) (as of 2016), nuclear safety (NUSSC), radiation
safety (RASSC), the safety of radioactive waste (WASSC) and the safe
transport of radioactive material (TRANSSC), and a Commission on Safety
Standards (CSS) which oversees the IAEA safety standards programme
(see Fig. 2).
All IAEA Member States may nominate experts for the safety standards
committees and may provide comments on draft standards. The membership of

Outline and work plan
prepared by the Secretariat;
review by the safety standards
committees and the CSS

Secretariat and
consultants:
drafting of new or revision
of existing safety standard
Draft

Review by
safety standards
committee(s)

Draft
Member States
Comments

Final draft

Endorsement
by the CSS

FIG. 2. The process for developing a new safety standard or revising an existing standard.

the Commission on Safety Standards is appointed by the Director General and
includes senior governmental officials having responsibility for establishing
national standards.
A management system has been established for the processes of planning,
developing, reviewing, revising and establishing the IAEA safety standards.
It articulates the mandate of the IAEA, the vision for the future application of
the safety standards, policies and strategies, and corresponding functions and
responsibilities.
INTERACTION WITH OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
The findings of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects
of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR) and the recommendations of international

expert bodies, notably the International Commission on Radiological Protection
(ICRP), are taken into account in developing the IAEA safety standards. Some
safety standards are developed in cooperation with other bodies in the United
Nations system or other specialized agencies, including the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations Environment Programme,
the International Labour Organization, the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency, the
Pan American Health Organization and the World Health Organization.
INTERPRETATION OF THE TEXT
Safety related terms are to be understood as defined in the IAEA Safety
Glossary (see http://www-ns.iaea.org/standards/safety-glossary.htm). Otherwise,
words are used with the spellings and meanings assigned to them in the latest
edition of The Concise Oxford Dictionary. For Safety Guides, the English version
of the text is the authoritative version.
The background and context of each standard in the IAEA Safety
Standards Series and its objective, scope and structure are explained in Section 1,
Introduction, of each publication.
Material for which there is no appropriate place in the body text
(e.g. material that is subsidiary to or separate from the body text, is included
in support of statements in the body text, or describes methods of calculation,
procedures or limits and conditions) may be presented in appendices or annexes.
An appendix, if included, is considered to form an integral part of the
safety standard. Material in an appendix has the same status as the body text,
and the IAEA assumes authorship of it. Annexes and footnotes to the main text,
if included, are used to provide practical examples or additional information or
explanation. Annexes and footnotes are not integral parts of the main text. Annex
material published by the IAEA is not necessarily issued under its authorship;
material under other authorship may be presented in annexes to the safety
standards. Extraneous material presented in annexes is excerpted and adapted as
necessary to be generally useful.

CONTENTS
1.

2.

INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Background (1.1–1.9)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Objective (1.10–1.12)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Scope (1.13–1.15)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Structure (1.16–1.19)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

1
2
3
4

GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS FOR RADIATION
PROTECTION AND SAFETY IN MEDICAL USES OF
RADIATION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

5

General (2.1–2.3)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Types of exposure situation and categories of exposure (2.4–2.6)  . . . 
Application of the radiation protection requirements (2.7–2.22)  . . . . 
Graded approach (2.23–2.27)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Roles and responsibilities (2.28–2.118)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Education, training, qualification and competence (2.119–2.137)  . . . 
Management system for radiation protection and safety
(2.138–2.149)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Safety assessment (2.150–2.154)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3.

SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS FOR RADIATION
PROTECTION AND SAFETY IN DIAGNOSTIC
RADIOLOGY AND IMAGE GUIDED INTERVENTIONAL
PROCEDURES  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

5
6
8
11
13
40
47
51

53

General (3.1–3.8)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  53
Safety of medical radiation facilities and medical radiological
equipment (3.9–3.50)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  55
Occupational radiation protection (3.51–3.136)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  68
Radiation protection of individuals undergoing medical exposure
(3.137–3.272)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  89
Radiation protection of the public (3.273–3.282)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  121
Prevention and mitigation of accidents (3.283–3.292)  . . . . . . . . . . . .  123

4.

SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS FOR RADIATION
PROTECTION AND SAFETY IN NUCLEAR MEDICINE  . . . .  125
General (4.1–4.7)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Safety of medical radiation facilities and medical radiological
equipment (4.8–4.60)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Occupational radiation protection (4.61–4.152)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Radiation protection of individuals undergoing medical exposure
(4.153–4.262)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Radiation protection of the public (4.263–4.282)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Prevention and mitigation of accidents (4.283–4.301)  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Safety in the transport of radioactive material (4.302–4.304)  . . . . . . 

5.

125
126
140
161
189
195
201

SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS FOR RADIATION
PROTECTION AND SAFETY IN RADIATION THERAPY  . . .  202
General (5.1–5.9)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Safety of medical radiation facilities and medical radiological
equipment (5.10–5.92)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Occupational radiation protection (5.93–5.188)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Radiation protection of individuals undergoing medical exposure
(5.189–5.281)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Radiation protection of the public (5.282–5.296)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Prevention and mitigation of accidents (5.297–5.323)  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Safety in the transport of radioactive material (5.324–5.326)  . . . . . . 

202
204
223
241
265
268
275

APPENDIX I: SUMMARY OF TYPICAL CAUSES OF, AND
CONTRIBUTING FACTORS TO, ACCIDENTAL
EXPOSURES IN MEDICAL USES OF IONIZING
RADIATION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  277
APPENDIX II: AVOIDANCE OF PREGNANCY FOLLOWING
RADIOPHARMACEUTICAL THERAPY  . . . . . . . . .  281
APPENDIX III: CESSATION OF BREAST-FEEDING  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  282
REFERENCES  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  287
ABBREVIATIONS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  315
CONTRIBUTORS TO DRAFTING AND REVIEW  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  317

1. INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND
1.1. Medical uses of ionizing radiation are among the longest established
applications of ionizing radiation. In 2008, the estimated worldwide annual
number of diagnostic and interventional radiological procedures (including
dental) was 3.6 billion, the estimated number of nuclear medicine procedures
was over 30 million, and the estimated number of radiation therapy procedures
was over 5 million [1]. The number of such procedures has continued to increase
since then. These medical uses bring considerable public health benefits.
1.2. However, ionizing radiation can cause harm and a systematic approach
should be applied to ensure that there is a balance between utilizing the benefits
from medical uses of ionizing radiation and minimizing the risk of radiation
effects to patients, workers and members of the public.
1.3. Medical uses of ionizing radiation have a place only in the context of
medical practice. The system for ensuring radiation protection and safety should
form part of the larger system for ensuring good medical practice. This Safety
Guide focuses on the system of radiation protection and safety.
1.4. IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SF-1, Fundamental Safety Principles [2],
presents the fundamental safety objective and principles of protection and safety.
Requirements designed to meet this objective and these principles are established
in IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 3, Radiation Protection and
Safety of Radiation Sources: International Basic Safety Standards [3].
1.5. This Safety Guide provides guidance on fulfilling the requirements of
GSR Part 3 [3] with respect to medical uses of ionizing radiation.
1.6. The International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) has
developed recommendations for a system of radiation protection [4]. These and
other current recommendations of the ICRP and the International Commission
on Radiation Units and Measurements (ICRU) have been taken into account in
preparing this Safety Guide.
1.7. It is assumed in this Safety Guide that the individual State has in place
an effective governmental, legal and regulatory infrastructure for radiation
protection and safety that covers medical uses of ionizing radiation.
1

1.8. This Safety Guide supersedes IAEA Safety Standards Series No. RS-G-1.5,
Radiological Protection for Medical Exposure to Ionizing Radiation, issued in
2002, and several Safety Reports issued by the IAEA in 2005 and 2006.1
1.9. Unless otherwise stated, terms in this publication are to be understood as
defined and explained in GSR Part 3 [3] or the IAEA Safety Glossary [5].
OBJECTIVE
1.10. GSR Part 3 [3] establishes requirements for the protection of people from
harmful effects of exposure to ionizing radiation, for the safety of radiation
sources and for the protection of the environment. This Safety Guide recommends
how medical uses of ionizing radiation should be carried out safely within the
framework of GSR Part 3 [3].
1.11. The purpose of this publication is to provide recommendations and
guidance on meeting the requirements for the safe use of radiation in medicine
as established in GSR Part 3 [3], and these publications should be used
together. This Safety Guide is aimed primarily at end-users in medical radiation
facilities in which radiological procedures are performed, including managers,
radiological medical practitioners, medical radiation technologists, medical
1

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH
ORGANIZATION, WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Radiological Protection for
Medical Exposure to Ionizing Radiation, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. RS-G-1.5, IAEA,
Vienna (2002).
EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR THERAPEUTIC RADIOLOGY AND ONCOLOGY,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR OFFICE,
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR MEDICAL PHYSICS, PAN AMERICAN
HEALTH ORGANIZATION, WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Applying Radiation
Safety Standards in Radiotherapy, Safety Reports Series No. 38, IAEA, Vienna (2006).
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR OFFICE,
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR MEDICAL PHYSICS, INTERNATIONAL
SOCIETY OF RADIOLOGY, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, WORLD
HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Applying Radiation Safety Standards in Diagnostic Radiology
and Interventional Procedures Using X Rays, Safety Reports Series No. 39, IAEA,
Vienna (2006).
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR OFFICE,
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR MEDICAL PHYSICS, PAN AMERICAN
HEALTH ORGANIZATION, WORLD FEDERATION OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE AND
BIOLOGY, WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Applying Radiation Safety Standards in
Nuclear Medicine, Safety Reports Series No. 40, IAEA, Vienna (2005).

2

physicists, radiation protection officers (RPOs) and other health professionals.
It also provides recommendations and guidance to: health professionals who
refer patients for radiological procedures; manufacturers and suppliers of
medical radiological equipment; and ethics committees with responsibilities for
biomedical research. National requirements may vary, being stricter in some
States; the related national regulations and guidelines should be known and
followed.
1.12. This publication provides recommendations and guidance on appropriate
regulatory activities and infrastructure, and is therefore also applicable to
regulatory bodies, health authorities, government agencies in general and
professional bodies.
SCOPE
1.13. This Safety Guide provides recommendations for ensuring radiation
protection and safety of radiation sources with regard to patients, workers, carers
and comforters, volunteers in biomedical research and the public in medical uses
of ionizing radiation. It covers radiological procedures in diagnostic radiology
(including dentistry), image guided interventional procedures, nuclear medicine
and radiation therapy. Some of these radiological procedures may be carried
out in other medical specialties, including, but not limited to, cardiology,
vascular surgery, urology, orthopaedic surgery, gastroenterology, obstetrics and
gynaecology, emergency medicine, anaesthetics and pain management.
1.14. Depending on the laws and regulations in the State, medical uses of ionizing
radiation may include the use of ionizing radiation in other health care practices,
such as chiropractic, osteopathy and podiatry. These uses are also within the
scope of this Safety Guide.
1.15. This Safety Guide does not include recommendations or guidance on
human imaging using ionizing radiation for purposes other than medical
diagnosis, medical treatment or biomedical research. Such human imaging using
ionizing radiation for other purposes includes exposing people to radiation for
employment related, legal or health insurance purposes without reference to
clinical indications, and human imaging using ionizing radiation for the detection

3

of concealed objects for anti-smuggling purposes or for the detection of concealed
objects that could be used for criminal acts that pose a national security threat.2
STRUCTURE
1.16. Following this introductory section, Section 2 provides general
recommendations for radiation protection and safety in medical uses of ionizing
radiation. This includes: the application of the principles of protection and safety;
the use of the graded approach; roles and responsibilities; education, training,
qualification and competence; management systems for protection and safety;
and safety assessments.
1.17. Sections 3–5 provide recommendations for specific areas of medical uses
of ionizing radiation: Section 3 covers diagnostic radiology and image guided
interventional procedures; Section 4 covers nuclear medicine; and Section 5
covers radiation therapy. Guidance for hybrid modalities is addressed in the
relevant sections, as appropriate.
1.18. Appendix I provides summary guidance on typical causes of, and
contributing factors to, accidental exposure in medical uses of radiation.
Appendices II and III provide recommendations on the avoidance of pregnancy
following radiopharmaceutical therapy and on the cessation of breast-feeding
following administration of radiopharmaceuticals for nuclear medicine,
respectively.
1.19. It is important to note that the sections on specific areas (Sections 3–5)
should always be read in conjunction with Section 2. In addition, each section
should be considered in its entirety.

2

A Safety Guide on non-medical human imaging is in preparation. Guidance on the
justification of non-medical human imaging is provided in IAEA Safety Standards Series
No. GSG-5, Justification of Practices, Including Non-medical Human Imaging [6].

4

2. GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
RADIATION PROTECTION AND SAFETY IN
MEDICAL USES OF RADIATION
GENERAL
2.1. Medical uses of ionizing radiation take place in a variety of settings,
including hospitals, medical centres, health clinics, specialist clinics, and dental
practices. A medical radiation facility is the term used in GSR Part 3 [3] to cover
all such possible settings. A medical radiation facility may provide services for
one or more medical uses of radiation. For example, a large hospital typically
has facilities for diagnostic radiology, image guided interventional procedures,
nuclear medicine and radiation therapy. The authorization process for medical
uses of ionizing radiation varies from State to State. In some States, a single
authorization may cover all specialties and activities within the facility, whereas
others may authorize each specialty or application separately. For example, in
one State a hospital may have a single authorization covering all of diagnostic
radiology, image guided interventional procedures, nuclear medicine and
radiation therapy, whereas in another State each of these areas or applications
may be authorized separately. Despite such differences in authorization, the
guidance in this Safety Guide remains applicable.
2.2. Traditionally, each of the areas of diagnostic radiology, nuclear medicine
and radiation therapy were separate, with little or no combined usage. This has
changed, with hybrid imaging systems involving both diagnostic radiology and
nuclear medicine expertise, and with the planning, guidance and verification
stages of radiation therapy increasingly involving both imaging and radiation
therapy expertise. Within this Safety Guide, cross-references are provided where
appropriate when such systems are addressed.
2.3. As stated in paras 1.13 and 1.14, the setting for this Safety Guide is the
practice of medicine (including dentistry, chiropractic, osteopathy and podiatry).
The requirements of GSR Part 3 [3] for radiation protection and safety of
radiation sources apply to the uses of radiation in medicine as for elsewhere. The
requirements should be met and included within medical structures and processes
and in medical guidelines, with the objective of improved patient care and patient
outcomes.

5

TYPES OF EXPOSURE SITUATION AND CATEGORIES OF EXPOSURE
2.4. The requirements of GSR Part 3 [3] are structured according to the three
types of exposure situation: planned exposure situations, existing exposure
situations and emergency exposure situations. Medical uses of ionizing radiation
are a planned exposure situation and the requirements of sections 2 and 3 of
GSR Part 3 [3] apply, as appropriate. This includes situations of potential
exposure, which is defined in para. 1.20(a) of GSR Part 3 [3] as an exposure
that “is not expected to occur with certainty, but could result from an accident
or from an event or a sequence of events that may occur but is not certain to
occur”. Potential exposure can be applicable for any occupational, public and
medical exposure where the event, if it occurs, results in an exposure over and
above what would be expected normally. Unintended and accidental medical
exposures should be treated as planned exposure situations (para. 3.145
of GSR Part 3 [3], see Table 1). Sections 2–5 of this Safety Guide cover the
prevention and mitigation of the consequences of events leading to a potential
exposure. In extreme situations in medical facilities of emergency preparedness
category III [7] (such as a radiation therapy facility), an emergency exposure
situation may occur that affects either workers or members of the public. For
preparedness and response for emergency exposure situations, the applicable
requirements include section 4 of GSR Part 3 [3] and IAEA Safety Standards
Series Nos GSR Part 7 [7], GSG-2 [8] and GS-G-2.1 [9].
2.5. Medical uses of ionizing radiation involve all three categories of exposure:
occupational exposure for those involved in the performance of radiological
procedures; medical exposure, primarily for the patients undergoing the
radiological procedures, but also for carers and comforters and for volunteers
subject to exposure as part of a programme of medical research; and public
exposure for members of the public, such as in waiting rooms. The requirements
for radiation protection and safety differ according to the category of exposure,
so it is important that the exposure of persons is categorized correctly. For
example, a nurse assisting with image guided interventional procedures would
be considered to be occupationally exposed. A nurse working on an inpatient
ward where occasional mobile radiography is performed by a medical radiation
technologist would also be considered to be occupationally exposed; however,
because in this case the radiation source is not required by or directly related to the
work, this nurse should be provided with the same level of protection as members
of the public (see para. 3.78 of GSR Part 3 [3]). The term ‘carer and comforter’ is
defined in GSR Part 3 [3] as: “Persons who willingly and voluntarily help (other
than in their occupation) in the care, support and comfort of patients undergoing
radiological procedures for medical diagnosis or medical treatment.” Carers
6

and comforters are subject to medical exposure, whereas a casual acquaintance
visiting a patient who has undergone radionuclide therapy would be considered
a member of the public and hence subject to public exposure. More extensive
guidance is provided in each of the specialty Sections 3–5 of this Safety Guide.
TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF RADIATION PROTECTION PRINCIPLES AS
APPLIED TO OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE AND PUBLIC EXPOSURE
IN COMPARISON WITH MEDICAL EXPOSURE
Application to occupational exposure
and public exposure

Application to medical exposure

Justification of practices: Adopting a
practice that entails exposure to radiation
only if it yields sufficient benefit to the
exposed individuals or to society to
outweigh the radiation detriment.

Justification of practices: The diagnostic or
therapeutic benefits of exposure are weighed
against the radiation detriment they might
cause, with account taken of the benefits and
risks of available alternative techniques that do
not involve medical exposure.

Optimization of protection and safety:
Providing the best available protection and
safety measures under the prevailing
circumstances, so that the magnitudes and
likelihood of exposures and the numbers of
individuals exposed are as low as reasonably
achievable, economic and social factors
being taken into account.

Optimization of protection and safety: In
diagnostic and interventional medical
exposure, keeping the exposure of patients to
the minimum necessary to achieve the
required diagnostic or interventional objective.
In therapeutic medical exposure, keeping the
exposure of normal tissue as low as reasonably
achievable consistent with delivering the
required dose to the planning target volume.

Limitation of doses: Doses to individuals
are limited (for occupational exposure and
public exposure).

Limitation of doses: Does not apply to medical
exposure.

2.6. Unintended and accidental medical exposures are covered in detail in
Sections 3–5. Such events include any medical treatment or diagnostic procedure
in which the wrong individual is exposed.3

3

The definition of medical exposure in GSR Part 3 [3] was changed from that used
previously to ensure that the event of the wrong individual being exposed is kept within the
radiation protection and safety framework for medical exposure so that it can be investigated
by the appropriate people, with corrective actions to minimize recurrence.

7

APPLICATION OF THE RADIATION PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS
2.7. The three general principles of radiation protection, namely justification,
optimization of protection and safety, and the application of dose limits, are
expressed in Principles 4–6 and 10 of the Fundamental Safety Principles [2].
In terms of Requirement 1 of GSR Part 3 [3], those responsible for protection
and safety are required to ensure that the relevant requirements applying these
principles are met.
2.8. Medical exposure differs from occupational and public exposure in that
persons (primarily patients) are deliberately, directly and knowingly exposed
to radiation for their benefit. In medical exposure, applying a dose limit is
inappropriate, as it may limit the benefit for the patient; consequently, only two
of the radiation protection principles apply — justification and optimization.
Justification plays the role of gatekeeper, as it will determine whether or not the
exposure will take place. If it is to take place, the radiological procedure should
be performed in such a way that radiation protection and safety is optimized.
Justification
2.9. Justification in medical uses of ionizing radiation involves consideration
of all three categories of exposure: medical exposure, occupational exposure and
public exposure.
2.10. From an occupational exposure and public exposure perspective, the
practice should be justified. This aspect of justification is the process of
determining whether the use of the given radiological procedure is expected to
yield benefits to the individuals who undergo the procedure and to society that
outweigh the harm (including radiation detriment) resulting from the procedure.
In almost all cases, the occupational exposure and public exposure considerations
in justification are overshadowed by the justification of medical exposure (see
para. 2.11). While a medical radiological procedure is expected to do more good
than harm to the patient, account should also be taken of the radiation detriment
from the exposure of the staff of the medical radiation facility and of other
individuals.
2.11. The application of the justification principle to medical exposure requires a
special approach, using three levels (the three-level approach). As an overarching
justification of medical exposure, it is accepted that the proper use of radiation in
medicine does more good than harm (level 1). At the next level (level 2), generic
justification of a given radiological procedure should be carried out by the health
8

authority in conjunction with appropriate professional bodies. This applies to the
justification of current technologies and techniques and new technologies and
techniques as they evolve. The decisions should be reviewed from time to time,
as more information becomes available about the risks and effectiveness of the
existing procedure and about new procedures. Those radiological procedures that
are no longer justified should be removed from medical practice. The possibility
of accidental or unintended exposure should also be considered at level 2. For the
final level of justification (level 3), the application of the radiological procedure
to a given individual patient should be considered. The specific objectives of
the exposure, the clinical circumstances and the characteristics of the individual
involved should be taken into account. National or international referral
guidelines, developed by professional bodies together with health authorities,
are required to be used (para. 3.158 of GSR Part 3 [3]). The approach to the
implementation of justification of a procedure for an individual patient (level 3)
depends on whether it is a diagnostic procedure, an image guided intervention,
or a treatment. Specific guidance on justification in each specialty is given in
Sections 3–5.
2.12. The level 3 justification of medical exposure for an individual patient does
not include considerations of occupational exposure. If the proposed radiological
procedure is justified for that patient, then the participation of particular staff in
performing the procedure is governed by the requirements for optimization of
occupational radiation protection and safety and limitation of occupational dose.
Optimization of protection and safety
2.13. The optimization of protection and safety, when applied to the exposure of
workers and of members of the public, and of carers and comforters of patients
undergoing radiological procedures, is a process for ensuring that the magnitude
and likelihood of exposures and the number of individuals exposed are as low as
reasonably achievable, with economic, societal and environmental factors taken
into account. This means that the level of protection and safety would be the best
possible under the prevailing circumstances.
2.14. As is the case with justification, the application of the requirements for
optimization to the medical exposure of patients and to the medical exposure
of volunteers as part of a programme of biomedical research requires a special
approach. Too low a radiation dose could be as bad as too high a radiation dose,
in that the consequence could be that a cancer is not cured or the images taken are
not of suitable diagnostic quality. The medical exposure should always lead to
the required clinical outcome.
9

2.15. Optimization is a prospective and iterative process that requires judgements
to be made using both qualitative and quantitative information. Specialty specific
guidance on optimization of medical, occupational and public radiation protection
and safety is given in Sections 3–5.
2.16. Dose constraints are used in the planning stage in the optimization of
protection and safety. Dose constraints are applicable for occupational exposure
and for public exposure in medical uses of ionizing radiation. Dose constraints are
also used in the optimization of protection and safety for carers and comforters
and for volunteers subject to exposure as part of a programme of biomedical
research. Dose constraints are not applicable for the exposure of patients in
radiological procedures for the purposes of medical diagnosis or treatment (see
also paras 2.46–2.50).
2.17. One of the purposes of establishing a dose constraint for each particular
source of radiation exposure is to ensure that the sum of doses from planned
operations for all sources under control remains within the dose limits. Dose
constraints are not dose limits; exceeding a dose constraint does not represent
non-compliance with regulatory requirements, but it might result in follow-up
actions.
2.18. In X ray medical imaging, image guided interventional procedures and
diagnostic nuclear medicine, diagnostic reference levels (DRLs) are a tool used
in the optimization of protection and safety. Periodic assessments are required to
be performed of typical patient doses or, for radiopharmaceuticals, of activities
administered in a medical radiation facility (para. 3.169 of GSR Part 3 [3]).
Doses in this context may be expressed in one of the accepted dosimetric
quantities as described in para. 2.40 [10–12]. For simplicity, the term ‘dose’
in Sections 3 and 4 will be used when referring generally to measurements of
medical exposure in radiological imaging, with specific forms of dose or activity
used where necessary.
2.19. If comparison with established DRLs shows that the typical doses or
activities to patients are either unusually high or unusually low, a local review
is required to be initiated to ascertain whether protection and safety has been
optimized and whether any corrective action is required. DRLs are not dose
limits (see also paras 2.34–2.45).
2.20. Other tools used in the optimization of protection and safety applied
to all three categories of exposure include, inter alia, design and operational

10

considerations and programmes of quality assurance. These are described in
detail in the specialty Sections 3–5.
Dose limits
2.21. Dose limits apply to occupational exposure and public exposure arising
from any use of ionizing radiation. Schedule III of GSR Part 3 [3] sets out these
dose limits, which are reproduced here for convenience (see Box 1). Dose limits
do not apply to medical exposure (i.e. exposure of patients, carers or comforters,
and volunteers as part of a programme of biomedical research).
2.22. The occupational dose limit for the lens of the eye is lower in GSR Part 3 [3]
than previously recommended. There are some areas of medical uses of ionizing
radiation, such as image guided interventional procedures, where, if good
radiation protection practice is not being followed, there is a possibility of
exceeding this dose limit. Specific guidance is given in Sections 3–5.
GRADED APPROACH
2.23. The graded approach is a concept that underpins the application of the
system for protection and safety. Paragraph 2.12 of GSR Part 3 [3] states: “The
application of the requirements for the system of protection and safety shall be
commensurate with the radiation risks associated with the exposure situation.”
2.24. The risks associated with medical uses of ionizing radiation vary
significantly, depending strongly on the particular radiological procedure.
At the low risk end are dental exposures (excluding cone beam computed
tomography, CBCT), and dedicated bone densitometry studies (dual energy
X ray absorptiometry, DXA). At the high risk end is radiation therapy, where
the doses involved could be lethal, and image guided interventional procedures,
where radiation injuries can occur.
2.25. GSR Part 3 [3] places responsibilities for a graded approach on the
government, the regulatory body, registrants and licensees, and employers. The
government and the regulatory body are required to use a graded approach in
setting and enforcing regulatory requirements. For example, it would be expected
that regulatory bodies devote fewer resources and less time to regulating dental
practices than to regulating the use of radiation in radiation therapy or image
guided interventional procedures.

11

BOX 1: DOSE LIMITS FOR PLANNED EXPOSURE SITUATIONS
OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE
III.1. For occupational exposure of workers over the age of 18 years, the dose
limits are:
(a) An effective dose of 20 mSv per year averaged over five consecutive
years66 (100 mSv in 5 years) and of 50 mSv in any single year;
(b) An equivalent dose to the lens of the eye of 20 mSv per year averaged
over five consecutive years (100 mSv in 5 years) and of 50 mSv in any
single year;
(c) An equivalent dose to the extremities (hands and feet) or to the skin67 of
500 mSv in a year.
Additional restrictions apply to occupational exposure for a female worker
who has notified pregnancy or is breast-feeding (para. 3.114 of [GSR Part 3]).
III.2. For occupational exposure of apprentices of 16 to 18 years of age who
are being trained for employment involving radiation and for exposure of
students of age 16 to 18 who use sources in the course of their studies, the
dose limits are:
(a) An effective dose of 6 mSv in a year;
(b) An equivalent dose to the lens of the eye of 20 mSv in a year;
(c) An equivalent dose to the extremities (hands and feet) or to the skin67 of
150 mSv in a year.
PUBLIC EXPOSURE
III.3. For public exposure, the dose limits are:
(a) An effective dose of 1 mSv in a year;
(b) In special circumstances68, a higher value of effective dose in a single
year could apply, provided that the average effective dose over five
consecutive years does not exceed 1 mSv per year;
(c) An equivalent dose to the lens of the eye of 15 mSv in a year;
(d) An equivalent dose to the skin of 50 mSv in a year.
Source: Schedule III of GSR Part 3 [3].
66

The start of the averaging period shall be coincident with the first day of the relevant
annual period after the date of entry into force of these Standards, with no retrospective
averaging.
67
The equivalent dose limits for the skin apply to the average dose over 1 cm2 of the
most highly irradiated area of the skin. The dose to the skin also contributes to the effective
dose, this contribution being the average dose to the entire skin multiplied by the tissue
weighting factor for the skin.
68
For example, in authorized, justified and planned operational conditions that lead
to transitory increases in exposures.

12

2.26. The registrants, or licensees, and employers are required to use a graded
approach in the measures they take for protection and safety. For example, the
registrant or licensee of a dental practice would not need to implement a quality
assurance programme that is as comprehensive as the programme implemented
for a radiation therapy facility in order to meet the requirements of GSR Part 3 [3].
2.27. Guidance incorporating the graded approach is given in the specific
guidance for each specialty and for the various modalities within those specialties
(see Sections 3–5).
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Government
General
2.28. The roles and responsibilities of the government4 with regard to
protection and safety are established in Requirement 2 and paras 2.13–2.28 of
GSR Part 3 [3], with further detailed requirements established in IAEA Safety
Standards Series No. GSR Part 1 (Rev. 1), Governmental, Legal and Regulatory
Framework for Safety [13]. These include:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Establishing an effective legal and regulatory framework for protection and
safety in all exposure situations.
Establishing legislation that meets specified requirements.
Establishing an independent regulatory body with the necessary legal
authority, competence and resources.
Establishing requirements for education and training in protection and
safety.
Ensuring that arrangements are in place for:
——The provision of technical services (including radiation monitoring
services and standards dosimetry laboratories);
——Education and training services.

All of these responsibilities are relevant to the safe use of ionizing radiation in
medicine.
4

States have different legal structures, and therefore the term ‘government’ as used in
IAEA safety standards is to be understood in a broad sense, and is accordingly interchangeable
here with the term ‘State’.

13

2.29. As noted in para. 1.7, this Safety Guide assumes that an effective
governmental, legal and regulatory infrastructure for radiation protection and
safety is in place. However, there are some additional considerations that are
important for ensuring radiation protection and safety in medical uses of ionizing
radiation.
2.30. The government has a responsibility to facilitate and ensure that the
health authority, the relevant professional bodies and the radiation protection
regulatory body communicate and cooperate in working towards establishing
the infrastructure necessary for radiation protection and safety in medical uses of
ionizing radiation. The role of the health authority typically includes determining
policy, which in turn may dictate the resources allocated to the various areas of
health care, including medical uses of ionizing radiation. Up to date information
on developments in medical uses of ionizing radiation, and how that might
shape and influence medical practice, should be available so that appropriate
policy can be developed and implemented. The professional bodies of the
various health professionals associated with radiation in health care represent
the collective expertise of the given health profession and, as such, can strongly
influence the practice of radiation protection and safety. The health authority
and the professional bodies should be active working partners with the radiation
protection regulatory body in achieving effective regulation of medical uses of
ionizing radiation (see paras 2.52–2.69 for more guidance on the health authority
and professional bodies).
2.31. Mechanisms for formal recognition of health professionals should be put in
place to ensure that only persons with the appropriate competencies are allowed
to take on particular roles and responsibilities. In medical uses of ionizing
radiation, this applies in particular to persons undertaking the role of radiological
medical practitioner, medical radiation technologist or medical physicist. Detailed
guidance is provided in paras 2.119–2.137, on education, training, qualifications
and competence.
2.32. Other organizations can make a worthwhile contribution to radiation
protection and safety in medical uses of ionizing radiation. These include
technical standards associations, regulatory bodies for medical devices and
health technology assessment agencies that issue standards and reports that could
have direct implications for radiation protection and safety. Not all States have
such organizations but, where they exist, the government should ensure that they
interact cooperatively with the radiation protection regulatory body, the health
authority and the relevant professional bodies. In States that do not have such

14

organizations, the government should consider means to adopt or adapt relevant
standards or reports from such organizations in other States.
2.33. Other organizations can have an indirect, but not necessarily insignificant,
effect on radiation protection and safety in medical uses of ionizing radiation.
Such organizations include health insurance or re-imbursement companies and
standards accreditation bodies. The former, by deciding on what radiological
procedures (and other alternative techniques) are covered, and the latter, by
including radiation protection and safety in its scope, can positively influence
how well radiation protection and safety is being implemented in medical
facilities seeking accreditation. Again, the government should be aware of
these organizations and should utilize their influence to improve the practice of
radiation protection and safety in medical uses of ionizing radiation.
Diagnostic reference levels
2.34. DRLs are an important tool and should be used for optimization of
protection and safety for diagnostic medical exposure (see para. 2.18). The
government has a particular responsibility to ensure that DRLs are established for
the State. DRLs can also be established for a region within the State or, in some
cases, regions of several small States. In establishing values for the DRLs, typical
(e.g. median or average) doses5 for patients are obtained from a representative
sample of rooms and facilities where these procedures are being performed.
In this way, a snap shot of current practice in the State or region is obtained,
reflecting both good and poor practices, for that particular imaging procedure.
The value of the DRL for that particular procedure is typically the rounded 75th
percentile of the distribution of typical doses for the room or facility [14–17].
In establishing DRLs, it is important to include only radiological procedures
whose image quality is adequate for the medical purpose (for further guidelines,
see para. 3.215 for diagnostic and interventional radiology and para. 4.207 for
nuclear medicine).
2.35. Once DRLs have been established, medical radiation facilities should
compare their typical doses (sometimes called facility reference levels or local
reference levels) with the relevant DRLs, as described in Sections 3 and 4. The
use of the median value rather than the average value of the distribution of data
collected from a representative sample of standard sized patients should be
preferred for comparison with DRLs, as the average value could be substantially
5

The term ‘doses’ in paras 2.34–2.45, on DRLs, includes activities in nuclear medicine
procedures, as described in para. 2.18.

15

affected by a few high or low values (see also Ref. [14]). Optimization of
protection and safety for a particular radiological procedure should be reviewed
if the comparison shows that the facility’s typical dose exceeds the DRL, or that
the facility’s typical dose is substantially below the DRL and it is evident that the
exposures are not producing images of diagnostic usefulness or are not yielding
the expected medical benefit to the patient. The resulting actions aimed at
improving optimization of protection and safety will usually, but not necessarily,
result in lower facility typical doses for the procedure or procedures. At some
predetermined interval, typically three to five years, there should be a review
of the established national or regional DRL values. More frequent surveys may
be necessary when substantial changes in technology, new imaging protocols
or image post-processing become available. A new national or regional survey
will result in a new distribution of facility typical doses, which will reflect
the improvements made as a result of using the existing DRLs. After initial
evaluations, it is likely that the new values of the DRLs will be lower than the
previous values. This cycle of establishment of national or regional DRLs, their
use by imaging facilities, corrective actions by imaging facilities, and periodic
review of national or regional DRLs brings about a steady improvement in the
optimization of protection and safety across the State or region. After several
cycles, it would be expected that the value of the DRL would stabilize. However,
a DRL may increase if there is a major change in technologies or techniques in
which the relationship between the diagnostic content of the image and the dose
changes.
2.36. There are several steps to the establishment of DRLs. At the national or
regional level, decisions should be made whether to use actual patients or
phantoms to represent a ‘standard patient’ for each modality. Whenever possible,
DRLs should be established on the basis of surveys of procedures performed
on an appropriate sample of patients. The use of phantoms avoids most of the
issues with variations in patient size indices (e.g. mass, height and body mass
index) (see paras 2.39 and 2.41). However, their use does not truly represent
clinical practice with patients and clinical images and, as such, it would seem
less appropriate for use in establishing DRLs. Nevertheless, a phantom based
approach, in the absence of adequate patient data, can be used first to establish
DRLs and then later in their application [14, 17].
2.37. The imaging procedures for which DRLs are to be established should be
decided upon at a national or regional level. The criteria that may help in this
decision are the relative frequencies of the imaging procedures and the magnitude
of the doses incurred. A graded approach may be used to select procedures for
which DRLs are to be established for adults and children — the more frequent
16

and higher dose procedures should have a higher priority. Specific consideration
should be given to paediatric imaging. Depending on national or regional
resources, the actual number of procedures for which DRLs are established will
vary6 [18]. It is beneficial if the health authority and professional bodies adopt a
common terminology for procedures.
2.38. Another consideration with DRLs is whether the procedure is simply
defined in terms of the anatomical region being imaged or whether there should
be a further refinement to include the clinical purpose of the examination
(e.g. indication based protocols). For example, a CT of the abdomen may be
performed differently depending on the diagnostic purpose. For those embarking
on establishing DRLs for the first time, it is advisable to define the procedure
simply in terms of the anatomical region being imaged.
2.39. The next step is to perform, for the selected procedures, a representative
survey — preferably widespread in terms of the types and sizes of facility (rural,
urban, private and public), the equipment and the geographical locations. Most
imaging radiological procedures are performed on adults, and traditionally
national DRLs have been established first for adults. For each room or facility
in which the given procedure is performed, the sample size depends on the
frequency of the imaging procedure and variability in patient doses, but clearly a
larger sample size will reduce the statistical uncertainties (for further guidelines,
see para. 3.213 for diagnostic and interventional radiology and para. 4.205
for nuclear medicine). Not all adults are the same size, so many States have
established DRLs for a standard adult patient, limiting patient eligibility to the
sample on the basis of mass, for example 70 ± 20 kg, and aiming for a sample
average in a given mass range, for example 70 ± 5 kg (see Refs [14–16]). Other
States have adopted a more pragmatic approach, accepting all adults in the initial
sample but excluding extreme outliers in terms of patient size indices.7
2.40. The dose metrics used to represent the dose to the patient should be easily
measurable and should be in accordance with the recommendations of the ICRU,
as established in para. 1.46 of GSR Part 3 [3]. The following are commonly used
terms for diagnostic and interventional radiology [10, 11]:
(a)
(b)

In radiography: air kerma–area product, incident air kerma or entrance
surface air kerma (which includes backscatter).
In fluoroscopy: air kerma–area product.
6
77

See www.eu-alara.net/index.php/surveys-mainmenu-53/36-ean-surveys/156-drls.html
See
Seewww.arpansa.gov.au/research-and-expertise/surveys/national-diagnostic-reference-level-service
www.arpansa.gov.au/research/surveys/national-diagnostic-reference-level-service

17

(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

In CT: CT air kerma index and CT air kerma–length product.
In mammography and tomosynthesis: incident air kerma or entrance surface
air kerma and mean glandular dose.
In dentistry: incident air kerma for intraoral radiography and air kerma–area
product for panoramic radiography and CBCT.
In image guided interventional procedures: air kerma–area product and
cumulative reference air kerma at the patient entrance reference point.

Further guidance on dose metrics is given in paras 3.202–3.204. It is crucial that
the dose data for each contributing facility is only collected for procedures where
the image quality was confirmed as adequate for the clinical purpose. In nuclear
medicine, DRLs are set in activity administered to the patient and in activity per
unit of body mass (MBq/kg) (see paras 4.205 and 4.206).
2.41. Optimizing protection and safety for average adult patients does not
necessarily mean that optimization is being achieved for other size or age groups.
Experience, in particular with children undergoing CT examinations, has clearly
demonstrated that this is not the case [19]. This means that consideration should
also be given to establishing DRLs for children undergoing imaging procedures.
The same problem of size and mass, as stated in para. 2.39, also pertains to
children. Patient age has been used to define groups of children for the purpose
of establishing paediatric DRLs. Some States or regions have adopted a simple
age approach, for example newborn, 1, 5, 10 and 15 years, while others use age
bands, for example less than 1 year, 1–5 years, 5–10 years and 10–15 years.
Because the size of children, and hence the dose level, significantly varies not
only across different ages but also at any given age, this alone is not a good
indicator, and patient mass or patient equivalent thickness should also be
considered. When DRLs for several mass, size or age groups are defined, the
groups should be defined unambiguously by using intervals (e.g. body mass
bands). The number of groups chosen should take into account the practical
difficulty in collecting a sufficient number of patient dose data in each group.
In nuclear medicine, administered activities should be adjusted on the basis of
agreed factors linked to size or mass. More guidance on grouping patients for
establishing typical doses and DRL is given in para. 3.213 for diagnostic and
interventional radiology, in para. 4.205 for diagnostic nuclear medicine and in
Ref. [14]. In addition, guidelines on DRLs for paediatric imaging are also being
prepared by the European Commission.8

8

18

See www.eurosafeimaging.org/pidrl

2.42. The processes and steps towards establishing DRLs, as described in
paras 2.36–2.41, are likely to involve many parties, including the imaging
facilities, the health authority, professional bodies and the regulatory body. In
particular, there should be collective ownership of the DRLs in deciding which
procedures and age groups will be used, how the data will be collected, who
will manage the data, and when the DRLs should be reviewed and updated.
In some States, a national governmental body administers the national patient
dose database that underpins the establishing of DRLs. In other States, this
role may be taken by the regulatory body or a professional body. There is no
preferred custodian: what is important is that a patient dose database for DRLs
is established and maintained, DRL values are set and then promulgated through
the regulatory processes, and a process for periodic review is established. It may
be more appropriate to take a regional rather than a national approach to DRLs
(see para. 2.34).
2.43. The methodology used in performing the initial survey can range from a
paper based approach through to a web based, electronic submission approach.
As the interconnectivity of imaging systems, with the availability of patient dose
metrics, and radiology and hospital information systems (HISs) improves, the
process of gathering data for DRLs is likely to become easier. States embarking
on establishing DRLs for the first time should consider applying an electronic
submission approach.
2.44. The national or regional DRL values should be periodically reviewed and
updated, typically with a cycle of three to five years (see para. 2.35). The review
can be performed in many ways, but in all cases there is first a collection phase,
followed by analysis of the data collected. The collection of facility typical doses
can occur throughout the cycle, or it can be restricted to a shorter time frame
towards the end of the cycle. Pragmatically, the occasion of a medical radiation
facility comparing its facility typical doses with the current DRLs would seem
to be an appropriate time for the facility to submit its new facility typical doses
to the national or regional database being used for the DRLs. At the end of the
cycle, an analysis of the submitted facility typical doses would take place, and
the values of the DRLs would be updated accordingly. While increased digital
connectivity would technically support the continuous collection and analysis of
data, a given set of DRL values should be kept stable for a period of time to allow
the improvement cycle to take place.
2.45. Finally, if the State is not able to facilitate the establishment of its own
national DRLs or to participate in a regional approach, there is the option to
facilitate the adoption of the DRLs from another State or region. While such
19

DRLs might not reflect the State’s own practice, with judicious selection, the
adopted DRLs can still perform the same role of bringing about an improvement
in the optimization of protection and safety in the adopting State. Care is needed
when comparing DRLs from States that use significantly different generations of
imaging systems.
Dose constraints
2.46. Dose constraints are not dose limits; they are tools for optimization of
protection and safety, including considerations of social and economic factors.
The role of dose constraints for occupational exposure and for public exposure
is introduced in para. 2.16. In particular, the government, typically through the
radiation protection regulatory body, has responsibilities with respect to public
exposure, where its primary role is to ensure that no member of the public can
exceed the public dose limit as a result of cumulative public exposure arising
from multiple authorized facilities, including medical radiation facilities.
A simple approach that can be taken is to set a dose constraint for public exposure
arising from a single facility at some fraction of the dose limit. Some States
use a dose constraint of approximately one third of the dose limit, namely an
effective dose of 0.3 mSv per year [20]. In establishing such a dose constraint,
the regulatory body should consider the number and type of radiation sources
used in a particular State or region that may result in public exposure.
2.47. In addition to patients, two other groups of people that can incur medical
exposure are carers and comforters, and volunteers in biomedical research. Since
it is medical exposure, neither of these groups is subject to dose limits for the
exposures incurred. Instead, reliance is placed on the use of dose constraints
as a means for ensuring that optimization of protection and safety takes place
(see para. 2.16). For both of these groups of people, the government, through
consultation with the health authority, the relevant professional bodies and the
radiation protection regulatory body, has the responsibility to ensure that dose
constraints are established.
2.48. For carers and comforters, the usual approach is to apply dose constraints
on an episode by episode basis — that is, the dose constraint applies to the
cumulative exposure of the carer or comforter over the duration of that person
giving care and comfort to a patient. In the case of a parent assisting with his
or her child undergoing a diagnostic X ray procedure, the episode is the time
in which the X rays are being produced, which is extremely short. In the
case of a carer or comforter for a person having undergone treatment with
radiopharmaceuticals, the episode will last several days until the radionuclide has
20

decayed to negligible levels. Consideration should be given to the cumulative
dose of a carer or comforter acting in this role for several distinct episodes. In
such cases, a dose constraint per annum may be used in addition to an episode
based dose constraint.
2.49. In setting dose constraints for carers and comforters, consideration should
be given to the age of the individual and the possibility of pregnancy. A particular
issue is that of children in this role. The definition of a carer or comforter
includes that the person “willingly and voluntarily” helps in this role. It could be
argued that young children might not understand such concepts. Nonetheless, it
is reasonable and likely that the children of a parent undergoing treatment would
want to provide and receive comfort. The framework for radiation protection and
safety should accommodate such wishes. A pragmatic approach is often taken,
whereby children in this role are effectively treated as members of the public and
their medical exposure is constrained to an effective dose of 1 mSv per episode.
A pregnant carer or comforter presents a similar situation, and consideration
should be given to the embryo or fetus. The same approach of constraining the
effective dose to the embryo or fetus to 1 mSv per episode is often taken. For
an adult carer or comforter, a value of dose constraint commonly used is 5 mSv
effective dose per episode. For elderly persons, more lenient dose constraints may
be used. In any of these cases, flexibility may need to be applied with respect to
the dose constraint.
2.50. In setting dose constraints for diagnostic radiological procedures that are
performed on volunteers participating in a programme of biomedical research,
the intention is that government, through consultation with the health authority,
the relevant professional bodies and the radiation protection regulatory body,
provides broad guidance for the ethics committees (see paras 2.99–2.102) who,
in turn, would adapt the dose constraints to suit the particular programme of
biomedical research under consideration. Typical patient doses and national
DRLs would be two considerations in setting such dose constraints.
Criteria and guidelines for the release of patients after radionuclide therapy
2.51. Many factors can influence the exposure that members of the public
and carers and comforters can incur following the release of a patient who
has undergone a therapeutic procedure with unsealed sources or who retains
implanted sealed sources (for detailed information on these factors for unsealed
sources, see Ref. [21]). The role of government, through consultation with the
health authority, the relevant professional bodies and the radiation protection
regulatory body, is to ensure that criteria are established, with accompanying
21

guidance, to help to simplify the process when individual medical radiation
facilities are considering the release of a patient. Guidance for such actions of the
medical radiation facility is given in Sections 4 and 5.
Health authority
2.52. All medical facilities should be authorized by the health authority to
ensure that the facility meets the applicable requirements for quality of medical
services. When the medical facility uses ionizing radiation, authorization
for medical practice and health care should be granted by the health authority
only if the radiation safety requirements are met (paras 2.70–2.76). As noted
in para. 2.30, the health authority should contribute to radiation protection and
safety. This includes participation in establishing DRLs, dose constraints for
carers and comforters and for volunteers in biomedical research, and criteria and
guidance for the release of patients after radionuclide therapy (see the guidance
in paras 2.34–2.51). Coordination and collaboration between the health authority
and the radiation protection regulatory body should ensure radiation protection
and overall safety of the medical facility.
2.53. Radiation protection and safety in medical uses of ionizing radiation
should be assured by the proper specialization of health professionals, namely
that only health professionals with the appropriate competencies can take on
roles that include specific responsibilities for radiation protection and safety.
The health authority has responsibilities in providing policy and guidance with
respect to health profession specialties and their subspecialties, including on the
scope of practice, and requirements for competence. Guidance on recognition of
competence in a specialty is given in paras 2.119–2.133.
2.54. Adequate numbers of radiological medical practitioners, medical
radiation technologists, medical physicists and other health professionals with
responsibilities for patient radiation protection should be available for a medical
radiation facility to function correctly and safely. This includes sufficient capacity
to cover absences of key personnel through sickness, leave or other reasons. The
health authority, through its policy making role, should set clear standards for
acceptable medical practice.
2.55. The health authority has particular roles in the application of the radiation
protection requirements for justification, namely with respect to:
(a)
(b)
22

Generic justification of radiological procedures;
Justification of radiological procedures in health screening programmes;

(c)

Criteria for the justification of radiological procedures for health assessment
of asymptomatic individuals intended for the early detection of disease, but
not as part of a health screening programme.

2.56. Generic justification of radiological procedures is an ongoing process as
new procedures become available and as established procedures are reviewed in
the light of new knowledge and developments. It should be decided whether a new
radiological procedure should become a new addition to the existing procedures.
Conversely, an existing radiological procedure may need to be withdrawn from
use if there is evidence that an alternative modality or technology has greater
efficacy. The health authority, together with relevant professional bodies, should
make these decisions.
2.57. The use of radiological procedures as part of a health screening programme
involves subjecting asymptomatic populations to radiation exposure. The decision
to embark upon such a programme should include consideration of, inter alia, the
potential of the screening procedure to detect a particular disease, the likelihood
of effective treatment of cases detected and, for certain diseases, the advantages
to the community from the control of the disease. Sound epidemiological
evidence should provide the basis for such health screening programmes. The
health authority, together with relevant professional bodies, should consider all
the factors before reaching a decision.
2.58. The use of radiological procedures on asymptomatic individuals, intended
for the early detection of disease but not as part of an approved health screening
programme, is now increasingly common. Such radiological procedures are not
established medical practice, nor are they performed as part of a programme
of biomedical research. Therefore, the health authority, together with relevant
professional bodies, has a role in providing guidance on the applicability and
appropriateness of such procedures. Such guidance would help the referring
medical practitioner and the radiological medical practitioner carry out the
process of justification for an individual patient (see paras 3.141–3.143).
2.59. National or international referral guidelines should be used as an important
tool in the application of the process of justification of medical exposure for an
individual patient. The health authority should support the relevant professional
bodies in developing and implementing evidence based referral guidelines (see
also para. 2.65).

23

2.60. The health authority should also encourage the development of, and
promote the implementation of, practice guidelines and technical standards9
developed by professional bodies.
Professional bodies
2.61. Professional bodies is the collective term used in GSR Part 3 [3] and in
this Safety Guide to include the various organizations and groups of health
professionals. These include societies, colleges and associations of health
professionals, often for a particular specialty. Examples of professional bodies with
direct involvement in the use of ionizing radiation include societies, colleges and
associations of radiologists, radiation oncologists, nuclear medicine physicians,
medical physicists, medical radiation technologists and dentists. In large States,
such professional bodies might be regional within the State. Conversely, there
can be regional professional bodies covering several States. There are also
professional bodies in the wider medical arena that still influence some aspects
of radiation use. Examples of these include societies, associations and colleges
representing specialties such as cardiology, gastroenterology, urology, vascular
surgery, orthopaedic surgery and neurology, who may use radiation, and other
organizations, such as those that represent general practitioners and primary care
physicians.
2.62. Professional bodies, as stated in para. 2.30, represent the collective expertise
of the given health profession and specialty and, as such, they should also play a
role in contributing to radiation protection and safety in medical uses of ionizing
radiation. This includes setting standards for education, training, qualifications
and competence for a given specialty, and setting technical standards and giving
guidance on practice. Further guidance on education, training, qualifications and
competence is given in paras 2.119–2.133.
2.63. Relevant professional bodies, in partnership with the health authority
and the radiation protection regulatory body, have a role with respect to the
establishment of DRLs, dose constraints for carers and comforters and for
volunteers in biomedical research, and criteria and guidance for the release
of patients after radionuclide therapy, as is described in paras 2.42, 2.47–2.50
and 2.51, respectively.

9

The term ‘practice guidelines and technical standards’ is used to represent the range of
documents, statements and publications produced by professional bodies to help to educate and
guide health professionals in the conduct of their specialty.

24

2.64. The role of the relevant professional bodies with respect to the application
of the requirements for justification is described in paras 2.56–2.60.
2.65. Professional bodies should take the lead in the development of referral
guidelines (also called appropriateness criteria in some States) for use in
justification of medical exposure for an individual patient (para. 2.59). It might
not be possible for every State to develop its own referral guidelines. The
significant work of a number of professional bodies around the world could
be utilized by many other States through adoption or adaptation by the local
professional bodies (see also paras 3.143 and 4.160).
2.66. With respect to medical imaging, the process of optimization of radiation
protection and safety should aim at achieving adequate image quality — not the
best possible image quality, but certainly sufficient to ensure that diagnosis or
treatment is not compromised. From an operational perspective, there are many
factors that influence the relationship between image quality and patient dose.
Having standards or norms that specify acceptable image quality is clearly
advantageous, and relevant professional bodies have a role in establishing and
promoting such criteria.
2.67. For the optimization of radiation protection and safety, a comprehensive
programme of quality assurance for medical exposure is required. Such
programmes should be part of the wider management system of the medical
radiation facility (see para. 2.140). Nonetheless, there is considerable benefit
in making use of resource material and standards established by professional
bodies for particular areas of the programme of quality assurance. For example,
many medical physics professional bodies have developed detailed guidance on
performance testing aspects of a programme of quality assurance. Where such
material or standards are lacking in a State, the relevant professional body could
adopt or adapt such resources from outside the State.
2.68. Professional bodies should encourage their members to perform proactive
risk assessment, especially in radiotherapy. They can also play an active role by
encouraging their members to contribute to relevant international or national
anonymous and voluntary safety reporting and learning systems, and by
contributing to developing of such systems. Such databases provide a wealth
of information that can help to minimize unintended and accidental medical
exposures. Examples of international safety reporting systems are the IAEA
safety reporting systems Safety in Radiation Oncology (SAFRON) and Safety
in Radiological Procedures (SAFRAD), and the Radiation Oncology Safety
Education and Information System (ROSEIS).
25

2.69. Professional bodies have a role in disseminating information on standards
and guidance relevant to radiation protection and safety.
Regulatory body
2.70. The radiation protection regulatory body should fulfil its regulatory
functions, such as establishing requirements and guidelines, authorizing and
inspecting facilities and activities, and enforcing legislative and regulatory
provisions. Detailed requirements specifying these roles and responsibilities
are given in GSR Part 3 [3] and GSR Part 1 (Rev. 1) [13], and further general
guidance is provided in IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GS-G-1.5, Regulatory
Control of Radiation Sources [22]. Guidance on general regulatory body roles
and responsibilities with respect to occupational radiation protection and
radiation protection of the public are given in IAEA Safety Standards Series
Nos GSG-7, Occupational Radiation Protection [23], and GSG-8, Radiation
Protection of the Public and the Environment [24]. A prerequisite for the
regulatory body being able to perform its regulatory functions effectively is
having staff with appropriate specialist expertise. This is covered in detail in
GSR Part 3 [3], GSR Part 1 (Rev. 1) [13] and GS-G-1.5 [22], and applies in the
context of medical uses of ionizing radiation. The regulatory controls should be
applied knowledgeably and not just as an administrative exercise.
Authorization of medical radiation facilities
2.71. The graded approach to medical uses of ionizing radiation has particular
significance for regulatory bodies because, as described in paras 2.23–2.27, there
is a wide variation in the complexity of medical radiation facilities. Regulatory
bodies should consider which form of authorization is appropriate for a given type
of medical radiation facility. Coupled with the type of authorization is the level
of complexity of the documentation that should be submitted to the regulatory
body prior to the authorization. This includes the degree of detail in the safety
assessment (see paras 2.150–2.154). The duration for which the authorization is
granted is another consideration for the regulatory body; more complex facilities
would warrant a more frequent renewal process.
2.72. Typical practices that are amenable to registration are those for which:
(i) safety can largely be ensured by the design of the facilities and equipment;
(ii) the operating procedures are simple to follow; (iii) the safety training
requirements are minimal; and (iv) historically, there have been few problems
with safety in operations. Registration is best suited to those practices for which
operations do not vary significantly. These conditions are generally not met
26

in medical uses of ionizing radiation for the following three reasons: patient
exposure depends on human performance; radiation protection and safety is not
largely ensured by design; and the amount of training required is significant.
Medical radiation facilities are, in principle, better candidates for individualized
licensing than for registration. It would be expected that licensing would
be used for radiation therapy facilities, nuclear medicine facilities, facilities
performing image guided interventional procedures and for most diagnostic
radiology facilities. For some simple forms of diagnostic radiology, such as
dental radiography (without CBCT) and DXA, authorization through registration
may be acceptable. For both forms of authorization, the regulatory body should
develop standardized forms or templates that help to ensure that the correct
information is submitted to the regulatory body (see also paras 2.150–2.154 on
safety assessment).
2.73. No matter which form of authorization is used for a medical radiation
facility, a crucial step prior to the granting of it is that the regulatory body
ascertains the credentials of key personnel with responsibilities for radiation
protection and safety, including radiological medical practitioners, medical
radiation technologists, medical physicists and RPOs. This step cannot be
overemphasized, as all aspects of radiation protection and safety in medical
uses of ionizing radiation depend ultimately on the competence of the personnel
involved (see also paras 2.119–2.137).
2.74. Setting up a medical radiation facility may involve the construction of
facilities that are difficult to modify at a later time. Regulatory bodies may choose
a two stage process of authorization; that is, to require an initial application to
build a facility to be submitted before construction begins. At this stage, the
regulatory body should review the intended medical uses of ionizing radiation,
the facility’s design, including structural shielding plans10, and the planned
equipment. This is followed at a later stage by the full review and assessment
by the regulatory body, leading to the granting of the authorization. For more
complex medical radiation facilities, such as a radiation therapy facility, this
latter process should include an inspection by the regulatory body or authorized
party.
2.75. Subsequent, substantial modifications of a medical radiation facility,
including its medical radiological equipment and its procedures, may have safety
10

Although not strictly a radiation protection and safety issue, it is important to ensure
that the building can support the weight of the structural shielding, for which it may have not
been originally designed.

27

implications. The regulatory body may require an application for an amendment
to the authorization.
2.76. The regulatory body should require the renewal of an authorization after
a set time interval. This allows a review of the findings of inspections and of
other information on the safety performance of the medical radiation facility. The
frequency of renewal should be based on radiation protection and safety criteria,
with consideration given to the frequency of inspections by the regulatory body
and the safety record associated with a given type of practice in general or with a
particular medical radiation facility. A renewal cycle longer than five years would
normally not be appropriate for medical radiation facilities.
2.77. The authorization of a medical radiation facility to use ionizing radiation
for medical purposes is a separate exercise to the authorization of the same
facility, or the wider medical facility of which it is part, by the health authority
to carry out medicine practice and health care (see para. 2.52). Meeting radiation
safety requirements is a condition that is necessary but not sufficient to obtain an
authorization to practice medicine. Coordination and collaboration between the
radiation protection regulatory body and the health authority should take place to
ensure radiation protection and overall safety of the medical facility.
Inspection of medical radiation facilities
2.78. On-site inspection by the regulatory body is often the principal means
for face-to-face contact with personnel in the medical radiation facility. The
regulatory body should establish a system for prioritization and frequency of
inspections, based on the risk and complexity associated with the particular
medical uses of ionizing radiation. The inspection by the regulatory body of
medical radiation facilities should be performed by staff with the specialist
expertise to be able to assess competently the compliance of the facility with the
radiation protection regulations and authorization conditions. Further guidance
on inspections is given in GS-G-1.5 [22].
Particular considerations for the regulatory body with respect to medical
exposure, occupational exposure and public exposure
2.79. The regulatory body should ensure that all the requirements of
GSR Part 3 [3] with respect to medical exposure, occupational exposure and
public exposure are applied in authorized medical radiation facilities, as described
in detail in the relevant subsections of Sections 3–5. To help medical radiation

28

facilities fulfil their obligations, there are some particular areas for which the
regulatory body should provide specific guidance.
2.80. Arrangements for the calibration of sources giving rise to medical exposure
are required to be in place to ensure radiation protection and safety in medical
uses of ionizing radiation, as established in para. 3.167 of GSR Part 3 [3], and
detailed guidance is given in Sections 3–5. The regulatory body should specify
frequencies for re-calibration of equipment and, in doing so, should make use of
applicable guidance given by professional bodies of medical physics.
2.81. In the case of the calibration of radiation therapy units, independent
verification prior to clinical use is required to be assured (para. 3.167(c) of
GSR Part 3 [3]). The regulatory body should be aware of the limitations on local
resources in their State. An ‘ideal’ independent verification — for example by
independent medical physicist using different dosimetry equipment — might not
be feasible. The regulatory body has the responsibility to ensure that the radiation
safety of the radiation therapy unit is not compromised and at the same time the
facility is not unnecessarily closed down. The regulatory body should decide on
acceptable alternatives, such as verification by a different medical physicist with
the same equipment or verification by using a different set of equipment, or using
a form of verification by postal dosimetry using thermoluminescent, optically
stimulated luminescent dosimeters or equivalent.
2.82. Unintended and accidental medical exposures do occur, and the regulatory
body is required to ensure that a system is put in place and all practical measures
are taken to prevent such exposures, and, if such an exposure does occur, that
it is properly investigated and corrective actions are taken (Requirement 41 of
GSR Part 3 [3]). Arrangements should be put in place to respond promptly in
order to mitigate any consequences. The regulatory body should require written
records to be kept of all unintended and accidental medical exposures and
should provide guidelines on what information is to be included in these reports.
The more significant events are required to be reported to the regulatory body
(para. 3.181(d) of GSR Part 3 [3]). The regulatory body should provide guidance
on which events should be reported to them. One of the reasons for reporting
to the regulatory body is to enable the regulatory body, in turn, to disseminate
information on the event to relevant parties so that the recurrence of similar
events can be minimized. In addition to mandatory reporting for regulatory
purposes, anonymous and voluntary safety reporting and learning systems can
significantly contribute to enhanced radiation protection and safety and quality
in health care. The regulatory body should be proactive and encourage medical
radiation facilities to participate in relevant international or national anonymous
29

and voluntary safety reporting and learning systems, as stated in para. 2.68.
Further guidance is given in Sections 3–5.
2.83. With respect to assessment of occupational exposure, the regulatory body
should establish requirements and provide clear guidance on which form of
monitoring should be in place. Paragraphs 3.99–3.102 of GSR Part 3 [3] require
employers, registrants and licensees to make arrangements for assessment of
occupational exposure, and provide broad criteria for when individual monitoring
should be arranged and when workplace monitoring may be sufficient.
Occupational exposures vary widely in medical uses of ionizing radiation,
ranging from uses where it is quite clear that individual monitoring should be
undertaken, to uses where workplace monitoring would suffice. It is where uses
fall between these two situations that specific direction should be provided by the
regulatory body. Further guidance is given in Sections 3–5.
2.84. The regulatory body has a role as the custodian of public radiation
protection. Because a member of the public can be subject to exposure arising
from any number of authorized medical radiation facilities (or indeed other
facilities and activities using radiation), the regulatory body has an oversight role
to ensure that the cumulative effect of these multiple exposure pathways does not
lead to public exposure greater than the dose limits (see Box 1). Part of this role
includes setting dose constraints and ensuring that safety assessments include
considerations of public exposure and potential public exposure.
2.85. GSR Part 3 [3] establishes many requirements for registrants, licensees
and employers with respect to occupational radiation protection to maintain and
make available records on a wide range of matters. GSR Part 3 [3] requires that:
“3.104. Records of occupational exposure for each worker shall be
maintained during and after the worker’s working life, at least until the
former worker attains or would have attained the age of 75 years, and for
not less than 30 years after cessation of the work in which the worker was
subject to occupational exposure.”
For all other records, the period for which they should be maintained is deferred
to the regulatory body. The period of retention will depend on the type of record
and its usefulness or relevance after the passage of time. Records relating to a
person’s health or health care should be kept for that person’s lifetime, but
there are significant variations around the world. In some States, for example,
medical records are required to be kept for the lifetime of the person plus ten
years; in others, retention for a much shorter period, such as seven to ten years, is
30

required. Records for activities such as calibrations, dosimetry, quality assurance
and investigations of accidents and unintended medical exposures should be
kept for a significant period of time, as there is always the possibility that the
records will be needed to perform retrospective assessments of medical exposure,
occupational exposure or public exposure. A retention period of at least ten years
may be appropriate for such records. On the other hand, records on education,
training, qualification and competence of individuals may be of relevance only
when that person is working at the medical radiation facility. Further guidance
for the regulatory body and for registrants, licensees and employers is given in
IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GS-G-3.1, Application of the Management
System for Facilities and Activities [25].
Authorization for the installation, maintenance and servicing of medical
radiological equipment
2.86. The regulatory body should ensure that the activities to install, maintain
or service medical radiological equipment are appropriately authorized (see
also paras 2.103–2.111 on responsibilities for suppliers of sources, equipment
and software, paras 2.112–2.114 maintenance and servicing organizations, and
para. 2.135 on education, training, qualification and competence of servicing
engineers and technicians).
Authorization of other practices relating to medical uses of ionizing radiation
2.87. The regulatory body may also require authorization for other activities
relating to medical uses of ionizing radiation, including: the import, distribution,
assembly, sale, transfer and transport of radioactive sources or medical
radiological equipment; decommissioning; and disposal of radioactive sources
and waste. The requirements to carry out these practices should be established
by regulations, and complementary regulatory guidance documents should be
provided.
Dissemination of information
2.88. Paragraph 2.33 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that the regulatory body ensures
that mechanisms are in place for the timely dissemination of information, in the
context of this Safety Guide, to medical radiation facilities, manufacturers and
suppliers, the health authority and professional bodies, on lessons for radiation
protection and safety resulting from regulatory experience and operating
experience, and from incidents, including accidents, and related findings.
Information should be exchanged through the publication of newsletters and the
31

periodic mailing of notices, by presentations at scientific meetings and meetings
of professional associations, by establishing a web site, or by co-sponsoring
educational seminars and workshops with professional and scientific associations.
More rapid actions should be considered in response to actual or potential
problems that may result in significant consequences.
Medical radiation facility
2.89. In medical uses of ionizing radiation, the prime responsibility for radiation
protection and safety rests with the person or organization responsible for the
medical radiation facility, normally referred to as the registrant or licensee.
Almost all the requirements of GSR Part 3 [3] applicable to a medical radiation
facility for ensuring radiation protection and safety in medical uses of ionizing
radiation place the responsibility on the registrant or licensee (and on the
employer, in the case of occupational radiation protection).
2.90. However, medical uses of ionizing radiation involve a multidisciplinary
team led by a health professional who often is not the registrant or licensee of
the authorized medical radiation facility. Because of the medical setting in which
such exposures occur, primary responsibility for radiation protection and safety
for patients lies with the health professional responsible for the radiological
procedure, who is referred to in GSR Part 3 [3] and in this Safety Guide as the
radiological medical practitioner. The term ‘radiological medical practitioner’ is
the generic term that GSR Part 3 [3] uses to refer to a health professional with
specialist education and training in medical uses of radiation, who is competent
to perform independently or to oversee procedures involving medical exposure
in a given specialty. Health professionals that could take on the role of the
radiological medical practitioner, depending on the particular use of radiation
and on the laws and regulations in a State, include radiologists, nuclear medicine
physicians, radiation oncologists, cardiologists, orthopaedic surgeons, other
specialist physicians, dentists, chiropractors and podiatrists. More guidance on
the health professionals who could be radiological medical practitioners is given
in Sections 3–5 and in paras 2.124 and 2.125 on education and training.
2.91. The net effect of paras 2.89 and 2.90 is that, for medical exposure, the
registrant or licensee should ensure all requirements are applied. This normally
requires that the radiological medical practitioner ensure a given set of actions
take place, usually with the involvement of further health professionals, mainly
medical radiation technologists and medical physicists (see paras 2.92 and
2.93, respectively). The medical exposure subsections of Sections 3–5 provide

32

guidance on meeting the many requirements that come under the responsibility
of the radiological medical practitioner.
2.92. The term ‘medical radiation technologist’ is used in GSR Part 3 [3] and this
Safety Guide as the generic term for a second group of health professionals. A wide
variety of terms are used throughout the world for such health professionals,
such as radiographer, radiological technologist, nuclear medicine technologist
and radiation therapist. In GSR Part 3 [3], a medical radiation technologist is
a health professional with specialist education and training in medical radiation
technology, competent to perform radiological procedures, on delegation from
the radiological medical practitioner, in one or more of the specialties of medical
radiation technology (e.g. diagnostic radiology, radiation therapy and nuclear
medicine). The medical radiation technologist is usually the interface between
the radiological medical practitioner and the patient, and his or her skill and
care in the choice of techniques and parameters determines to a large extent the
practical realization of the optimization of radiation protection and safety for a
given patient’s exposure in many modalities. The medical radiation technologists
may also have a role in education and training. More guidance on the roles and
responsibilities of medical radiation technologists is given in Sections 3–5 and in
paras 2.126 and 2.127 on education and training.
2.93. In GSR Part 3 [3], a medical physicist is a health professional with
specialist education and training in the concepts and techniques of applying
physics in medicine and competent to practise independently in one or more of
the subfields (specialties) of medical physics (e.g. diagnostic radiology, radiation
therapy and nuclear medicine). The medical physicist provides specialist
expertise with respect to radiation protection of the patient. The medical physicist
has responsibilities in the optimization of radiation protection and safety in
medical exposures, including source calibration, clinical dosimetry, image
quality and patient dose assessment, and physical aspects of the programme of
quality assurance, including medical radiological equipment acceptance and
commissioning. The medical physicist is also likely to have responsibilities in
providing radiation protection and safety training for health professionals. In
addition, he or she may also perform the role of the RPO, whose responsibilities
are primarily in occupational and public radiation protection. More guidance on
the roles and responsibilities of medical physicists is given in Sections 3–5, in
Ref. [26], and in paras 2.128 and 2.129 on education and training.
2.94. There are other health professionals with responsibilities for radiation
protection of the patient. These include, for example, radiopharmacists,

33

radiochemists, dosimetrists and biomedical or clinical engineers. Detailed
guidance is given in Sections 3–5.
2.95. For a medical radiation facility, the radiation protection and safety
responsibilities outlined above for the radiological medical practitioner,
the medical radiation technologist, the medical physicist and other health
professionals with responsibilities for patient radiation protection should be
assigned through an authorization (or other regulatory means) issued by the
radiation protection regulatory body in that State.
2.96. The RPO is: “A person technically competent in radiation protection
matters relevant for a given type of practice who is designated by the registrant,
licensee or employer to oversee the application of regulatory requirements” [3].
For a medical radiation facility, the RPO oversees the application of requirements
for occupational and public radiation protection, and may provide general
radiation protection advice to the registrant or licensee. The RPO has no direct
responsibilities or roles with respect to patient radiation protection. An RPO,
unless he or she has recognized competence in medical physics, cannot perform
the role of a medical physicist with respect to medical exposure.
2.97. In addition, all health professionals involved in medical uses of ionizing
radiation have responsibilities with respect to occupational and public radiation
protection. (See the occupational and public radiation protection subsections in
Sections 3–5).
2.98. Medical radiation facilities, as they increasingly utilize digital technologies,
should ensure access to an IT specialist11 who, through specialized training and
experience, has competence in the maintenance and quality control of IT software
and hardware. The correct functioning of these systems is crucial for radiation
protection and safety.
Ethics committee
2.99. Participants in a programme of biomedical research may be either patients,
with some disease or ailment, or they may be healthy individuals. Regardless,

11

The IT specialist in this respect is an expert in imaging informatics, with expertise
in improving the efficiency, accuracy, usability, reliability and interconnectivity of medical
imaging and radiotherapy services within the medical radiation facility and, if relevant, its
parent health care facility.

34

they should be volunteers. The ethics committee12 has a particular responsibility
with respect to justification of medical exposure of volunteers exposed as part
of a programme of biomedical research (para. 3.161 of GSR Part 3 [3]). The
first part of this responsibility is to decide whether to approve the programme of
biomedical research, including the proposed use of radiation. The use of radiation
in a programme of biomedical research can include:
(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

The use of a diagnostic radiological procedure to assess the efficacy of the
treatment under investigation (e.g. ranging from a DXA scan to measure
bone mineral density before, during and after a given treatment regime, to
a CT or a positron emission tomography (PET)–CT examination to assess
some clinical indicators, again performed before, during and after the
treatment);
Trials being performed to assess a new radiopharmaceutical (i.e. the
radiation itself is part of the research, rather than a tool for assessment);
Trials being performed to assess a new radiotherapy protocol alone or in
combination with other therapeutic modalities;
Trials being performed to compare radiological procedures, for example
specificities and sensitivities of different imaging procedures or efficacy of
different treatments;
Trials being performed to assess physiological and/or biochemical
processes in healthy individuals.

In making its decision, the ethics committee should be presented with correct
information on the expected doses and estimates of the radiation risks based on
the age, sex and health status of the participants. The ethics committee should
also obtain information on who will perform the radiological procedures and
how. The dose estimates and the associated radiation risks should be assessed
by a medical physicist. This information should be then considered by the ethics
committee together with the information on the other risks and benefits of the
programme.
2.100. The ethics committee has the responsibility to specify any dose
constraints that are to be applied to the doses incurred as part of the approved
programme of biomedical research. Such dose constraints would be guided
by nationally or regionally established dose constraints (see para. 2.50). Dose
constraints should be adjusted to the expected benefit of the programme of
12

The ethics committee is the term used in GSR Part 3 [3] to refer to a committee
dedicated to the rights and well-being of research subjects. Other terms, such as institutional
review board, are used in some States.

35

biomedical research: the lower the benefit to society, the more stringent the dose
constraint. The ICRP stratifies doses incurred in biomedical research according
to radiation risk [27] and in Ref. [4] assigns numerical values of dose constraints
ranging from less than 0.1 mSv to greater than 10 mSv, as the benefit to society
ranged from minor through to substantial. Less stringent dose constraints may be
applied for participants with short life expectancy (e.g. see Ref. [28]). Particular
attention should be given to setting dose constraints for healthy volunteers who
repeatedly take part in biomedical research programmes that expose them to
increased risks.
2.101. Ethics committees might not be aware of these responsibilities.
Therefore, the radiation protection regulatory body should act as a facilitator in
promoting systems so that the ethics committee knows about its responsibilities
when a proposal for a programme of biomedical research that includes radiation
exposure is submitted to the ethics committee. Such a system may include a
standardized proposal form that includes the question ‘Will ionizing radiation be
used as part of this programme of biomedical research?’ If the answer is yes, the
form should then request information on radiation doses and risks to be provided,
having been first assessed and signed off by a medical physicist.
2.102. In parallel, the regulatory body should inform the registrants and
licensees that radiological procedures requested as part of a programme of
biomedical research are justified only if that programme has been approved by
the ethics committee, and that such an approval is subject to dose constraints,
which would then influence how the procedure would be performed.
Suppliers of sources, equipment and software
2.103. Suppliers13 of medical radiological equipment and developers of
software that could influence the delivery of the medical exposure have
responsibilities with respect to design and performance. Generic requirements
are established in para. 3.49 of GSR Part 3 [3] and specific requirements in
para. 3.162 of GSR Part 3 [3].
2.104. A particular issue with medical radiological equipment and software in
medical uses of ionizing radiation is that of the language, terminology and icons
used on control panels, on software screens and in instruction manuals. English
13

The definition of supplier (of a source) in GSR Part 3 [3] includes designers,
manufacturers, producers, constructors, assemblers, installers, distributors, sellers, importers
and exporters of a source.

36

and other widely spoken languages dominate. The person using the equipment
or software should fully understand the options being presented, and translation
into a local language is strongly recommended. It is not appropriate to assume
that partial knowledge of other languages is sufficient; there are documented
instances of unintended or accidental medical exposures arising from incorrect
understanding of the displayed language (e.g. see Ref. [29]).
2.105. Many items of medical radiological equipment can be configured and
supplied with different options. For example, protective tools may be an optional
extra, with a higher price. Basic model versions of a given piece of equipment
should include as a default all the relevant protective tools and the features that
provide the greatest control over patient radiation protection. Paring the price
back by removing radiation protection and safety options in order to gain a sale is
not acceptable. Facility management should not be placed in a position of saving
money at the expense of compromising radiation protection and safety.
2.106. When medical radiological equipment and software are to be part of a
digital network, suppliers should facilitate interconnectivity with other relevant
systems.
2.107. After installation of medical radiological equipment or software, the
supplier should go through a formal handover to the medical radiation facility’s
registrant or licensee. This should include acceptance testing, described in more
detail in Sections 3–5.
2.108. Specific training in the use of the equipment or software should be given
to the staff of the medical radiation facility, including the radiological medical
practitioners, the medical radiation technologists, the medical physicists and the
local maintenance engineers. The features of the equipment or software should be
fully understood, including their implications for radiation protection of patients
and personnel.
2.109. The radiation protection and safety responsibilities of suppliers of
refurbished medical radiological equipment should be no different to the
responsibilities for the supply of new equipment. Further guidance on refurbished
equipment is given in Refs [30, 31].
2.110. The radiation protection and safety responsibilities for donors of
medical radiological equipment should be no different to those of commercial
suppliers for such equipment. Further guidance on donated equipment is given in
Refs [32, 33].
37

2.111. Regulatory control of engineers and technicians who install medical
radiological equipment varies around the world. In many States, they will be
licensed to perform installation and servicing and a prerequisite to obtaining
such a licence should be that they have had appropriate radiation protection and
safety training. Guidance on education, training, qualification and competence of
installation and servicing personnel is given in para. 2.135.
Maintenance and servicing organizations
2.112. Maintenance and servicing of medical radiological equipment is usually
performed by an engineer or technician employed either by a company offering
such services (who may also be the manufacturer and/or the vendor) or by the
medical facility itself (e.g. as part of an engineering, biomedical or clinical
engineering, or service department). In either case, when the medical radiological
equipment is being serviced, the equipment should not be used for medical
exposures; patients should not be imaged or treated until service and hand back
is completed (see para. 2.113). The engineer or technician should follow both
the radiation protection and safety rules and procedures established by his or her
employer and the relevant rules and procedures of the medical radiation facility,
including rules and procedures on how to ensure a safe working environment for
the service and how to ensure restricted access to the area where the servicing
is taking place. Further guidance on good practice in maintenance is given in
Ref. [34].
2.113. Maintenance and servicing continues until the medical radiological
equipment is ready to be handed back to the medical radiation facility’s registrant
or licensee. The handover to the registrant or licensee should be formalized.
Depending on the maintenance or servicing that has taken place, there may be a
need for quality control tests to be performed by a medical physicist before the
handover is complete (see paras 3.49, 4.59 and 5.91). The engineering service
should collaborate with medical physicists, medical radiation technologists
and radiological medical practitioners in ensuring optimal performance of
the equipment. The engineer or technician should also inform the registrant
or licensee of any changes with respect to the medical radiological equipment
that may have implications for radiation protection and safety. At this stage, the
equipment is available for medical use. Pressures to hand medical radiological
equipment back for medical use should not be allowed to compromise radiation
protection and safety; for example, equipment should not be used clinically while
it is still in a ‘service mode’.

38

2.114. Regulatory control of servicing engineers and technicians varies around
the world. In many States, they will be licensed to perform servicing and a
prerequisite to obtaining such a licence should be that they have had appropriate
education and training in radiation protection and safety. Guidance on education,
training, qualification and competence of servicing engineers and technicians is
given in para. 2.135.
Referring medical practitioners
2.115. The health care of the patient is the responsibility of the physician or
health professional managing the patient. This physician or health professional
may decide that the patient needs to undergo a radiological procedure, at which
point a referral to an appropriate medical radiation facility is initiated. Referring
medical practitioner is the generic term used in GSR Part 3 [3] for the health
professional who may refer individuals for a radiological medical procedure.
There may be different requirements in different States about who can act in the
role of a referring medical practitioner. The referring medical practitioner has a
joint responsibility with the radiological medical practitioner to decide on the
justification of the proposed radiological procedure. More detailed guidance is
given in Sections 3–5.
2.116. Usually the roles of the referring medical practitioner and the radiological
medical practitioner are performed by two different people. However, there are
some instances in which both roles are performed by the same person, often
called self-referral. A very common example is a dentist, who decides whether
an X ray examination is necessary and, if so, performs the examination. Dental
professional bodies in many States have established guidelines for when dental
X ray examinations are appropriate or not, and use of these guidelines should help
the dentist to fulfil both roles acceptably. In other situations, typically involving
medical imaging, there may be very strong financial incentives for self-referral
because the performance of the radiological procedure generates significant
income. Again there is a clear role for professional body guidelines to help to
minimize potential misuses of self-referral.
Patients
2.117. Patients are increasingly being involved in the decision making processes
concerning their own health care, and this includes medical uses of ionizing
radiation. Paragraph 3.151(d) of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that the registrant or
licensee for the medical radiation facility ensure that the patient be informed,
as appropriate, of both the potential benefit of the radiological procedure and
39

the radiation risks. Information should be provided in an understandable format
(e.g. verbally, leaflets, posters and web sites) and in a timely manner. The level
of information should be commensurate with the complexity, dose and associated
risks; and for some radiological procedures, informed consent may be required,
either written or verbal. Female patients of reproductive capacity should be
informed about the risk to the embryo or fetus from radiological procedures for
either diagnosis or therapy.
2.118. ‘Self-presenting’ patients are individuals demanding a particular
radiological procedure on the basis that they believe that this procedure is
needed, for example, to detect cancer or heart disease in its early stages before
symptoms become manifest. These individuals should be handled in the same
way as any other patient, namely through an appropriate referral and the ensuing
justification.
EDUCATION, TRAINING, QUALIFICATION AND COMPETENCE
2.119. Medical uses of ionizing radiation involve a number of health
professionals performing radiological procedures such as diagnostic
examinations, interventional procedures and treatment. In each case, the radiation
protection and safety associated with the radiological procedure depends greatly
on the skills and expertise of those health professionals involved, as the patient is
necessarily and deliberately exposed to radiation. In other words, the education,
training, qualification and competence of the respective health professionals
underpin radiation protection and safety in medical uses of ionizing radiation.
2.120. GSR Part 3 [3] places great emphasis on education and training for
all persons engaged in activities relevant to protection and safety, with the
responsibility placed on government to ensure that requirements for education,
training, qualification and competence are established and that arrangements
are in place for the provision of the necessary education and training. The
development and implementation of a national strategy for education and training
(see Ref. [35]) that is based on a national needs assessment can be useful in this
context. Furthermore, the regulatory body is required to ensure the application
of the requirements for education, training, qualification and competence in
radiation protection. Such verification should take place when an application
for an authorization has been submitted to the regulatory body and during the
periodic inspections of the medical radiation facility. Finally, the registrant or
licensee of the medical radiation facility has the responsibility to ensure that all

40

the health professionals in that facility with responsibilities for protection and
safety have appropriate education, training, qualification and competence.
2.121. In medical uses of ionizing radiation, medical exposure occurs and
occupational and public exposure might occur. For the health professionals
involved, it is their education, training, qualification and competence in the
medical exposure aspects that are the most critical. To this end, the requirements
of GSR Part 3 [3] for the health professionals involved in performing radiological
procedures are quite stringent. For each of the key roles of the radiological
medical practitioner, the medical radiation technologist, the medical physicist
and the radiopharmacist, the definition in GSR Part 3 [3] takes the same form,
namely: that the person is a health professional, that they have specialist
education and training in the particular discipline (including radiation protection
and safety), and that they have been assessed as being competent to carry out
that particular role (see Definitions in GSR Part 3 [3] for complete descriptions).
The competence of a person is normally assessed by the State through a formal
mechanism for registration, accreditation or certification of the particular
specialized health professional. States that have yet to develop such a mechanism
should assess the education, training and competence of an individual proposed
by a licensee to act as a specialized health professional and to decide, on the
basis either of international standards or standards of a State where such a system
exists, whether the individual can be considered competent.
2.122. A health professional intending to act in any of the roles of radiological
medical practitioner, medical radiation technologist, medical physicist or
radiopharmacist can do so only if he or she has the requisite education,
training, qualification and competence. It is the responsibility of the registrants
and licensees to ensure that their staff meet these requirements, and it is the
responsibility of the regulatory body to use the authorization, inspection and
enforcement processes to ensure that registrants and licensees discharge their
responsibilities in this respect.
2.123. The institutes and organizations that provide education and training in
radiation protection to health professionals should use GSR Part 3 [3] and this
Safety Guide as resources on the requirements for radiation protection and safety
in medical uses of radiation.
Radiological medical practitioners
2.124. The term ‘radiological medical practitioner’ is applied to a number
of health professionals who independently perform or oversee radiological
41

procedures within a given specialty (see also para. 2.90). Some radiological
medical practitioners belong to a specialty with a very long association with
medical uses of ionizing radiation, such as radiology, nuclear medicine, radiation
therapy and dentistry. In States where there are well established processes in place
for education, training, qualification and competence in these specialties, such
education, training, qualification and competence includes subjects not only in
the specialty itself but also with respect to radiation protection (patient protection
and occupational protection). Radiological medical practitioners would typically
become registered with the national medical or dental registration board (or a
body with a similar function), and competence in the specialty should include
competence in radiation protection and safety. The regulatory body and the
relevant professional body should periodically review the radiation protection
and safety aspects of the education and training to ensure that it is still up to
date and relevant. In States where there is a lack of infrastructure for education
and training in these specialties, a prospective radiological medical practitioner
should gain the necessary education, training and qualification outside the State,
both in the specialty itself and in radiation protection and safety. The competence
of radiological medical practitioners trained outside the State should be assessed.
In this situation the regulatory body should seek advice from the health authority
and the relevant professional body (if it exists) with respect to the adequacy of the
specialization of the individual and assessment of the individual’s competence
with respect to radiation protection and safety may need to be performed by
the regulatory body. In time, this approach should develop into a standardized
process for dealing with competence assessments.
2.125. Other specialties, such as orthopaedic surgery and cardiology, have
also had a long association with medical uses of ionizing radiation, but radiation
protection and safety might not traditionally have been part of the processes for
education, training, qualification and competence in the specialty. Still other
specialties have a more recent association with medical uses of ionizing radiation,
especially with respect to image guided interventional procedures. Radiation
protection (patient protection and occupational protection) is often not included
in the curriculum for education, training, qualification and competence in these
specialties. For specialists from these two groups, additional or separate education
and training and credentialing in radiation protection and safety, as it applies to
their specialty, may need to be arranged. The relevant professional bodies and
the regulatory body should work together in establishing acceptable criteria
on education and training in radiation protection and safety, and the means for
recognition of competence in radiation protection. The preferred approach is for
the relevant professional body to administer the process and to maintain a register
of specialists and their radiation protection and safety credentials. Another
42

possibility is the regulatory body taking on the role of overseeing the radiation
protection and safety training and recognition processes. A medical radiation
facility can adopt a ‘credentialing and privileging’ approach to cover education,
training, qualification and competence in radiation protection and safety [36]. In
this approach, the prospective radiological medical practitioner would present all
their relevant data on training and experience (including in radiation protection
and safety), and apply for permission to perform certain medical procedures
involving radiological procedures. Detailed guidance on appropriate education
and training in radiation protection and safety for various specialties involved in
medical use of ionizing radiation is given in Refs [37, 38].
Medical radiation technologists
2.126. The programme of education and training in medical radiation
technology usually includes significant components of radiation protection
(patient protection and occupational protection). On completion of the
programme, the medical radiation technologist would typically become registered
with the national registration board (or a body with a similar function), and his
or her competence in medical radiation technology should include competence in
radiation protection and safety.
2.127. Medical radiation technologists may be specialized in various fields
and subfields. The approach to specialties and subspecialties vary significantly
among States. In many States, the medical radiation technologist undergoes a
programme of education and training specific to diagnostic radiology, nuclear
medicine or radiation therapy and hence his or her competence would be in that
specialty only. Within these specialties, there may be specific subspecialties for
which the general programme of education and training does not necessarily
confer competence. For example, the diagnostic radiology programme in a State
might not cover CT or image guided interventional procedures to the depth
needed for competence. Additional education and training should be arranged
to achieve competency in the subspecialty. The regulatory body, in terms of
reviewing an application for an authorization and during its periodic inspections,
needs to be aware of issues of specialization and subspecialization and ensure
that only persons with the correct credentials can work in the particular roles.
Similarly, the registrant or licensee should ensure that only persons that have the
requisite competence are employed.

43

Medical physicists
2.128. Even though the International Labour Organization has stated that
medical physicists working in clinical practice can be considered health
professionals [39], medical physicists are not well recognized as a specialist
group of health professionals. In some States, there are well established
processes for education, training and qualification and achieving competence
in medical physics, with academic training in medical physics at a university
(typically a postgraduate programme), clinical training in a hospital or facility,
and finally an assessment of competence. In some States, the professional body
administers this whole process, with approved universities for the academic
component, approved hospitals or facilities for the clinical placement, and a
professional standards board for the competence assessment. More details on
education, training, qualification and competence of medical physicists is given
by the IAEA [26, 40–43]. There are also national and regional requirements and
guidance on education, training and recognition of medical physics experts [44].
GSR Part 3 [3] requires specialization for the medical physicist, so, for example,
a medical physicist with competence only in diagnostic radiology or image
guided interventional procedures cannot act in the role of a medical physicist in
radiation therapy, and vice versa.
2.129. It is more difficult where either the State does not recognize medical
physics as a distinct health profession or where there is no infrastructure in
place for the education and training of medical physicists. In both cases, there
is likely to be little in the way of infrastructure for medical physics in the State.
The problem is similar to that described in the second half of para. 2.124 for
radiological medical practitioners. The assessment of education, training,
qualification and competence of a person seeking to act in the role of a medical
physicist should still take place. Regardless of the educational process, the final
competence assessment for medical physicists should be specialty specific, as
required by para. 3.150 of GSR Part 3 [3].
Radiopharmacists
2.130. A radiopharmacist is a health professional, usually a pharmacist, who
has received additional specialist education and training, and has competency in
the preparation and dispensing of radiopharmaceuticals. Postgraduate courses in
radiopharmacy are available in some States. A few States have a radiopharmacy
professional body, or a radiopharmacy can be a specialist subgroup within the
national nuclear medicine professional body or a pharmacy professional body.
More details on education, training, qualification and competence of persons
44

working in a radiopharmacy are given in Ref. [45]. Even in the absence of a
formal infrastructure, the assessment of education, training, qualification and
competence of a person seeking to act in the role of a radiopharmacist should still
take place.
Other health professionals in the medical radiation facility
2.131. Other health professionals are involved in the medical uses of
ionizing radiation. However, a distinction should be made between those who
have specific responsibilities for patient radiation protection and those whose
responsibilities (in terms of radiation protection) are for occupational radiation
protection only. A health professional who falls into the former group, and who is
not a radiological medical practitioner, a medical radiation technologist, a medical
physicist or a radiopharmacist, should still have appropriate specialization (as it
applies to the particular use of radiation) and the respective radiation protection
and safety education, training, qualification and competence. The guidance given
in paras 2.124, 2.127, 2.129 and 2.130 for health professionals in States where
infrastructure is lacking would again be applicable.
2.132. The latter group of health professionals and other professionals involved
in medical uses of ionizing radiation includes specialist nurses (working in a
cardiac investigation suite or theatre), specialist physicians (such as anaesthetists14
providing support to a patient undergoing an interventional procedure),
biomedical engineers, clinical engineers and radiochemists providing support to
the performance of the radiological procedure, either directly or indirectly. All
these persons should have formal education and training on radiation protection.
An example of such training for radiation oncology nurses is given in Ref. [46].
Referring medical practitioners
2.133. The referring medical practitioner has a crucial role in the justification
of a given radiological procedure for a given patient. The referring medical
practitioner will be more effective in this role if he or she has a good
understanding of radiation protection and safety as it applies to medical uses
of ionizing radiation. Formal processes to require such education and training
under a radiation protection and safety framework are difficult to put in place.
Instead, a more general approach may be adopted of promoting education and
training in radiation protection and safety as part of the general medicine degree

14

Also called anaesthesiologists in some States.

45

curriculum, especially at the time when clinical rotations begin, or as part of the
corresponding specialty education and training programme.
Radiation protection officers
2.134. The RPO should be competent in radiation protection and safety matters
with respect to occupational and public radiation protection, relevant for given
medical uses of ionizing radiation. The RPO’s technical expertise could come
from a range of backgrounds, often in science, engineering or health. The
additional education and training required for the RPO role will depend on the
complexity of the technology and practice of the medical radiation facility. In
some facilities, the RPO may lead a team, all of whom should have the requisite
education and training. Similar to other health professionals, in the absence of a
process for recognition by a third party, the regulatory body should liaise with the
relevant professional body (if it exists) to set standards to enable assessment of
persons seeking authorization to act in the role of RPO. The International Labour
Organization recognizes the radiation protection expert as an “environmental and
occupational health and hygiene professional” [39].
Suppliers, installation, maintenance and servicing personnel
2.135. Persons who work as engineers or technicians for the supply,
installation, maintenance and servicing of radiological medical equipment and
software should be qualified and competent in such work. Often, they will have
been trained by their employer specifically for this role. Another aspect of their
training should be in the area of radiation protection and safety, not only for their
own occupational radiation protection and radiation protection of the staff of the
medical radiation facility where they are working, but they should also have a
good working knowledge of patient radiation protection in the context of the
types of medical radiological equipment and software they are servicing. For the
latter, this particularly includes understanding the radiation protection and safety
implications of the various features of the equipment or software, and how that
changes when the features undergo adjustments or revisions. Regulatory control
of servicing engineers and technicians varies around the world. In some States,
a licence may be required to perform servicing and a prerequisite to obtaining
such a licence should be that such engineers or technicians have had appropriate
radiation protection and safety training.

46

Maintaining competence
2.136. Paragraphs 2.119–2.133 provide guidance on the processes for the
initial education, training, qualification and competence assessment of health
professionals. Health professionals should maintain their core competencies,
including radiation protection and safety, and should keep abreast of new
developments in medical uses of radiation. One way to achieve this is through
formal continuing medical education or continuing professional development
programmes. In many States, the professional bodies administer such
programmes, and maintenance of certification of competence in a specialty is
dependent on satisfactory participation in the programme. Registrants, licensees
and the regulatory body can use these programmes as evidence of continuing
competence.
Specific training on equipment and software
2.137. Specific training should take place using the actual medical radiological
equipment and software used in the medical radiation facility. This applies
in particular to radiological medical practitioners and the medical radiation
technologists, who work directly with the equipment and software during
radiological procedures, and the medical physicist. They should understand
how the equipment and software function, including the available options and
how to customize these, and their implications for patient radiation protection.
Practical training should take place in the medical radiation facility when new
equipment or software is installed and when significant modifications are made
(see also paras 2.104 and 2.108). From the vendors’ side, the servicing engineer,
the applications specialist and the IT specialist have a role in providing specific
training for the medical radiation facility. It is important to ensure that equipment
and software specific training is given in a manner that can be readily understood
by local staff.
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR RADIATION PROTECTION AND SAFETY
2.138. The use of radiation in medicine is just one aspect of medical
practice. The application of the radiation protection and safety requirements of
GSR Part 3 [3] should complement the wider set of requirements that ensure

47

good medical practice. In particular, the medical radiation facility15 and its
management should ensure complementarity between the requirements for
radiation protection and safety and other health care delivery requirements
within the medical facility. This is achieved through an appropriate management
structure and management system.
2.139. Requirement 5 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes a specific requirement
for radiation protection and safety to be effectively integrated into the overall
management system of a given organization. In this Safety Guide, this applies to
the medical radiation facility. Paragraphs 2.47–2.52 of GSR Part 3 [3] establish
additional detailed requirements on the protection and safety elements of the
management system, for promoting a safety culture and for taking into account
human factors. Further detailed requirements for facilities and activities in general
are established in IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 2, Leadership and
Management for Safety [47], and elaborated in GS-G-3.1 [25]. The requirements
for quality management are established in those safety standards and will not
be discussed further in this Safety Guide, other than to emphasize that effective
management for radiation protection and safety requires commitment from the
highest level of management in the medical radiation facility, including the
provision of all the required resources. The guidance in paras 2.140–2.149 is
limited to a few particular components of the management system relating to
radiation protection and safety.
2.140. Paragraphs 2.42 and 2.43 of GSR Part 3 [3] establish a requirement
for a “protection and safety programme”, in general, and Requirement 24 of
GSR Part 3 [3] establishes arrangements under a “radiation protection programme”
specifically for occupational exposure. In addition, paras 3.170–3.172 of
GSR Part 3 [3] establish requirements for a “comprehensive programme of
quality assurance for medical exposures”. All three of these programmes should
be part of the overall management system of the medical radiation facility.
Detailed guidance on the radiation protection programme for occupational
exposure and the programme of quality assurance for medical exposures is given
in Sections 3–5.

15

The medical radiation facility may be a ‘stand alone’ entity, such as a medical
imaging centre, or it may be part of a larger organization, such as a hospital. The focus of
paras 2.138–2.149 on the management system is at the medical radiation facility level, but,
where the medical radiation facility is part of a larger organization, the management system of
the medical radiation facility will be part of the larger organization’s management system.

48

2.141. Depending on the size of the medical radiation facility, committees
might be formed to help the implementation of the aspects of the management
system pertaining to the radiation protection and safety programme. One such
committee might be a radiation safety committee, with the function of advising
on safe operation and compliance with radiation protection and safety regulatory
requirements. The members of the committee should be at the senior level
and would typically include an administrator representing the management, a
radiological medical practitioner, a medical radiation technologist, a medical
physicist and the RPO. The RPO should carry out day to day oversight of
the radiation protection programme and should report to the radiation safety
committee. The licensee should ensure that the RPO is provided with the
resources required to oversee the programme, as well as the authority to
communicate with the committee on a periodic basis. The RPO should be able to
communicate directly with the licensee, and with the regulatory body as needed,
such as in the case of breaches of compliance that may compromise safety.
2.142. Another committee might be a quality assurance committee, with
oversight of the programme of quality assurance for medical exposures within
the medical radiation facility. The committee would determine policy and give
direction to the programme, ensure proper documentation is being maintained
and review the effectiveness of the programme. The radiation safety committee
and the quality assurance committee have some functions in common, especially
with regard to medical exposure, and the representation of health professionals on
each is likely to be the same. The work of both committees should be harmonized
to avoid either the duplication or the inadvertent omission of some functions.
2.143. The management system should promote continuous improvement,
which implies a commitment by staff to strive for continuous improvement in
medical uses of ionizing radiation. Feedback from operational experience and
from lessons identified from accidental exposures or near misses should be
applied systematically, as part of the process of continuous improvement.
2.144. Paragraph 2.50 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that the medical radiation
facility “be able to demonstrate the effective fulfilment of the requirements for
protection and safety in the management system.” This will include monitoring,
performed to verify compliance with the requirements for protection and safety
(Requirement 14 and paras 3.37 and 3.38 of GSR Part 3 [3]).
2.145. There are requirements for records to be kept, and made available as
needed, in many sections of GSR Part 3 [3]. The management system of the

49

medical radiation facility should provide for such record keeping and access.
Details on what should be provided are described in Sections 3–5.
2.146. Digital information systems are becoming increasingly available to
provide various support functions to the management system of the medical
radiation facility, including the handling of requests for radiological procedures,
the scheduling of radiological procedures, the tracking of patients, and the
processing, storage and transmission of information pertaining to the patient.
Furthermore, digital information systems can be used for viewing imaging
studies and obtaining reports of study interpretations. Example of systems with
some or all of these functions include picture archiving and communication
systems (PACSs), radiology information systems (RISs), HISs, electronic
health records (EHRs) and any other commercially available dose management
systems. These systems should operate independently, but they can also
interconnect with each other. Imaging devices and other medical radiological
equipment can be interconnected by computer networks and can exchange
information in accordance with standards such as the Transmission Control
Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP or the Internet protocol suite), Digital
Imaging and Communication in Medicine (DICOM)16, Health Level Seven
(HL7)17 and Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise (IHE)18. These information
systems are complex, and users should ensure that they are expertly implemented
and supported. Digital information systems when used appropriately can have
a positive effect on the practice of radiation protection and safety in medical
uses of ionizing radiation. For example, use of these systems can help to avoid
the performance of unnecessary or inappropriate studies and repeat studies by
making patient information available to multiple users. Furthermore, connected
digital systems should minimize the need for multiple manual data entry, with
its associated risks, such as in radiation therapy. These systems can also help in
monitoring doses to patients and image receptors, and monitoring image retakes;
the information from such monitoring can help in the optimization of protection
and safety for imaging procedures.
2.147. Such digital information systems and the procedures for their use should
be designed to protect against data loss, which in the context of the medical
radiation facility might compromise radiation protection and safety by, for

16

See www.dicomstandard.org
See www.hl7.org
18
See www.ihe.net
17

50

example, necessitating repeat examinations. It is the responsibility of the medical
radiation facility to meet the requirements of the relevant State authorities for the
retention, security, privacy and retrieval of records.
2.148. The management system should include a review cycle. The general
principles for audits and reviews are well established (see GS-G-3.1 [25] and
GSR Part 2 [47]). For a medical radiation facility, a possible tool for this is
the clinical audit. Clinical audits can be considered as a systematic and critical
analysis of the quality of clinical care, including the procedures used for
diagnosis and treatment, the associated use of resources and the effect of care
on the outcome and quality of life for the patient. A clinical audit looks beyond
a strict radiation protection and safety focus, and seeks to assess the quality and
efficacy of the medical practice offered in the facility, ultimately the patient
health outcome. This should include the radiation protection and safety aspects
of medical uses of ionizing radiation and, importantly, should keep these
aspects in the context of medical practice, ensuring a common goal. Thus, while
GSR Part 3 [3] does not require a clinical audit, its use can be seen as fulfilling
both the radiation protection and safety and the medical aspects of the medical
radiation facility’s management system. More detailed guidance on clinical
audits is given in Refs [48–50].
2.149. GSR Part 3 [3], in the context of medical exposure, requires the
performance of a radiological review and this should be incorporated into
the medical radiation facility’s management system (see para. 3.182 of
GSR Part 3 [3]). At its simplest, the radiological review includes an investigation
and critical review of the current practical application of the requirements
for justification and optimization of radiation protection and safety for the
radiological procedures that are being performed in the medical radiation facility.
The radiological review involves at least the radiological medical practitioners,
the medical radiation technologists and the medical physicists at the medical
radiation facility.
SAFETY ASSESSMENT
2.150. In the context of medical uses of ionizing radiation, a safety assessment
means an assessment of all relevant aspects of radiation protection and safety
for a medical radiation facility, including the siting, design and operation of the
facility. The safety assessment can occur before a facility is operational or when a

51

major change in operation is contemplated. As noted in para. 2.70, the regulatory
body has the responsibility to establish requirements for safety assessments and,
once the safety assessment has been submitted, to review and evaluate it prior to
granting an authorization (see Requirement 13 and para. 3.29 of GSR Part 3 [3]).
2.151. Paragraphs 3.30–3.35 of GSR Part 3 [3] establish requirements on
what a safety assessment is to include, what the registrant or licensee is to take
into account, its documentation and placement in the management system,
and when additional reviews of the safety assessment are to take place. More
detailed requirements on safety assessment (for all facilities and activities)
are given in IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 4 (Rev. 1), Safety
Assessment for Facilities and Activities [51]. For medical radiation facilities, the
safety assessment should include not only considerations of occupational and
public exposure but also medical exposure and the possibility of unintended or
accidental medical exposures.
2.152. GSR Part 3 [3] specifies two types of safety assessment: generic and
specific to the practice or source. A generic safety assessment is usually sufficient
for types of source with a high degree of uniformity in design. A specific safety
assessment is usually required in other cases; however, the specific safety
assessment need not include those aspects covered by a generic safety assessment
if a generic safety assessment has been conducted for the source. The safety
assessments for medical uses of ionizing radiation will range in complexity, but
even if the source itself is covered by a generic safety assessment, its placement
in the medical radiation facility will nearly always require some form of specific
safety assessment. It is very useful if the regulatory body develops a set of
templates to be used by medical radiation facilities for safety assessments for the
various modalities and specialties in medical uses of ionizing radiation [13, 51].
2.153. GSR Part 3 [3] requires that potential exposure be considered in the
safety assessment of a new facility being planned or a planned modification to
an existing facility. Potential exposure refers to prospective exposure that might
occur, but could result from an accident or from an event or a sequence of events
that might occur. As stated in Requirement 15 of GSR Part 3 [3]: “Registrants
and licensees…shall take all practicable measures to prevent accidents and to
mitigate the consequences of those accidents that do occur.”
2.154.

Paragraph 3.43 of GSR Part 3 [3] states that:

“If the safety assessment indicates that there is a reasonable likelihood of an
emergency affecting either workers or members of the public, the registrant
52

or licensee shall prepare an emergency plan for the protection of people and
the environment. As part of this emergency plan, the registrant or licensee
shall include arrangements for the prompt identification of an emergency,
and for determining the appropriate level of the emergency response….”
Situations that can lead to an emergency in a medical setting are loss of control
over the source as a result of technical failure, human error, a nuclear security
event, or conventional emergencies such as fires and earthquakes. More detailed
requirements and guidance on emergency preparedness and response are given in
GSR Part 7 [7], GSG-2 [8] and GS-G-2.1 [9].

3. SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
RADIATION PROTECTION AND SAFETY IN
DIAGNOSTIC RADIOLOGY AND IMAGE GUIDED
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
GENERAL
3.1. This section covers radiographic and fluoroscopic diagnostic procedures,
image guided interventional procedures, and imaging studies using X ray
radiation that are part of the processes of radiation therapy or nuclear medicine.
These radiological procedures usually take place in facilities that are in a fixed
location, but they can also take place in mobile facilities.
3.2. The radiographic procedures aim to image or quantify a particular organ
or tissue in two, three or four dimensions, and include general radiography, CT,
CBCT, mammography, tomosynthesis, dental radiography (intraoral, panoramic
and CBCT) and bone densitometry (DXA).
3.3. Fluoroscopic diagnostic procedures aim to provide real time assessment
of the anatomy and pathology of a system or organ. Examples include cardiac,
gastrointestinal, urological and gynaecological examinations.
3.4. During image guided interventional procedures, fluoroscopy (primarily)
or CT is used as an imaging tool to facilitate the diagnosis and treatment of
vascular and non-vascular diseases. Examples of vascular procedures include
coronary angiography or angioplasty, uterine artery embolization, aortic valve

53

implantation and aortic endografts. Common non-vascular procedures include,
for example, biliary drainage or stenting, and injecting cytostatic agents into the
liver. Fluoroscopically guided intraoperative procedures include, for example,
intramedullary nailing and vertebroplasty. Some image guided interventional
procedures involve the use of sealed or unsealed radiation sources, for example
in intracoronary radiation therapy to prevent coronary artery restenosis.
3.5. The generic term medical radiation facility is used widely in Section 2
to mean any medical facility where radiological procedures are performed. In
Section 3, the narrower term radiology facility is used to cover any medical
radiation facility where diagnostic radiology and/or image guided interventional
procedures are performed. Radiology facilities include: a traditional radiology
department in a hospital or medical centre; a stand alone X ray imaging facility;
an interventional cardiology (or other specialty) department, unit or facility,
either stand alone or as part of a larger entity; and a dental practice.
3.6. Different health professionals can take on the role of the radiological
medical practitioner (see para. 2.90) in diagnostic radiology and image guided
interventional procedures, depending, inter alia, on national laws and regulations.
They typically include radiologists, cardiologists, orthopaedic surgeons,
neurosurgeons, plastic surgeons, vascular surgeons, gastroenterologists,
urologists, respiratory and other specialist physicians and surgeons, dentists,
chiropractors, osteopaths and podiatrists.
3.7. As stated in para. 2.92, the term ‘medical radiation technologist’ is used in
GSR Part 3 [3] and this Safety Guide as a generic term for the health professional
known by several different terms in different States; such terms include
radiographer, radiological technologist and others. Clearly, each State will use its
own term in its own jurisdiction.
3.8. Section 2 of this Safety Guide provides general guidance on the framework
for radiation protection and safety in medical uses of radiation, including roles
and responsibilities, education, training, qualification and competence, and
the management system for protection and safety. This guidance is relevant to
diagnostic radiology and image guided interventional procedures, and reference
to Section 2 should be made as necessary.

54

SAFETY OF MEDICAL RADIATION FACILITIES AND MEDICAL
RADIOLOGICAL EQUIPMENT
Radiology facilities
Fixed facilities: Design of X ray rooms
3.9. Paragraph 3.51 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes the broad requirements to be
met when choosing a location to use a radiation generator, and these are relevant
to the design of a radiology facility. Provisions for the incorporation of radiation
protection and safety features are best made at the facility design stage (e.g. for
X ray rooms and other related rooms). The siting and layout should take into
account the types of radiological procedure, workload and patient flow, both
within the radiology facility and, in cases where the radiology facility is part
of a larger hospital or medical centre, within other departments of the facility.
Guidance on setting up diagnostic radiology and interventional radiology
facilities is given in Refs [52–55].
3.10. The three factors relevant to dose reduction (time, distance and shielding)
should be combined in the design to optimize occupational radiation protection
and public radiation protection. Larger rooms are preferable to allow easy access
for patients on bed trolleys. At the same time, they allow for easier patient
positioning and facilitate both equipment and patient movement during the
procedure, which, in the case of fluoroscopy and image guided interventional
procedures, helps to reduce time and exposure. Larger rooms will also reduce the
levels of secondary radiation (due to scattering and leakage) potentially reaching
areas occupied by staff and public areas, typically reducing the level of shielding
required.
3.11. Shielding requirements should be tailored to meet any national requirements
and to suit the practice requirements based on the intended patient workload
and the types of examination to be performed. Further assessments should
be undertaken when the intended use of a room changes, X ray equipment is
upgraded, underlying procedures or patient workload changes, or the surrounding
room occupancy is altered.
3.12. At the design stage, the use of both structural and ancillary protective
barriers to provide shielding should be considered. In rooms using fluoroscopy
with staff working close to the patients, such as rooms for image guided
interventional procedures, ceiling mounted protective screens and table mounted
leaded curtains should be installed. Such ancillary protective barriers for image
55

guided interventional procedures should be part of the initial facility plan, and
should be designed so as not to interfere with the medical procedure (e.g. sterility
requirements). Wall shielding should be at least 2 m high, and any doors and
viewing windows in walls or doors should have at least the same lead equivalence
as the minimum shielding specifications for the shielded wall or barrier in which
they are located. Due consideration should be given to the provision of floor and
ceiling shielding when rooms immediately below and above the X ray installation
are occupied. All penetrations and joints in shielding should be arranged so that
they are equally as effective in shielding radiation. More details with respect to
structural shielding are given in paras 3.18–3.24.
3.13. General safety features of radiography, mammography, CT and fluoroscopy
rooms include the following:
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

A barrier should be placed at the control console to shield staff to the extent
that they do not need to wear protective clothing while at the console. This
is particularly important in mammography, where structural shielding in
walls, ceiling and floor might not be deemed necessary.
In radiography, all possible intended directions of the X ray beam should
be taken into consideration in the room design so that the X ray beam
cannot be directed at any area that is not shielded and which could lead to
potentially unacceptable doses being received in this area.
The doors should provide protective shielding for secondary radiation and
should be shut when the X ray beam is on. In radiography, the X ray room
should be designed so as to avoid the direct incidence of the X ray beam on
the access doors.
The medical radiation technologist should be able to clearly observe and
communicate with the patient at all times during an X ray diagnostic
procedure.

3.14. Signs and warning lights, preferably positioned at eye level, should be used
at the entrances of controlled areas and supervised areas to prevent inadvertent
entry (see also paras 3.279 and 3.280 on control of access). For controlled areas,
para. 3.90(c) of GSR Part 3 [3] requires the use of the basic ionizing radiation
symbol recommended by the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) [56]. The signs should be clear and easily understandable. Warning lights,
such as illuminated or flashing signs, as appropriate, should be activated when
radiation is being produced inside the controlled area or supervised area. Door
interlocks are not appropriate in X ray diagnostic radiological procedures because
if the X ray beam is stopped, the medical procedure may have to be repeated.

56

3.15. A stable power supply should be available. An emergency diesel power
generator might not be sufficiently stable to power a CT or interventional
radiology suite and should not be relied upon. An uninterruptible power supply
or battery backup systems should be installed to capture the active information
at the time of the outage and to shut down all software in a controlled manner.
Servers should be programmed to shut down automatically when the power
supply is interrupted.
3.16. The design of the facility should include an air conditioning system
sufficient to maintain the temperature in the examination room (and sometimes in
areas with computer equipment and detectors) within the parameters defined by
the equipment manufacturers, but consistent with health and safety requirements
for temperature and humidity.
Mobile facilities
3.17. Mammography and CT vans are commonly used in areas where fixed
facilities are not available. Other modalities may also be offered via a mobile
facility. General safety features of mobile facilities include the following:
(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)

(e)

Mobile facilities should be built so that protection is optimized mainly
through shielding (in all relevant directions during use), as providing
protection through distance is often limited and exposure time is determined
by the procedure being performed.
An appropriate power supply should be available with reliable connections.
Entrance to the mobile facility should be under the control of the mobile
facility personnel.
Waiting areas, if they exist, should be appropriately shielded to afford
levels of protection consistent with public exposure limits. Waiting areas
are common for mobile mammography facilities but not for mobile CT
facilities.
To facilitate the imaging procedure, including patient flow, mobile CT
facilities are usually operated adjacent to a hospital or clinic, from where
they can draw water and electricity, and where patients can use the toilets,
waiting rooms and changing rooms and have access to physician offices.
Similarly, mobile mammography facilities may also utilize hospital or
clinic facilities.

57

Shielding calculations
3.18. Two widely used methodologies for shielding calculations are given
in Refs [57, 58], but other methodologies are also available and used (e.g. see
Refs [55, 59]), as well as specific shielding calculations for the WHIS-RAD
X ray unit19 [60]. The nominal design dose in an occupied area is derived by
the process of constrained optimization (i.e. selection of a source related dose
constraint), with the condition that each individual dose from all relevant sources
is well below the dose limit for a person occupying the area to be shielded.
Nominal design doses are levels of air kerma used in the design calculations
and evaluation of barriers for the protection of individuals, at a reference point
beyond the barrier. Specifications for shielding are calculated on the basis of the
attenuation that the shielding needs to provide to ensure that the nominal design
doses are met.
3.19. The shielding thickness is obtained from the attenuation factor required
to reduce the dose that would be received by staff and the public if shielding
were not present to a dose value considered acceptable. This nominal design dose
should be derived by a process of optimization:
(a)

(b)

The dose that would be received without shielding is calculated by using
workload values, use factors for a given beam direction (the fraction of the
total amount of radiation emitted in that direction) and occupancy factors
(the fraction of the total exposure that will actually affect individuals at
a place, by virtue of the time spent by an individual in that place). For
secondary barriers, the use factor is always unity, since scatter and leakage
radiation is propagated in all directions all the time. If tabulated figures
are used, care should be taken that they reflect the actual usage in the
facility and not generic national scenarios. Potential changes in practice and
increases in workload should be considered as part of the calculations.
Once the dose that would be received without shielding is known,
attenuation should be calculated to reduce this dose to a design level that
meets national regulations and that can be considered optimized protection;
that is, a dose below which additional cost and effort in shielding is
not warranted by the dose being averted. This may require successive
calculations to determine where this level lies.

19

The World Health Imaging System is general purpose X ray equipment built in
accordance with specifications developed by the World Health Organization for developing
countries.

58

3.20. When a shielding methodology is applied to optimize occupational and
public radiation protection, decisions will need to be made about many factors
that can greatly influence the final results for the shielding specification. Those
decisions may be based on conservative assumptions, which together may lead to
an unduly over-conservative specification of the shielding. Realistic assumptions
should be used as much as possible, with some allowance for future changes in use.
Adequacy of the shielding specification should be ensured as corrective actions
after building has been completed will invariably be difficult and expensive.
Furthermore, it is likely that the building materials used to provide the shielding
will be supplied in specific discrete thicknesses or densities and this can be used
to provide a safety margin over the calculated shielding values. If a material other
than lead is to be used, tabulated values should be used only for materials that
match those being considered (in terms of their chemical composition, density
and homogeneity) as closely as possible. The following are some assumptions
that would each lead to conservatism in the shielding specification:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)

For primary barriers, the attenuation by the patient and image receptor is
not considered.
Workload, use and occupancy factors are overestimated.
Staff members are always in the most exposed place of the room.
Distances are always the minimum possible.
Leakage radiation is the maximum all the time.
Field sizes used for the calculation of scatter radiation are overestimated.
Attenuation of the materials is usually considered for the maximum beam
quality used.
The numerical value of calculated air kerma (in mGy) is directly compared
with dose limits or dose constraints (in mSv), which are given in terms of
effective dose. However, the actual effective dose to personnel or members
of the public is substantially lower than the air kerma, given the dose
distribution within the body for the beam qualities used in diagnostic and
interventional radiology.

3.21. Particular attention should be given to hybrid imaging systems, where
the shielding should be calculated for each modality and combined as
appropriate [54, 61, 62] (see also paras 4.32–4.35).
3.22. Consideration should be given in the design stage to making sure that
radiosensitive equipment and consumables, for example computed radiography
(CR) cassettes and X ray films, are appropriately shielded. Where used, darkrooms
for film processing may require extra shielding to prevent film fogging.

59

3.23. Specification of shielding, including calculations, should be performed by
a medical physicist or a qualified expert in radiation protection. In some States,
there may be a requirement for shielding plans to be submitted to the regulatory
body for review or approval prior to any construction (see also para. 2.74).
3.24. The adequacy of the shielding should be verified, preferably during
construction, and certainly before the room is placed in clinical use, and similarly
after any future structural modifications. Clearly, requirements of the regulatory
body should be met (para. 2.74).
Design of display and interpretation (reading) rooms
3.25. To facilitate their interpretation by the radiological medical practitioner,
images should be displayed in rooms specifically designed for such purposes.
A low level of ambient light in the viewing room should be ensured (see also
paras 3.45 and 3.46 on image display devices and view boxes).
3.26. Viewing rooms with workstations for viewing digital images should be
ergonomically designed to facilitate image processing and manipulation so that
reporting can be performed accurately. The viewing monitors of the workstations
should meet applicable standards (see para. 3.46).
Medical radiological equipment, software and ancillary equipment
3.27. This subsection considers medical radiological equipment, including
its software, used in diagnostic radiology and image guided interventional
procedures, including radiography, fluoroscopy and angiography, CT, CBCT,
mammography, dental radiology, bone mineral densitometry (e.g. DXA) and
tomography (including tomosynthesis). It is also applicable to the X ray based
component of hybrid imaging modalities, including PET–CT, single photon
emission computed tomography (SPECT)–CT, and PET–mammography, and the
X ray based component of image guided radiation therapy (IGRT) systems. Some
of this equipment might be used in a nuclear medicine facility or in a radiation
therapy facility, rather than a radiology facility.
3.28. The requirements for medical radiological equipment and its software
are established in paras 3.49 and 3.162 of GSR Part 3 [3]. The International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) has published international standards
applicable to medical radiological equipment. Current IEC standards
relevant to X ray imaging include Refs [63–103] (for those relevant to the
radiopharmaceutical based component of hybrid imaging, see para. 4.41). It
60

is recommended that the IEC web site be visited to view the most up to date
list of standards. ISO publishes international standards applicable to medical
radiological equipment. It is recommended that the ISO web site be visited to
view the most up to date list of standards.
3.29. As licensees take responsibility for the radiation safety of medical
radiological equipment they use, they should impose purchasing specifications
that include conditions to meet relevant international standards of the IEC and
ISO or equivalent national standards. In some States, there may be an agency
with responsibilities for medical devices or a similar organization that gives type
approval to particular makes and models of medical radiological equipment.
3.30. Displays, gauges and instructions on operating consoles of medical
radiological equipment, and accompanying instruction and safety manuals, might
be used by staff who do not understand, or who have a poor understanding of, the
manufacturer’s original language. In such cases, the accompanying documents
should comply with IEC and ISO standards and should be translated into the local
language or into a language acceptable to the local staff. The software should
be designed so that it can be easily converted into the local language, resulting
in displays, symbols and instructions that will be understood by the staff. The
translations should be subject to a quality assurance process to ensure proper
understanding and to avoid operating errors. The same applies to maintenance
and service manuals and instructions for maintenance and service engineers and
technicians who do not have an adequate understanding of the original language
(see also paras 2.104 and 2.137).
3.31. All medical radiological equipment should be supplied with all appropriate
radiation protection tools as a default rather than as optional extras. This applies
to both patient radiation protection and occupational radiation protection (see
also para. 2.105).
Design features for medical radiological equipment
3.32. The design of medical radiological equipment should be such that its
performance is always reproducible, accurate and predictable, and that it has
features that facilitate the appropriate personnel in meeting the requirement
of para. 3.163(b) of GSR Part 3 [3] for operational optimization of patient
protection, namely that it provides “Appropriate techniques and parameters to
deliver a medical exposure of the patient that is the minimum necessary to fulfil
the clinical purpose of the radiological procedure, with account taken of relevant
norms of acceptable image quality….” Many design features contribute to the
61

performance of medical radiological equipment and should be considered when
purchasing such equipment (see paras 3.33–3.41). Further details on design
features and performance standards of medical radiological equipment used
in diagnostic radiology and image guided interventional procedures are given
in Refs [67–74, 76, 78–83, 98–108] (see also paras 3.232–3.246 on quality
assurance and acceptance testing, in particular para. 3.236).
3.33. General design features for medical radiological equipment used in
diagnostic radiology and image guided interventional procedures should include
the following:
(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)

(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)

(i)

Means to detect immediately any malfunction of a single component of
the system that may lead to an inadvertent underexposure or overexposure
of the patient or exposure of staff so that the risk of any unintended or
accidental medical exposure is minimized.
Means to minimize the frequency of human error and its impact on the
delivery of unintended or accidental medical exposure.
Hardware and software controls that minimize the likelihood of unintended
or accidental medical exposures.
Operating parameters for radiation generators, such as the generating tube
potential, filtration, focal spot position and size, source to image receptor
distance, field size indication and either tube current and time or their
product, that are clearly and accurately shown.
Radiation beam control mechanisms, including devices that indicate clearly
(visually and/or audibly) and in a fail-safe manner when the beam is on.
X ray tubes with inherent and added filtration adequate to remove low
energy components of the X ray beam which do not provide diagnostic
information.
Collimating devices to define the radiation beam; in the case of a light
beam diaphragm, the light field should align with the radiation field.
With the exception of mammography, dental X ray and CT equipment,
diagnostic and interventional X ray equipment that is fitted with
continuously adjustable beam collimating devices. Such devices allow the
operator20 to limit the area being imaged to the size of the selected image
receptor or the region of interest, whichever is the smaller.
When preset protocols are provided, technique factors that are readily
accessible and modifiable by adequately trained personnel.

20

The term ‘operator’ is used in a general sense in this section. The operator is usually a
medical radiation technologist, but may sometimes be a radiological medical practitioner.

62

(j)

Design of the X ray tube to keep radiation leakage as low as reasonably
achievable and not exceeding 1 mGy in an hour measured at 1 m from
the focal spot, and less than maximum levels specified in international
standards or in local regulations.

3.34. Specific design features for medical radiological equipment used in
radiography should include the following:
(a)

(b)

(c)

The provision of devices that automatically terminate the irradiation after
a preset time, tube current–exposure time product, or dose to the automatic
exposure control (AEC) detector, or when the ‘dead man’ hand switch is
released.
The incorporation of AEC systems in radiographic units, where practicable.
Such AEC systems should be able to compensate for energy dependence,
patient thickness and dose rate, for the expected range of clinical imaging
conditions, and should be suited to the type of image receptor being used,
whether film–screen or digital.
Indications or displays of the air kerma–area product and/or incident air
kerma.

3.35. Specific design features for medical radiological equipment used for dental
radiography should include the following:
(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

A minimum tube potential of 60 kVp;
For intraoral dental systems, an open-ended (preferably rectangular)
collimator providing a focus to skin distance of at least 20 cm and a field
size at the collimator end of no more than 4 cm × 5 cm if rectangular or
6 cm in diameter if cylindrical, and limitation of field size to the dimensions
of the image receptor;
For panoramic dental systems, limitation of field size to the area required
for diagnosis by means of programmed field size trimming and the ‘child
imaging mode’;
For dental CBCT, adjustable X ray tube potential and tube current–exposure
time product, and a choice of volume sizes and voxel sizes.

3.36. Specific design features for medical radiological equipment used for CT
should include the following:
(a)

Console display of all CT parameters that directly influence the image
acquisition (these can be displayed over a number of screens);

63

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

(f)
(g)

Console display of estimated volume CT air kerma index and CT air
kerma–length product for the procedure or image acquisition;
Operator alert if exposure factors are set too high (usually expressed in
terms of the volume CT air kerma index and/or the CT air kerma–length
product);
Means for dose modulation (rotational and z-axis), and means for selection
of noise index or equivalent;
A comprehensive range of beam widths and pitches and other ancillary
devices (e.g. dynamic collimation) to ensure ‘over ranging’ in CT is kept as
low as reasonably achievable by facilitating the appropriate choice of beam
width and pitch to limit patient dose while maintaining diagnostic image
quality;
Reconstruction algorithms that result in dose reduction without
compromising image quality, such as iterative reconstruction algorithms;
A range of selectable tube potentials, tube current–exposure time products,
and filters to facilitate the optimization of protocols, especially for children.

3.37. Specific design features for medical radiological equipment used for
mammography (both digital systems and film–screen systems) should include
the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Various anode and filter combinations;
Compression and immobilization capabilities;
Magnification views;
Display on the console of a dose index, for example incident air kerma or
mean glandular dose;
An image receptor or image receptors to accommodate all breast sizes.

3.38. Specific design features for medical radiological equipment used for
fluoroscopy should include the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

64

The provision of a device that energizes the X ray tube only when
continuously depressed (such as an exposure foot switch or ‘dead man’
switch);
Indications or display (both at the control console and on monitors) of the
elapsed time, air kerma–area product, and cumulative reference air kerma;
Automatic brightness control (ABC) or automatic dose rate control
(ADRC);
Pulsed fluoroscopy and pulsed image acquisition modes;
The capture and display of the last acquired frame (last image hold);

(f)
(g)
(h)

Interlocks that prevent inadvertent energizing of the X ray beam when the
image detector is removed from the imaging chain;
The capability to deactivate the exposure foot switch between cases;
The provision of a timer and an alarm that sounds at the end of a pre-set
interval (typically 5 min).

3.39. In addition to those listed in para. 3.38, design features for medical
radiological equipment used for image guided interventional procedures should
include the following:
(a)

X ray tubes that have high heat capacities to enable operation at high tube
currents and short times.
(b) A radiation generator with a capability of at least 80 kW.
(c) A radiation generator with a large dynamic range of tube current and
tube potential (to minimize the pulse width necessary to accommodate
differences in patient attenuation).
(d) For paediatric work:
——A radiation generator that supports an X ray tube with a minimum of
three focal spots;
——An anti-scatter grid that is removable;
——An image acquisition frame rate that extends up to at least 60 frames per
second for small children.
(e) A real time display of air kerma–area product and cumulative reference air
kerma.
(f) Imaging detectors that allow different fields of view (magnification) to
improve spatial resolution.
(g) Automatic collimation.
(h) Dual-shape collimators incorporating both circular and elliptical shutters to
be used to modify the field for collimation along cardiac contours.
(i) System specific variable filtration in the X ray beam that is applied
according to patient attenuation (often as part of the ADRC system).
(j) Selectable dose per pulse and selectable number of pulses per second.
(k) Wedge filters that move automatically into the field of view to attenuate the
beam in areas where there is no tissue and thus no need for imaging.
(l) Possible means for manipulation of diaphragms while in ‘last image hold’.
(m) The option of the automatic display of the last acquired image run.
(n) Display and recording in a dose report in digital format of the following
parameters:
——Reference air kerma rate;
——Cumulative reference air kerma;
——Cumulative air kerma–area product;
65

——Cumulative time of fluoroscopy;
——Cumulative number of image acquisitions (acquisition runs and frames
per run);
——Integrated reference air kerma;
——Option for digital subtraction angiography;
——Road mapping, which is a technique used for navigation of the catheter
or wire in endovascular procedures.
3.40. All digital medical radiological equipment should have the following
additional features:
(a)
(b)

Real time dose display and end-of-case dose report (radiation dose
structured report, DICOM object), including export of dose metrics for the
purpose of DRLs and individual patient dose calculation;
Connectivity to RIS and to PACS.

3.41. For medical radiological equipment used for performing diagnostic and
interventional radiology procedures on children, there should be additional
design features that both facilitate successful radiological procedures on patients
who may be uncooperative and suit the imaging of very small patients. Such
features include the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Capability of very short exposure times for radiography;
Specifically designed AEC systems;
Provision of ‘paediatric modes’ for the automatic brightness and/or dose
rate control systems in fluoroscopy and image guided interventional
procedures;
Paediatric protocols for CT;
Child imaging mode for dental panoramic and CBCT equipment.

Other equipment
3.42. For radiology facilities where film is being used as an image receptor,
film processing plays a crucial role in ensuring the medical exposure results
in an acceptable diagnostic image. Automatic film processors should meet
appropriate standards. Film–screen based mammography should have dedicated
film processors with extended processing cycles. If manual processing is being
performed, specially designed developer, fixer and washing tanks should be
used, with processing times based on the developer temperature. The darkroom
for processing should meet relevant international and national standards for
light tightness and should be equipped with an appropriately filtered safe-light,
66

compatible with the film being used. Further details are given in Refs [79,
109–114].
3.43. For radiology facilities where film is the medium from which the image
is read (e.g. a printed digital image), the printing process plays a crucial role
in ensuring the medical exposure delivered results in a diagnostic image. The
resolution of the printer should not be less than the resolution of the detector, so
that the image quality of the final image is not limited or compromised.
3.44. The characteristics of image receptors (film–screen, phosphor plates for
CR or flat detectors for digital radiography (DR)) should be appropriate for
the diagnostic imaging task. For example, high resolution is needed for breast
imaging, and high sensitivity detectors are needed for paediatric imaging.
3.45. View boxes, for viewing films, should have sufficient uniform brightness
to facilitate diagnosis, and the colour of view boxes should be matched through
the complete set of view boxes. Means should be available (masks) to restrict
the illuminated area of the radiograph to avoid dazzling. View boxes used for
mammography should have higher luminance. Detailed guidance is given in
Refs [109–114] (see paras 3.25 and 3.26 for guidance on display and interpretation
rooms).
3.46. All equipment used for digital image display should meet appropriate
international and national standards, for example meeting the performance
specifications in Ref. [115].
Maintenance
3.47. Paragraphs 3.15(i) and 3.41 of GSR Part 3 [3] establish requirements for
maintenance to ensure that sources meet their design requirements for protection
and safety throughout their lifetime and to prevent accidents as far as reasonably
practicable. The registrant or licensee is required to ensure that adequate
maintenance (preventive maintenance and corrective maintenance) is performed
as necessary to ensure that medical radiological equipment retains, or improves
through appropriate hardware and software upgrades, its design specifications
for image quality and radiation protection and safety for its useful life. The
registrant or licensee should, therefore, establish the necessary arrangements and
coordination with the manufacturer or installer before initial operation and on an
ongoing basis.

67

3.48. All maintenance procedures should be included in the comprehensive
programme of quality assurance and should be carried out at the frequency
recommended by the manufacturer of the equipment and relevant professional
bodies. Servicing should include a report describing the equipment fault, the
work done and the parts replaced and adjustments made, which should be filed
as part of the programme of quality assurance. A record of maintenance carried
out should be kept for each item of equipment. This should include information
on any defects found by users (a fault log), remedial actions taken (both interim
repairs and subsequent repairs) and the results of testing before equipment is
reintroduced to clinical use.
3.49. In line with the guidance provided in para. 2.113, after any modifications
or maintenance, the person responsible for maintenance should immediately
inform the licensee of the medical radiation facility before the equipment is
returned to clinical use. The person responsible for the use of the equipment, in
conjunction with the medical physicist, the medical radiation technologist and
other appropriate professionals, should decide whether quality control tests are
needed with regard to radiation protection, including image quality, and whether
changes to protocols are needed.
3.50. The electrical safety and mechanical safety aspects of the medical
radiological equipment are an important part of the maintenance programme,
as these can have direct or indirect effects on radiation protection and safety.
Authorized persons who understand the specifications of the medical
radiological equipment should perform this work (see also paras 2.112–2.114).
Electrical and mechanical maintenance should be included in the programme
of quality assurance and should be performed, preferably by the manufacturer
of the medical radiological equipment or an authorized agent, at a frequency
recommended by the manufacturer. Servicing should include a written report
describing the findings. These reports and follow-up corrective actions should be
archived as part of the programme of quality assurance.
OCCUPATIONAL RADIATION PROTECTION
3.51. In the diagnostic imaging procedures described in paras 3.1–3.4,
occupationally exposed individuals are usually the medical radiation technologists
and the radiological medical practitioners (e.g. including radiologists and, in
dental practices, dentists operating X ray machines). In a trauma centre, other

68

health professionals such as nurses, emergency department physicians and
anaesthetists who may have to be present when portable or fixed X ray machines,
including C-arm fluoroscopes, are used or who may have to be present in the CT
room when the unit is operating may also be considered occupationally exposed.
3.52. In image guided interventional procedures and during surgery, as
described in para. 3.4, the occupationally exposed individuals are the
radiological medical practitioners who perform the interventions (including,
but not limited to, radiologists, cardiologists, vascular surgeons, orthopaedic
surgeons, neurosurgeons, urologists, anaesthetists, respiratory physicians
and gastroenterologists), medical radiation technologists and other health
professionals who are present and part of the interventional team, including the
anaesthetist, nurses, and technicians who monitor the physiological parameters
of the patient. Some complex and lengthy procedures may require more than one
interventionist.
3.53. Additional occupationally exposed personnel may include medical
physicists, biomedical, clinical and service engineers and some contractors,
depending on their role.
3.54. Other radiology facility workers, such as ward nurses, imaging staff
who work exclusively with imaging modalities without ionizing radiation
(ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)), patient porters, orderlies,
assistants, cleaners and other service support personnel, for whom radiation
sources are not required by, or directly related to, their work, are required to
have the same level of protection as members of the public, as established in
para. 3.78 of GSR Part 3 [3]. Consequently, the recommendations provided in
paras 3.277–3.280 are also applicable in respect of such workers. Rules should be
established for these workers, especially with regard to access to controlled areas
and supervised areas.
3.55. This subsection contains guidance very specific to diagnostic radiology
and image guided interventional procedures. More general and comprehensive
guidance on occupational radiation protection is given in GSG-7 [23], including
guidance on radiation protection programmes, assessment of occupational
exposure and providers of dosimetry services, applicable to all areas of radiation
use (including non-medical uses).

69

Arrangements under the radiation protection programme
Classification of areas
3.56. Various areas and rooms in a radiology facility should be classified as
controlled areas or supervised areas, in line with the requirements established
in paras 3.88–3.92 of GSR Part 3 [3]. All other rooms and areas that are not so
designated are considered as being in the public domain, and levels of radiation
in these areas should be low enough to ensure compliance with the dose limits for
public exposure. Paragraphs 3.57–3.59 give general guidance, and it would be
expected that final decisions by the licensee for a given medical radiation facility
would be based on the expert advice of the medical physicist, a qualified expert
in radiation protection or the RPO.
3.57. All X ray rooms should be designated as controlled areas; in addition, areas
where mobile X ray units are used can also be categorized as controlled areas
during the time in which radiological procedures are being carried out. Open plan
emergency departments (i.e. areas without fixed walls where curtains are used to
create cubicles), with either fixed or mobile X ray units, can also be categorized
as controlled areas during the time in which radiological procedures are being
carried out. In order to avoid uncertainties about the extent of controlled areas,
the boundaries should, when possible, be walls and doors.
3.58. Supervised areas may involve areas surrounding X ray rooms. A typical
design of a radiology department includes two basic areas: one for patient
circulation, which includes the reception, waiting rooms and corridors from
which the X ray rooms can be accessed through the dressing cabinets; and
another for staff circulation, which includes dark rooms, film and workstation
reading rooms and internal corridors. Most of the staff area may be classified as
a supervised area, not primarily because of the exposure level, which can be kept
very low, but rather as a ‘buffer zone’ owing to the potential for other individuals
to enter the X ray rooms inadvertently and be exposed.
3.59. The control console may be inside the X ray room, separated by structural
shielding, or outside the X ray room in the staff area, with visual control of the
X ray room and with patient communication. Access of unauthorized individuals
to control console areas should be restricted to avoid the distraction of the
operator, which might lead to unnecessary or repeated exposures. Control panel
areas are not in the public domain and therefore should be classified as either
controlled areas or supervised areas.

70

Local rules and procedures
3.60. Paragraph 3.93 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes a hierarchy of preventive
measures for protection and safety with engineered controls, including
structured and ancillary shielding, being supported by administrative controls
and personal protective equipment. To this end, and as established in para. 3.94
of GSR Part 3 [3], local rules and procedures are required to be established in
writing in any radiology facility. Their purpose is to ensure protection and safety
for workers and other persons. Such local rules and procedures should include
measures to minimize occupational radiation exposure both for normal work and
in unusual events. The local rules and procedures should also cover the wearing,
handling and storing of personal dosimeters, and should specify investigation
levels and ensuing follow-up actions (see paras 3.104–3.129).
3.61. Since all personnel involved in using radiation in a radiology facility need
to know and follow the local rules and procedures, the development and review
of these local rules and procedures should involve representatives of all health
professionals involved in diagnostic radiology and image guided interventional
procedures.
3.62. Equipment (both hardware and software) should be operated in a manner that
ensures satisfactory performance at all times with respect to both the tasks to be
accomplished and radiation protection and safety. The manufacturer’s operating
manual is an important resource in this respect, but additional procedures are
likely to be needed. The final documented set of operational procedures should
be subject to approval by the licensee of the radiology facility, and should be
incorporated into the facility’s management system (see paras 2.138–2.149).
3.63. Radiology facility staff should understand the documented procedures
for their work with radiation and for the operation of the equipment with which
they work, including the safety features, and should be trained, with periodic
refresher training, in what to do if things go wrong. Additional training should be
conducted when new medical radiological equipment is brought into use in the
radiology facility.
3.64. Many local rules and procedures address some or all aspects of occupational
radiation protection, patient radiation protection and public radiation protection,
either directly or indirectly, as well as providing for a successful diagnostic
examination or intervention. Paragraphs 3.65–3.88 give recommendations that
should be incorporated into the radiology facility’s local rules and procedures.
They are placed in this section on occupational radiation protection because they
71

are to be followed by workers, but they will often also have significance for
patient and public radiation protection.
3.65. For those radiological procedures where there is no need for staff to be in
the room during an exposure, all attending staff should position themselves in the
appropriately shielded areas.
3.66. In general, there should be no need for occupationally exposed staff to
hold, or have close contact with, patients during a radiological procedure. If such
holding or contact is indeed necessary, then the person to be used in that role
should be considered a carer or comforter of the patient, and should be afforded
the appropriate radiation protection described in paras 3.247–3.251.
3.67. Immobilization devices (e.g. a CT head cradle) should be used whenever
possible and as appropriate to minimize exposure of the patient, the staff member
or the carer or comforter. Immobilization of patients should not be performed
by staff and, if possible, not by any person. If immobilization requires the use of
a person, then this should be someone such as a relative of the patient who has
agreed to be a carer or comforter and is afforded radiation protection accordingly
(see paras 3.247–3.251).
3.68. For general radiography:
(a)
(b)

The X ray tube should not be pointed at the control console area.
Given that the patient is the source of scatter radiation, care should be taken
to ensure that the position of the patient is as far from the control console as
is feasible, with account taken of the room configuration and accessories,
and preferably more than 1 m distant from the console.

3.69. For mobile radiography:
(a)

(b)

72

Operators should wear lead aprons and should maintain as much distance
as possible between themselves and the patient (to minimize exposure to
scatter radiation), whilst still maintaining good visual supervision of the
patient and being able to communicate verbally with him or her.
Other staff (e.g. nursing, medical and ancillary staff) are not considered as
occupationally exposed workers and hence should be afforded protection as
a member of the public. This is achieved by ensuring such persons are as
far away from the patient as possible during the exposure (typically at least
3 m) or are behind appropriate barriers.

(c)
(d)
(e)

In situations in which a member of staff needs to be close to the patient,
protective aprons should be worn (e.g. an anaesthetist with a ventilated
patient or a nurse with an unstable patient).
Verbal warning of an imminent exposure should be given.
Consideration should be given to other patients nearby (see also para. 3.276
on public radiation protection).

3.70. In many emergency departments, ceiling suspended X ray equipment
provides a versatile environment for performing rapid trauma radiography.
Appropriate occupational radiation protection can be afforded through the
following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

Lead aprons should be worn by staff members who need to be adjacent to
the patient being exposed.
The primary beam should be directed away from staff and other patients
whenever possible.
Staff should keep as far away as possible from the patient during exposure,
whilst still maintaining good visual supervision of the patient.
Where available, mobile shields should be used.
Any pregnant staff member (other than radiology staff) should be asked by
the medical radiation technologist to leave the vicinity during exposure.
Verbal warning of imminent exposure should be given.

3.71. For CT, when staff need to be in the room during exposures, additional
measures should be taken:
(a)

(b)

In the case of CT interventions, the interventionist should use appropriate
personal protective equipment (a protective apron, a thyroid shield and
protective eyewear). In addition, care should be exercised to avoid the
placing of hands in the primary beam and immediate notification to the
interventionist should be given if this happens.
In the case of persons providing medical support (e.g. anaesthetists), a
protective apron should be worn and the person should position themselves
as far from the gantry as possible, whilst still maintaining good visual
supervision of the patient.

3.72. For diagnostic fluoroscopic procedures, when staff need to be in the room,
the following measures should be taken:
(a)

The staff member performing the procedure should use personal protective
equipment (a protective apron, a thyroid shield, protective eyewear and
73

(b)

gloves). In addition, care should be exercised to avoid the placing of hands
in the primary beam and immediate notification to the fluoroscopist should
be given if this happens.
In the case of persons providing medical support (e.g. anaesthetists), a
protective apron should be worn and the person should position themselves
as far from the patient as possible during exposure.

3.73. For radiological procedures performed with mobile fluoroscopic units
(C-arm systems), the following measures should be taken:
(a)

(b)
(c)

The staff member performing the procedure should use personal protective
equipment (a protective apron, a thyroid shield, protective eyewear and
gloves). In addition, care should be exercised to avoid the placing of hands
in the primary beam and immediate notification to the fluoroscopist should
be given if this happens.
Only essential staff should remain in the room. All such staff are considered
occupationally exposed workers.
In situations in which a member of staff needs to be close to the patient,
protective aprons should be worn (e.g. an anaesthetist with a ventilated
patient or a nurse with an unstable patient). At no time should a pregnant
staff member take on this role.

For other practical advice, including X ray tube orientation and positioning,
mobile shields, technical parameter selection, see paras 3.79–3.87 on image
guided interventional procedures.
3.74. For mammography, the medical radiation technologist should stand behind
the protective barrier attached to the mammography unit when making the
exposure.
3.75. For dental facilities with intraoral and panoramic equipment, the following
measures should be taken:
(a)
(b)
(c)

74

Personal protective equipment is not usually needed. Radiation protection is
afforded through the use of distance from the patient. Typically, a distance
of at least 2 m is recommended.
The operator should not hold the image receptor during the exposure.
Handheld portable X ray equipment for intraoral radiography should
be used only for examinations where it is impractical or not medically
acceptable to transfer patients to a fixed unit or to use a mobile unit (e.g.
in nursing homes, residential care facilities or homes for persons with

disabilities; in forensic odontology; or for military operations abroad
without dental facilities) [116].
3.76. CBCT is used in some dental facilities, and should be housed in a room that
has been designed and shielded accordingly. Staff should be positioned behind
the protective barrier at the control console when exposures are made.
3.77. For DXA, the radiation levels around the unit are very low, and there are no
specific precautions that should be taken with respect to occupational radiation
protection. Typically, the operator can be in the room with the patient when
the machine is operating. The operator’s desk should be positioned at least 1 m
away from a pencil beam, and at least 2 m from a fan beam system. In the case
of fan beam and cone beam configurations or if the distances above cannot be
accommodated, the use of protective screens should be considered.
3.78. Local rules for pregnant workers and persons under the age of 18 should
reflect the guidance given in paras 3.133–3.135 and 3.136, respectively.
Specific local rules and procedures for image guided interventional procedures
3.79. Image guided interventional procedures, performed either in fluoroscopy
rooms or dedicated interventional rooms, tend to be complex and are performed
on patients who can be very ill or have a life threatening condition. As a
consequence, more staff will be needed in the room to attend to the patients’
individual medical needs (e.g. interventionists, anaesthetists, medical radiation
technologists, nurses and other specialists). Not only will more staff be exposed
during interventional procedures, but they may also be standing close to the
patient, where dose rates from radiation scattered by the patient are high.
3.80. Interventional procedures require specifically designed and dedicated
equipment. The dose rate in the vicinity of the patient is lower on the beam exit
side of the patient. For a vertical orientation, an under-couch X ray tube with an
over-couch image receptor has lower levels of scatter radiation in the area of the
operator’s trunk and head than an over-couch X ray tube with an under-couch
image receptor. A similar situation exists with lateral projections, where the
maximum scatter radiation is on the X ray tube side of the patient. Staff should,
where practicable, always stand on the image receptor side of the patient during
lateral or oblique projections.
3.81. There are simple methods of reducing exposure of staff by means of
operational factors, including choosing where to stand in the room. Since the
75

patient is the main source of scatter radiation, staff members should remain as
far away as practicable from the patient when exposures take place to reduce
exposure of staff. For the interventionist, taking a step or even half a step back
during image acquisition will result in a significant reduction in occupational
dose. As stated in para. 3.80, the orientation and positioning of the X ray tube will
determine where it is best to stand in order to be in an area subject to relatively
low amounts of scatter radiation. Automatic contrast media injectors should be
used when feasible to allow personnel to move away from the patient, ideally
behind a shield.
3.82. Staff should never be subject to direct beam exposure. This includes
avoiding the placing of hands in the beam whenever possible. When the hands
of the operator are close to the direct beam, an under-couch X ray tube with
an over-couch image receptor should be used because the dose rate is lower
on the beam exit side of the patient and the exposure of the operator’s hands is
significantly reduced.
3.83. There are many operational factors that affect patient dose during image
guided interventional procedures, and these factors in turn affect staff dose
because the dose to the patient determines the amount of scatter radiation being
produced. Methods to reduce patient dose are described in paras 3.189–3.195,
and should always be used to reduce both patient and staff doses.
3.84. Medical radiological equipment specifically designed for image guided
interventional procedures often incorporates protective devices, such as ceiling
suspended, lead acrylic viewing screens, and under-table and lateral shielding
attachments to the X ray couch, and personal mobile shields. Alternatively,
such devices can be purchased separately. These devices can afford individuals
significant degree of radiation protection, but they can sometimes be cumbersome
to use. However, the appropriate use of these devices will result in a significant
reduction in staff doses.
3.85. A higher incidence of radiation injuries to the lens of the eye has been
reported for interventionists and nurses performing image guided interventional
procedures [117]. For this reason interventionists, and other staff who routinely
work close to the patient, should always use ceiling mounted screens or protective
eyewear. This is further reinforced by the relatively low dose limit (20 mSv per
year) for the lens of the eye (see para. 2.22 and Box 1). It is quite likely that the
dose limit would be exceeded for an interventionist performing several hundred
image guided interventional procedures in a year if that person did not use any
protection for the eyes. Protective shielding devices are effective only when they
76

are interposed between the source of radiation and the eye. Care should be taken
in the proper positioning of the imaging displays to ensure optimum benefit is
derived from the use of screens and protective eyewear.
3.86. Further specific guidance on interventional radiology and interventional
cardiology, endorsed by several regional professional societies, can be found in
Refs [117, 118].
3.87. Some image guided interventional procedures are performed using CT, and
the guidance given in para. 3.71 applies.
3.88. For image guided interventional procedures involving intracoronary
implantation of unsealed and sealed radiation sources, reference should be made
to the guidance, where appropriate, in paras 4.75–4.89 and paras 5.117–5.145,
respectively.
Personal and in-room protective devices
3.89. Paragraphs 3.93 and 3.95 of GSR Part 3 [3] require that personal protective
equipment and in-room protective devices be available and used when structural
shielding and administrative controls alone cannot afford the required level of
occupational radiation protection. This typically arises when staff are required
to be in the room during radiological procedures, such as with image guided
interventional procedures and fluoroscopy, and with mobile radiography. The
need for this protective equipment should be established by the RPO or the
medical physicist at the radiology facility.
3.90. Personal protective equipment is worn on the person and includes
protective aprons, thyroid shields, protective eyewear and protective gloves.
Protective aprons are available in many shapes, configurations, materials and
lead equivalence, and should be chosen to best suit the intended use. Some
aprons require using fully overlapping panels to provide complete coverage.
Expert advice on personal protective equipment should be sought from the RPO
or medical physicist.
3.91. For image guided interventional procedures, wrap around aprons, preferably
consisting of vests and skirts to spread the weight, should be used. They should
cover:
(a)
(b)

From the neck down to at least 10 cm below the knees;
The entire breast bone (sternum) and shoulders;
77

(c)
(d)

The sides of the body from not more than 10 cm below the armpits to at
least halfway down the thighs;
The back from the shoulders down to and including the buttocks.

3.92. Protective gloves are useful for protecting the hands near the beam, but
can produce the opposite effect during fluoroscopy with ABC or ADRC when
the hands enter the area covered by the sensor of the ABC or ADRC, because
this would drive the exposure to higher levels for both the staff and the patient
and would be ineffective in protecting the hands. Even if the fluoroscopy system
operates without ABC or ADRC, leaded gloves can prolong the procedure
because they do not afford the necessary tactile sensitivity and thus their value is
questionable.
3.93. Protective eyewear, especially for use in image guided interventional
procedures, should cover the entire orbit. This means that lateral protection
should be provided by shielded sides and the glasses should be a close fit.
3.94. The lead equivalence of personal protective equipment should be specified
at the maximum operating X ray tube potential applicable for its intended use.
3.95. Non-lead based personal protective equipment, incorporating shielding
materials, such as tin, tungsten, bismuth and antimony, can be preferable if they
are lighter and easier to use. Care should be taken in interpreting claimed lead
equivalences for non-lead based protective equipment, and expert advice from
the RPO or medical physicist should be sought.
3.96. Protective equipment for pregnant workers should be carefully considered,
as wrap around aprons may no longer provide adequate protection for the embryo
or fetus (para. 3.114 of GSR Part 3 [3]). The RPO or medical physicist should be
consulted as necessary.
3.97. Items of personal protective equipment, in particular protective aprons, can
lose their protective effectiveness if mistreated or not appropriately used or cared
for. All personnel that use personal protective equipment have the responsibility
for its appropriate use and care, for example by ensuring aprons are correctly
hung and stored to minimize damage.
3.98. Personal protective equipment should be examined under fluoroscopy or
radiography periodically to confirm its shielding integrity.

78

3.99. Additional protective devices for use in fluoroscopy and image guided
interventional procedures include:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Ceiling suspended protective screens for protecting eyes and the thyroid
while keeping visual contact with the patient. Technical advances with such
screens include systems that move with the operator.
Protective lead curtains or drapes mounted on the patient table.
Mobile shields either attached to the table (lateral shields) or mounted on
coasters (full body).
Disposable protective drapes for the patient.

Workplace monitoring
3.100. Paragraphs 3.96–3.98 of GSR Part 3 [3] establish the requirements and
responsibilities for workplace monitoring. Workplace monitoring comprises
measurements made in the working environment and the interpretation of
the results. Workplace monitoring serves several purposes, including routine
monitoring, special monitoring for specific occasions, activities or tasks, and
confirmatory monitoring to check assumptions made about exposure conditions.
Workplace monitoring can be used to verify the occupational doses of personnel
whose work involves exposure to predictable low levels of radiation. It is
particularly important for staff members who are not individually monitored.
Further general guidance on workplace monitoring is given in GSG-7 [23].
3.101. Workplace monitoring in areas around each item of medical radiological
equipment in the radiology facility, when it is being operated, should be carried
out when:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

The room and shielding construction has been completed, regardless of
whether it is a new construction or a renovation, and before the room is first
used clinically;
New or substantially refurbished equipment is commissioned (both direct
and indirect radiation such as leakage and scatter radiation should be
measured);
New software for the medical radiological equipment is installed or there is
a significant upgrade;
New techniques are introduced;
Servicing of the medical radiological equipment has been performed, which
could have an impact on the radiation delivered.

79

3.102. Workplace monitoring should be performed and documented as part of
the radiology facility’s radiation protection programme. The radiology facility’s
RPO or medical physicist should provide specific advice on the workplace
monitoring programme, including any investigations that are triggered when
investigation levels are exceeded (see paras 3.121 and 3.122).
3.103. The survey meters used for radiation monitoring should be calibrated
in terms of ambient dose equivalent. The calibration should be current, and
should be traceable to a standards dosimetry laboratory. For diagnostic radiology
and image guided interventional procedures, the quantity is the ambient dose
equivalent, H*(10), and the unit is the sievert (Sv) and its submultiples (for more
detailed guidance, see GSG-7 [23]).
Assessment of occupational exposure and health surveillance for workers
Assessment of occupational exposure
3.104. The purpose of monitoring and dose assessment is, inter alia, to provide
information about the exposure of workers and to confirm good working practices
and regulatory compliance. Paragraph 3.100 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes the
requirement of individual monitoring for “any worker who usually works in a
controlled area, or who occasionally works in a controlled area and may receive
a significant dose from occupational exposure”. Workers who may require
individual monitoring include radiologists, cardiologists, gastroenterologists,
endoscopists, urologists, orthopaedic surgeons, neurosurgeons, respiratory
physicians, anaesthetists, medical physicists, biomedical and clinical engineers,
medical radiation technologists, nurses and the RPO.
3.105. Monitoring involves more than just measurement. It includes
interpretation, assessment, investigation and reporting, which may lead to
corrective measures, if necessary. Individual external doses can be assessed
by using individual monitoring devices, which include thermoluminescent
dosimeters, optical stimulated luminescent dosimeters, radiophotoluminiscent
dosimeters, film badges and electronic dosimeters. When electronic dosimeters
are used in pulsed X ray fields, care should be taken to ensure that they are
functioning correctly. Individual monitoring devices should be calibrated and
should be traceable to a standards dosimetry laboratory (for more detailed
guidance, see GSG-7 [23]).
3.106. Each dosimeter should be used for monitoring only the person to whom
it is issued, for work performed at that radiology facility, and it should not be
80

taken to other facilities where that person may also work. For example, if a person
is issued with a dosimeter at hospital A, it should be worn only at hospital A
and not at any other hospitals or medical centres where he or she also works.
Monitoring results can then be interpreted for the person working in a specific
radiology facility, and this will allow appropriate review of the effectiveness
of the optimization of protection and safety for that individual in that facility.
However, national regulatory requirements may differ from this advice, and they
would need to be followed in those jurisdictions in which they apply (see also
paras 3.123–3.125).
3.107. The monitoring period (period of dosimeter deployment) specified
by regulatory bodies in most States is typically in the range of one to three
months. A one month monitoring period is usually used for persons performing
procedures associated with higher occupational exposure, such as image guided
interventional procedures. A longer monitoring period (two or three months) is
more typical for personnel exposed to lower doses, as a one month cycle would
usually mean that the actual occupational dose is less than the minimum detection
level of the dosimeter, resulting in no detectable doses. With a longer cycle, it
is more likely that a reading can be obtained. Dosimeters should be sent from
the radiological facility to the dosimetry service provider, which should then
process the dosimeters and return the dose reports, all in a timely manner. Some
regulatory bodies may specify a performance criterion for timely reporting.
3.108. The operational dosimetric quantity used is the personal dose equivalent
Hp(d ). For weakly penetrating radiation and strongly penetrating radiation, the
recommended depths, d, are 0.07 mm and 10 mm, respectively. Radiation used
in diagnostic radiology and image guided interventional procedures is usually
relatively strongly penetrating, and therefore d = 10 mm for dosimeters being
used to assess effective dose. Hp(10) is used to provide an estimate of effective
dose that avoids both underestimation and excessive overestimation [23].
In diagnostic radiology and image guided interventional procedures, the
overestimation is somewhat larger because of the lower photon penetration from
X ray beams in the kV range [119, 120]. If a protective apron or thyroid shield
is being worn, the relationship between Hp(10) and effective dose becomes more
complex; additional guidance is given in para. 3.115.
3.109. For monitoring the skin and extremities, a depth of 0.07 mm (d = 0.07)
is recommended, and Hp(0.07) is used to provide an estimate of equivalent dose
to the skin and extremities.

81

3.110. For monitoring the lens of the eye, a depth of 3 mm (d = 3) is
recommended, and Hp(3) is used to provide an estimate of equivalent dose to
the lens of the eye. In practice, however, the use of Hp(3) has not been widely
implemented for routine individual monitoring. In cases where eye doses are a
concern, such as in image guided interventional procedures, Hp(0.07), and to a
lesser extent Hp(10), can be considered as an acceptable surrogate operational
quantity (see Ref. [121] for further information).
3.111. There are three dose limits applicable to workers in diagnostic radiology
and image guided interventional procedures: the limit for effective dose, and the
limits for equivalent dose to the lens of the eye and to the skin and extremities.
The dosimeter being worn will be used to estimate one or more of the quantities
used for the dose limits. Depending on the work performed by the person
being individually monitored, there may be a preferred position for wearing
the dosimeter, and more than one dosimeter may be used. For image guided
interventional procedures, two dosimeters should be worn.
3.112. For individual monitoring with only one dosimeter in diagnostic
radiology and image guided interventional procedures the following
recommendations are made:
(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)

If the monitored worker never wears a protective apron, the dosimeter
should be worn on the front of the torso between the shoulders and the
waist.
If the monitored worker sometimes wears a protective apron, the dosimeter
should be worn on the front of the torso between the shoulders and the
waist, and under the apron when it is being worn.
If the monitored worker always wears a protective apron, the dosimeter
should be worn on the front of the torso at shoulder or collar level outside
the apron (see also para. 3.113), except if national regulations require the
dosimeter to be worn under the apron.
If the working situation is such that the radiation always or predominantly
comes from one side of the person, such as in image guided interventional
procedures, the dosimeter should be placed on the front of the torso on the
side closest to the source of radiation; the guidance in (a) to (c) should also
be followed in this case.

3.113. For individual monitoring with two dosimeters, such as in image guided
interventional procedures, where the monitored worker always wears a protective
apron, one dosimeter should be worn on the front of the torso at shoulder or
collar level outside the apron on the side closest to the source of radiation. The
82

other dosimeter should be worn on the front of the torso between the shoulders
and the waist and under the apron, preferably on the side closest to the source of
radiation.
3.114. Specialized dosimeters, such as ring dosimeters for monitoring finger
doses, will have their own specific wearing instructions, which should be
followed.
3.115. When a protective apron is being used, the assessment of effective dose
might not be straightforward:
(a)

(b)

(c)

A single dosimeter placed under the apron, reported in Hp(10), provides
a good estimate of the contribution to the effective dose of the parts of
the body protected by the apron, but underestimates the contribution of
the unprotected parts of the body (the thyroid, the head and neck, and the
extremities).
A single dosimeter worn outside the apron, reported in Hp(10), provides
a significant overestimate of effective dose and should be corrected
for the protection afforded by the apron by using an appropriate
algorithm [120, 122, 123].
Where two dosimeters are worn, one under the apron and the other outside
the apron, an algorithm should be applied to estimate the effective dose
from the two reported values of Hp(10) [120, 122].

3.116. As noted in para. 3.110, dosimeters for reporting Hp(3) are not widely
available. A dosimeter worn outside the apron at collar or neck level, reported
in either Hp(0.07) or Hp(10), can provide a surrogate estimate for the equivalent
dose to the lens of the eye. Whether or not protective eyewear was worn should
be taken into account to interpret the dose estimate correctly.
3.117. When not in use, individual dosimeters should be kept in a dedicated
place and should be protected from damage or from irradiation. If an individual
loses his or her dosimeter, the individual should inform the RPO, who should
perform a dose assessment, record this evaluation of the dose and add it to the
individual’s dose record. Where there is a national dose registry, it should be
updated with the dose estimate in a timely manner. The most reliable method for
estimating an individual’s dose is to use his or her recent dose history. In cases
where the individual performs non-routine types of work, it may be better to use
the doses of co-workers experiencing similar exposure conditions as the basis for
the dose estimate.

83

3.118. In some radiology facilities and for some individuals with a low level
of occupational exposure (e.g. general dental practitioners), area dosimetry
to estimate the level of dose per procedure can be an acceptable alternative to
individual monitoring. With knowledge of the typical level of dose per procedure
for positions where personnel are placed during exposures and the number of
procedures per year, the RPO can estimate personnel doses.
3.119. Similarly, occupational doses can be estimated from the results of
workplace monitoring. The effective dose for personnel can be inferred from the
measured ambient dose equivalent H*(10). The ICRP [119] provides conversion
coefficients from ambient dose equivalent to effective dose for different types
of radiation and energy. The conversion coefficients for photons are close to
unity except for very low energy photons, such as photons scattered from a
mammography X ray beam.
3.120. An additional direct reading operational dosimeter, such as an
appropriately calibrated electronic dosimeter, can also be used in image guided
interventional procedures, as these devices can give the worker an instant
indication of both the cumulative dose and the current dose rate and are a useful
tool for the optimization of occupational radiation protection [23].
Investigation levels for staff exposure
3.121. Investigation levels are different from dose constraints and dose limits;
they are a tool used to provide a warning of the need to review procedures and
performance, to investigate what is not working as expected and to take timely
corrective action. The exceeding of an investigation level should prompt such
actions. For example, for diagnostic radiology and image guided interventional
procedures, monthly values higher than 0.5 mSv (for a dosimeter worn under
a protective apron) could be investigated. Values higher than 2 mSv per
month [118] from an over-apron dosimeter might indicate that eye doses are of
concern. Values higher than 15 mSv per month for hand or finger dosimeters
should also be investigated [117, 118]. Abnormal conditions and events should
also trigger an investigation. In all cases, the investigation should be carried out
with a view to improving the optimization of occupational protection, and the
results should be recorded. Investigation levels should also be set for workplace
monitoring, with account taken of exposure scenarios and the predetermined
values adopted for investigation levels for workers. Details on investigation
levels are provided in GSG-7 [23].

84

3.122. An investigation should be initiated as soon as possible following a
trigger or event, and a written report should be prepared concerning the cause,
including determination or verification of the dose, corrective or mitigatory
actions, and instructions or recommendations to avoid recurrence. Such reports
should be reviewed by the quality assurance committee and the radiation safety
committee, as appropriate, and the licensee should be informed. In some cases,
the regulatory body may also need to be informed.
Persons who work in more than one place
3.123. Some individuals might work in more than one radiology facility. The
facilities may be quite separate entities in terms of ownership and management,
or they may have common ownership but separate management, or they may
even have common ownership and management but be physically quite separate.
Regardless of the ownership and management structure, the occupational
radiation protection requirements for the particular radiology facility apply when
the person is working in that facility. As described in para. 3.106, a dosimeter
issued for individual monitoring should be worn only in the facility for which
it is issued, as this facilitates the effective optimization of protection and safety
in that facility. This approach is logistically more easily implemented, since
each physical site has its own dosimeters, and so there is no need to transport
dosimeters between facilities, with the risk of losing or forgetting them. In
cases where the facilities are under common ownership, it may be seen as an
unnecessary financial burden to provide more than one set of dosimeters for staff
that work in more than one of its facilities. However, the radiation protection
advantages of having the dosimeter results linked to a person’s work in only one
radiology facility remain (see also para. 3.125).
3.124. There is, however, an important additional consideration, namely the
need to ensure compliance with the occupational dose limits. Any person who
works in more than one radiology facility should notify the licensee for each of
those facilities. Each licensee, through its RPO, should establish formal contact
with the licensees of the other radiology facilities and their RPOs, so that each
facility has an arrangement to ensure that a personal dosimeter is available and
that there is an ongoing record of the occupational doses for that person in all the
facilities where he or she works.
3.125. Some individuals, such as consultant medical physicists or service
engineers, might perform work in many radiology facilities and, in addition, in
other medical radiation facilities. They can be employed by a company or be
self-employed, providing contracted services to the radiology facility and the
85

other facilities. In such cases, it is simpler for the company or the self-employed
person to provide the dosimeters for individual monitoring. Therefore, in these
cases, a worker uses the same dosimeter for work performed in all radiology
facilities (and other medical radiation facilities) in the monitoring period.
Records of occupational exposure
3.126. Paragraphs 3.103–3.107 of GSR Part 3 [3] establish the detailed
requirements for records of occupational exposure and place obligations on
employers, registrants and licensees. In addition to demonstrating compliance
with legal requirements, records of occupational exposure should be used
within the radiology facility for additional purposes, including assessing the
effectiveness of the optimization of protection and safety at the facility and
evaluating trends in exposure. National or local regulatory bodies might specify
additional requirements for records of occupational exposure and for access to
the information contained in those records. Employers are required to provide
workers with access to records of their own occupational exposure (para. 3.106(a)
of GSR Part 3 [3]). Further general guidance on records of occupational exposure
is given in GSG-7 [23].
Health surveillance for workers
3.127. The primary purpose of health surveillance is to assess the initial and
continuing fitness of employees for their intended tasks, and requirements are
given in paras 3.108 and 3.109 of GSR Part 3 [3].
3.128. No specific health surveillance relating to exposure to ionizing radiation
is necessary for staff involved in diagnostic radiology and image guided
interventional procedures, with perhaps the possible exception of initial eye
assessment and periodic eye assessments for visual acuity and contrast resolution
for personnel performing significant numbers of image guided interventional
procedures. Only in cases of overexposed workers, at doses much higher than
the dose limits (e.g. a few hundred millisieverts or higher), would special
investigations involving biological dosimetry and further extended diagnosis
and medical treatment be necessary [23]. Under normal working conditions,
the occupational doses incurred in diagnostic radiology and image guided
interventional procedures are low, and no specific radiation related examinations
are required for persons who are occupationally exposed to ionizing radiation, as
there are no diagnostic tests that yield information relevant to normal exposure.
It is, therefore, rare for considerations of occupational exposure arising from
the working environment of a radiology facility to influence significantly the
86

decision about the fitness of a worker to undertake work with radiation or to
influence the general conditions of service [23].
3.129. Counselling should be made available to workers who have or may have
been exposed in excess of dose limits, and information, advice and, if indicated,
counselling should be made available to workers who are concerned about
their radiation exposure. In diagnostic radiology and image guided procedures,
the latter group may include women who are or may be pregnant. Counselling
should be given by appropriately experienced and qualified practitioners. Further
guidance is given in GSG-7 [23].
Information, instruction and training
3.130. All staff involved in diagnostic radiology and image guided
interventional procedures should meet the respective training and competence
criteria described in paras 2.119–2.137. This will include general education,
training, qualification and competence for occupational radiation protection.
Radiological medical practitioners, medical radiation technologists and nurses
working with hybrid units (such as PET–CT and SPECT–CT) may have trained
exclusively in their original specialty. They should undertake radiation protection
and safety training relevant to the additional imaging modality.
3.131. Paragraph 3.110 of GSR Part 3 [3] places responsibilities on the
employer to provide adequate information, instruction and training for protection
and safety as it pertains to the radiology facility. This is not only for new staff but
also for all staff as part of their continuing professional development. Specific
instruction and training should be provided when new medical radiological
procedures, equipment, software and technologies are introduced.
Conditions of service and special arrangements
3.132. Paragraph 3.111 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that no special benefits be
offered to staff because they are occupationally exposed. It is not acceptable to
offer benefits as substitutes for measures for protection and safety.
Pregnant workers
3.133. There is no requirement in GSR Part 3 [3] for a worker to notify the
licensee that she is pregnant, but it is necessary that female workers understand
the importance of making such notifications so that their working conditions
can be modified accordingly. Paragraph 3.113(b) of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes
87

the requirement that employers, in cooperation with registrants and licensees,
provide female workers with appropriate information in this regard.
3.134.

Paragraph 3.114 of GSR Part 3 [3] states that:
“The employer of a female worker, who has been notified of her
suspected pregnancy…shall adapt the working conditions in respect
of occupational exposure so as to ensure that the embryo or fetus…is
afforded the same broad level of protection as is required for members
of the public.”

The limitation of the dose to the embryo or fetus does not mean that pregnant
women should avoid work with radiation, but it does mean that the employer
should carefully review the exposure conditions with regard to both normal
exposure and potential exposure. A possible solution includes reassignment of a
pregnant worker to a location that may have lower ambient dose equivalent; for
example, from fluoroscopy to radiography or to CT. Such reassignments should
be accompanied by adequate training.
3.135. With regard to the dose limit of 1 mSv for the embryo or fetus, the
reading of a dosimeter can overestimate the dose to the embryo or fetus by a
factor of 10. If the reading corresponds to a dosimeter worn outside a lead apron,
the overestimation can rise to a factor of 100 [124]. The dose to the embryo or
fetus should be assessed using an appropriately positioned additional dosimeter
(see also GSG-7 [23]). Information, advice and, if indicated, counselling for
pregnant workers should be made available (see also para. 3.129).
Persons under 18
3.136. In many States, there is the possibility of students aged 16 or more,
but under 18, commencing their studies and training to become a medical
radiation technologist or other health professional that can involve occupational
exposure to ionizing radiation. Paragraph 3.116 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes
the requirements for access to controlled areas and the dose limits for such
persons are more restrictive (see Box 1 of this Safety Guide and Schedule III of
GSR Part 3 [3]).

88

RADIATION PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUALS UNDERGOING MEDICAL
EXPOSURE
3.137. This section covers radiation protection of patients, carers and
comforters, and volunteers in biomedical research. The term ‘patient’, when used
in the context of medical exposure, means the person undergoing the radiological
procedure. Other patients in the radiology facility, including those who may be
waiting for their own radiological procedure, are considered members of the
public and their radiation protection is covered in paras 3.273–3.282.
3.138. As described in para. 2.8, there are no dose limits for medical exposure,
so it is very important that there is effective application of the requirements for
justification and optimization.
Justification of medical exposure
3.139. The requirements for justification of medical exposure
(paras 3.155–3.161 of GSR Part 3 [3]) incorporate the three-level approach to
justification (see para. 2.11) [4, 125, 126].
3.140. The roles of the health authority and professional bodies with respect
to a level 2 or generic justification of radiological procedures, justification of
health screening programmes, and justification of screening intended for the
early detection of disease, but not as part of a health screening programme, are
described in paras 2.55–2.60.
Justification of medical exposure for the individual patient
3.141. GSR Part 3 [3] requires a joint approach to justification at the level of
an individual patient, with a shared decision involving both the referring medical
practitioner (who initiates the request for a radiological procedure) and the
radiological medical practitioner. A referral should be regarded as a request for a
professional consultation or opinion rather than an instruction or order to perform.
The referring medical practitioner brings the knowledge of the medical context
and the patient’s history to the decision process, while the radiological medical
practitioner has specialist expertise on the radiological procedure. The efficacy,
benefits and risks of alternative methods (both methods involving ionizing
radiation and methods not involving ionizing radiation) should be considered. In
all cases, the justification is required to take into account national or international
referral guidelines (para. 3.158 of GSR Part 3 [3]). For examples of such

89

guidelines, see Refs [127–133].21 The ultimate responsibility for justification will
be specified in the individual State’s regulations.
3.142. The patient should also be informed about the expected benefits,
risks and limitations of the proposed radiological procedure, as well as the
consequences of not undergoing the procedure.
3.143. Justification, which is a principle of radiation protection, is
implemented more effectively as part of the medical process of determining
the ‘appropriateness’ of a radiological procedure. The process of determining
appropriateness is an evidence based approach to choosing the best test for a
given clinical scenario, with account taken of the diagnostic efficacy of the
proposed radiological procedure as well as of alternative procedures that do not
use ionizing radiation, for example, ultrasound, MRI or endoscopy. Useful tools
to support this decision making process include national or international imaging
referral guidelines developed by professional societies [127–133]. Imaging
referral guidelines can be disseminated or utilized through electronic requesting
systems22 and clinical decision support tools or systems. It should be ensured
that such systems correctly apply the regulatory requirements for justification, in
particular with respect to roles and responsibilities.
3.144. In determining the appropriateness of the radiological procedure for
an individual patient, the following questions should be asked by the referring
medical practitioner [132]:
(a)

(b)

Has it already been done? A radiological procedure that has already been
performed within a reasonable time period (depending on the procedure
and clinical question) should not be repeated (unless the clinical scenario
indicates the appropriateness of repeating the procedure). The results
(images and reports) of previous examinations should be made available,
not only at a given radiology facility but also for consultation at different
facilities. Digital imaging modalities and electronic networks should
facilitate this process. Individual patient exposure records should be used to
facilitate the decision making process if available.
Is it needed? The anticipated outcome of the proposed radiological
procedure (positive or negative) should influence the patient’s management.
21

Other
guidelines
are
available
at
http://gbu.radiologie.fr,
www.imagingpathways.health.wa.gov.au and www.myesr.org/esriguide
22
Such electronic requesting systems include the computerized physician order entry
(CPOE) system; such a system is expected to generate a request for imaging rather than an order.

90

(c)
(d)

(e)

Is it needed now? The timing of the proposed radiological procedure in
relation to the progression of the suspected disease and the possibilities for
treatment should all be considered as a whole.
Is this the best investigation to answer the clinical question? Advances in
imaging techniques are taking place continually, and the referring medical
practitioner may need to discuss with the radiological medical practitioner
what is currently available for a given problem.
Has the clinical problem been explained to the radiological medical
practitioner? The medical context for the requested radiological procedure
is crucial for ensuring the correct technique is performed with the correct
focus.

3.145. For some radiological procedures, primarily ‘well established’
procedures and low dose procedures, the practical implementation of justification
in many States is carried out by the medical radiation technologist, who is
effectively representing the radiological medical practitioner with the formal
understanding that, if there is uncertainty, the radiological medical practitioner is
contacted and the final decision is taken by the radiological medical practitioner
in consultation with the referring medical practitioner. Such justification is
guided by national or international referral guidelines. It should be noted that,
in all cases, the responsibility for justification lies with the radiological medical
practitioner and the referring medical practitioner.
3.146. For a small percentage of radiological procedures, primarily because
of a combination of complexity, difficult medical context and higher dose, the
justification is likely to be led by the radiological medical practitioner, with the
referring medical practitioner providing any necessary further clarification on
the medical context. Again, the justification should take into account national or
international referral guidelines.
3.147. Two particular groups of patients identified in para. 3.157 of
GSR Part 3 [3] for special consideration with respect to justification are patients
who are pregnant or are paediatric.
(a)

Owing to the higher radiosensitivity of the embryo or fetus, it should
be ascertained whether a female patient is pregnant before an X ray
examination for diagnosis or an image guided interventional procedure is
performed. Paragraph 3.176 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that procedures
be “in place for ascertaining the pregnancy status of a female patient of
reproductive capacity before the performance of any radiological procedure
that could result in a significant dose to the embryo or fetus”. Pregnancy
91

(b)

would then be a factor in the justification process and might influence
the timing of the proposed radiological procedure or a decision as to
whether another approach to treatment is more appropriate. Confirmation
of pregnancy could occur after the initial justification and before the
radiological procedure is performed. Repeat justification is then necessary,
with account taken of the additional sensitivity of the pregnant patient and
embryo or fetus.
As children are at greater risk of incurring radiation induced stochastic
effects, paediatric examinations necessitate special consideration in the
justification process.

3.148. Review of the justification may need to take place if circumstances
change; for example, if the performance of a low dose procedure has been
justified but, at the time of performing the examination, a high dose protocol
is needed. Such a case might be a justification for low dose CT for renal colic
that would have to be reviewed if high dose enhanced CT urography is actually
necessary to answer the clinical question.
3.149. A ‘self-referral’ occurs when a health professional undertakes a
radiological procedure for patients as a result of justification on the basis
of his or her own clinical assessment. Examples of acceptable self-referral
practice occur in dentistry, cardiology, orthopaedics, vascular surgery, urology
and gastroenterology. Relevant professional bodies in many States develop
appropriate guidance for their specialty, for example dental associations [134].
3.150. ‘Self-presentation’ occurs when a member of the public asks for a
radiological procedure without a referral from a health professional. This may
have been prompted by media reports or advertising. Examples include ‘individual
health assessments’ which often involves CT procedures in asymptomatic
individuals for early detection of cancer (e.g. whole body CT, lung CT or colon
CT) and quantification of coronary artery calcification (coronary artery CT).
Justification is required, as for all radiological procedures. Relevant professional
bodies have an important role in considering evidence for developing guidance
when new practices are proposed, as for example in the case of CT [135]. States
may choose to incorporate such guidance into legislation [136].
3.151. Means to improve awareness, appropriateness and auditing should be
developed to support the application of the requirement for justification of medical
exposure. Awareness of the need for justification underpins the whole process of
justification. Means for promoting awareness include traditional education and
training, such as at medical school or during specialty training, Internet based
92

learning or learning ‘on the job’ (e.g. junior doctors in an emergency department),
and the use of feedback in the reporting process. Appropriateness is described in
paras 3.143 and 3.144, and the audit process is used for monitoring and feedback
to improve both awareness and appropriateness.
Justification of medical exposure for biomedical research volunteers
3.152. The role of the ethics committee in the justification of medical exposure
of volunteers exposed as part of a programme of biomedical research is described
in para. 2.99.
Justification of medical exposure for carers and comforters
3.153. The three-level approach to justification is not applicable for carers and
comforters. Instead, para. 3.155 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes the requirement
to ensure that there be some net benefit arising from the exposure, for example
the successful performance of a diagnostic procedure on a child. The crucial
component in the justification of medical exposure of carers and comforters is
their knowledge and understanding about radiation protection and the radiation
risks for the procedure being considered. To this end, the radiological medical
practitioner or medical radiation technologist involved in the radiological
procedure, prior to the performance of the procedure, has the responsibility to
ensure that the carer or comforter is correctly informed about radiation protection
and the radiation risks involved, and that the carer or comforter understands this
information and consequently agrees to take on the role of carer or comforter.
Optimization of protection and safety
3.154. In medical exposure, optimization of protection and safety has several
components, some applicable directly to the radiological procedure about to
be performed and others providing the support or framework for the other
components. These components of optimization of protection and safety are
described in paras 3.155–3.252. Key personnel in the optimization process are
the radiological medical practitioner, the medical radiation technologist and the
medical physicist.
Design considerations
3.155. The use of appropriate and well designed medical radiological equipment
and associated software underpins any radiological procedure in diagnostic
radiology or any image guided interventional procedure. X ray generators
93

and their accessories should be designed and manufactured so as to facilitate
the keeping of doses in medical exposure as low as reasonably achievable
consistent with obtaining adequate diagnostic information or guidance for the
intervention. Guidance on design considerations is given in the subsection on
medical radiological equipment in paras 3.32–3.41. This guidance is applicable
to both stand alone and hybrid systems. Ultimately, as established in para. 3.162
of GSR Part 3 [3], it is the responsibility of the licensee of the radiology facility
to ensure that the facility uses only medical radiological equipment and software
that meets applicable international or national standards.
Operational considerations: General
3.156. Following justification, the diagnostic radiological procedure or image
guided interventional procedure is required to be performed in such a way as
to optimize patient protection (para. 3.163 of GSR Part 3 [3]). The level of
image quality sufficient for diagnosis is determined by the radiological medical
practitioner and is based on the clinical question posed and the anatomical
structures imaged (e.g. the diagnosis of the pattern of sinusitis on CT requires
only a low dose procedure as high contrast structures, namely air and bone, be
imaged). With image guided interventional procedures, the level of image quality
should be sufficient to guide the intervention.
3.157. The following points apply to all diagnostic radiological procedures or
image guided interventional procedures:
(a)
(b)
(c)

There should be an effective system for correct identification of patients,
with at least two, preferably three, forms of verification, for example name,
date of birth, address and medical record number.
Patient details should be correctly recorded, such as age, sex, body mass,
height, pregnancy status, current medications and allergies.
The clinical history of the patient should be reviewed.

3.158. The first step in operational considerations of optimization is selection
of the appropriate medical radiological equipment. For example, a chest X ray
should be performed using dedicated equipment with a radiation generator
producing high output enabling the use of a long source to image receptor
distance (typically 1.8 m) and a short exposure time to ensure a reproducible
image of diagnostic quality by minimizing patient respiratory motion and cardiac
motion.

94

3.159. The volume (area) of the patient that is exposed should be strictly limited
to that of clinical interest. This is achieved through collimation in radiography,
mammography, fluoroscopy and image guided interventional procedures, and
through the choice of scan parameters in CT. For diagnostic radiology, image
cropping performed after the exposure does not achieve any reduction in the
exposed volume.
3.160. Cooperation of the patient should be ensured to achieve an image of
diagnostic quality. This is particularly relevant when imaging children. Good
communication helps to achieve this. Verbal interaction between the medical
radiological technologist or the medical radiological practitioner and the patient
should take place before, during and after the procedure.
3.161. Optimization of protection and safety for a woman undergoing a
radiological procedure during pregnancy should take into account the woman
and the embryo or fetus. Routine diagnostic CT examinations of the pelvic region
with and without contrast injection can lead to a dose of 50 mSv to the uterus,
which is assumed to be the same as the dose that would be received by the fetus
in early pregnancy. When CT scanning is indicated for a pregnant patient, low
dose CT protocols should be used and the scanning area should be reduced to a
minimum (see also paras 3.176–3.185).
3.162. Shielding of radiosensitive organs, such as the gonads, the lens of the
eye, the breast and the thyroid, should be used when appropriate. Care should
be taken in the anatomical placement of such shields, the impact of shielding on
image quality (artefacts), and the use of AEC devices and the consequences for
patient dose.
3.163. For each modality, there are a number of factors that can be adjusted
to influence the relationship between image quality and patient dose. Written
protocols that specify the operating parameters to be used for common diagnostic
radiological procedures should be developed, adopted and applied in each
radiology facility. Such protocol ‘technique charts’ should be posted adjacent to
each X ray generator and should be specific for each piece of equipment. The
protocols should take into account the anatomical region, as well as patient mass
and size. The protocols should be developed using guidelines from national or
international professional bodies, and hence should reflect current best practices
(e.g. see Refs [137–147]). For modern digital equipment, many of the factors
are automated through the menu driven selection of options on the console.
Nevertheless, in setting up these options, significant scope exists for the
optimization of protection and safety through the appropriate selection of values
95

for the various technical parameters, thereby effectively creating an electronic
technique chart.
3.164. Size specific written protocols should be developed for children, from
neonates to teenagers, and should include additional operational considerations,
such as the use of additional filtration or the removal of grids when
appropriate [143, 145, 146].
3.165. Paragraph 3.166(b) of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes a special requirement
for the optimization of protection and safety for individuals subject to medical
exposure as part of an approved health screening programme. All aspects of
protection should be considered before the approval of the programme and
during its implementation, such as the selection of X ray equipment suitable for
the particular screening and parameters settings. A dedicated, comprehensive
programme of quality assurance should be implemented to meet screening
objectives, as described in more detail in paras 3.232–3.246. It should set
requirements for the education and training of the medical professionals involved
in the health screening programme, for adequate quality management for the
whole screening chain and for documentation and evaluation of the results.
Operational considerations: Radiography
3.166. In developing protocols for radiography, many technique factors should
be considered, which can influence the image quality and the patient dose for
the radiographic projection. Detailed guidance on appropriate choices for those
factors is widely available (see Refs [137, 142, 143, 148–153]). Such factors
include: the tube potential; current; exposure time; focal spot size; filtration;
source to image receptor distance; choice of anti-scatter grids or Bucky device;
collimation; image receptor size; positioning, immobilization and compression
of the patient; the number of projections needed (e.g. a posterior–anterior chest
X ray rather than posterior–anterior and lateral X rays); and organ shielding where
appropriate (e.g. testicular shielding for pelvic radiographs in male patients).
3.167. Suitably calibrated and maintained AEC systems should be used when
available and appropriate. Particular attention should be given in paediatric
radiography to ensuring that AEC sensors are within the radiation field [152].
AEC systems are calibrated on the basis of the radiation exposure at the detector
required to produce the desired level of optical density for film–screen systems or
a predetermined acceptable level of signal to noise ratio, or surrogate, for digital
systems. The value for the signal to noise ratio should be established as part of
setting up the protocols for radiographic projections for each particular X ray
96

unit. In determining technique factors when AEC is not available, consideration
should be given to the patient’s size and the thickness of the body part to be
imaged.
3.168. For digital systems, users should understand how the selection of the
‘exposure index’ (or other exposure indicator) affects the patient dose. For some
systems, increasing the index lowers the dose; for others, it increases it [154].
3.169. For film based image acquisition systems, additional factors include
the type (speed and spectral response) of film–screen combination and the
film processing conditions (e.g. the chemicals used and developing time and
temperature).
3.170. Mobile and portable radiographic equipment usually produce images
of lower quality compared with fixed units, and should only be used for
examinations where it is impractical or not medically acceptable to transfer
patients to a fixed unit.
3.171. The patient should be properly positioned and immobilized. In addition,
instructions should be clear and in the language understood by the patient.
Operational considerations: Mammography
3.172. In developing protocols for mammography, consideration of radiographic
technique factors should be made as for radiography (see para. 3.166). Additional
factors that should be considered include: adequate compression of the
breast; tissue composition (e.g. dense glandular breasts identified on previous
mammograms); and correct choice of anode and filters. Detailed guidance on
appropriate choices for technique factors and additional factors is available (see
Refs [111–114, 139, 155, 156]).
3.173. For film based mammographic systems, additional factors include
the type of film–screen combination and the film processing conditions (e.g.
the chemicals used and developing time and temperature), as described in
Refs [111–113].
3.174. Breast tomosynthesis is an evolving technique for which guidance for
optimization is likely to become available as the modality matures. A review of
features that influence image acquisition has been made in Refs [157, 158].

97

3.175. Viewing conditions are of paramount importance for both digital and film
based mammography systems, and the operational performance should be meet
the conditions described in paras 3.25, 3.26 and 3.45. Poor viewing conditions
not only compromise the reporting of a good quality image, but they may, in a
mistaken attempt to compensate for the poor viewing conditions, also lead to
changes in technique factors that actually result in suboptimal image quality.
For example, the use of low luminance viewing boxes may lead to radiographs
being produced that have a low density with insufficient diagnostic content.
Although the dose may have been reduced, there might be an unacceptable loss
of diagnostic information.
Operational considerations: Computed tomography
3.176. In developing protocols for CT, many technique factors and features
should be considered which can influence the image quality and the patient
dose for the examination, including: tube potential; tube current; tube current
modulation with noise index; pitch; beam width; and total scan length, over
ranging and over beaming for the scan. These and other factors may be optimized
through the AEC system where available. The choice of protocol will be
determined by the clinical question to be answered (e.g. for cardiac CT, a low dose
protocol is sufficient for stratifying risk in patients with intermediate probability
of coronary artery disease; whereas a higher dose contrast enhanced protocol is
necessary for patients with suspected coronary artery disease). Detailed guidance
on appropriate choices for these factors and features is available (see Refs [19,
62, 138, 144, 145, 147, 150, 152, 159–163]).
3.177. Careful consideration should be made as to the need for multiple phase
studies to answer the clinical question (e.g. in abdominal CT imaging for routine
detection of liver metastases, and the use of portal venous phase acquisitions
only, rather than triple phase acquisitions, namely arterial, portal venous and
delayed phase acquisitions). Protocols for optimized CT procedures for common
clinical conditions should be agreed, put in place and used.
3.178. Consideration of use of a spiral or axial technique will depend on
the indication and will have implications for image quality and dose (e.g. for
diffuse lung disease a non-contiguous single slice protocol is preferred for high
resolution lung CT, and it also delivers a lower patient dose).
3.179. Special attention should be given to developing protocols for children
adapted to body size and age [19, 145, 152]. The use of adult protocols for
scanning children is inappropriate.
98

3.180. Improved image presentation, reconstruction algorithms and
post-processing features to reduce image noise can potentially result in a protocol
with reduced patient dose. An example is the use of iterative reconstruction
algorithms. Care should be taken with the introduction of such algorithms to
ensure that the radiation protection of the patient is optimized.
3.181. Proper positioning of the patient and proper setting of the scanned
anatomical area of interest should be achieved, for example CT of the thorax
with both arms raised and CT of the wrist in the ‘superman position’ (i.e. with
the patient lying prone with the affected arm stretched out above the head) are
of considerable advantage to avoid artefacts and to reduce dose. Immobilizing
devices may be used where appropriate. Special attention should be made for
proper immobilization of paediatric patients by use of straps, swaddling blankets,
plastic holders for the head or body, foam pads, sponges, sand bags, pillows or
other objects.
3.182. Irradiating the lens of the eye within the primary beam should be
avoided. This may be achieved in brain scans by using a head cradle or, in some
cases, tilting the gantry.
3.183. For CT angiography, the use of software to detect the arrival of the
contrast medium in the relevant vessel to trigger the volume acquisition has
image quality advantages and avoids repeat acquisitions (e.g. detection of the
contrast medium in the pulmonary artery in CT pulmonary angiography).
3.184. For cardiac CT and CT angiography, the use of software to control
acquisition with respect to the electrocardiograph of the patient (ECG gated
or ECG triggered studies) should be considered, when appropriate, to reduce
radiation dose.
3.185. For hybrid imaging with CT (e.g. PET–CT and SPECT–CT),
consideration should be given to the use of a low dose CT protocol to correct for
PET or SPECT attenuation, which may necessitate a second diagnostic procedure
of the primary area of interest or a higher dose CT protocol (often contrast
enhanced) as part of the hybrid procedure.
3.186. CBCT, also known as flat panel CT, C-arm CT, cone beam volume
CT and digital volume tomography, is used in medical applications (diagnostic
and interventional radiology, and IGRT) and dental applications. Operational
aspects with respect to optimization are still evolving. Guidance is available (see
Refs [164, 165]), and factors that should be considered include: tube potential;
99

tube current–exposure time product; field of view; voxel size; and the number of
projections.
Operational considerations: Dentistry
3.187. In developing protocols for conventional intraoral radiography,
factors that can influence the image quality and the patient dose include: tube
potential; current; exposure time; collimation; focus to skin distance; and, for
analogue systems, film speed and processing development time and temperature.
Detailed guidance on appropriate choices for those factors is available (see
Refs [166, 167]).
3.188. In developing protocols for panoramic imaging, additional factors
that can influence the image quality and the patient dose include: patient
positioning (e.g. jaw open or closed); collimation (e.g. for examinations of
the temporomandibular joint, only those areas should be included); and for
analogue systems, film speed or screen speed, and processing development time
and temperature. Detailed guidance on appropriate choices for those factors is
available (see Refs [166, 167]).
Operational considerations: Image guided interventional procedures
3.189. The choice of imaging modality for guidance of interventional
procedures will depend on the clinical scenario (e.g. fluoroscopic guidance for
percutaneous coronary intervention and CT guidance for biopsy). Occasionally,
more than one modality may be used in a single interventional procedure to
improve effectiveness and safety. This may result in a lower dose when the
second modality is non-ionizing (e.g. ultrasound is used to locate the renal pelvis
in percutaneous nephrostomy before fluoroscopic placement of a catheter).
Furthermore, the correct selection of equipment with appropriate size (and shape)
of flat panel or image intensifier will improve the diagnostic image quality.
3.190. Successful interventions are heavily reliant upon patient cooperation
(e.g. movement may compromise the accuracy of roadmaps in the performance
of aneurysm embolization in neuro-intervention). Patients should be briefed
about the intervention prior to the commencement of the procedure so that they
know what to expect and how to cooperate.
3.191. In developing protocols for fluoroscopically guided interventional
procedures, many technique factors and features should be considered, which can
influence the image quality and the patient dose for the intervention, including:
100

tube potential; tube current; use of pulsed fluoroscopy (hence pulse width and
rate); dose rate mode (effectively the image intensifier or flat panel detector input
air kerma rate); collimation, and collimation tracking with the distance from the
focus to the detector; filtration (fixed and variable); use of magnification; total
fluoroscopy time for the intervention; image acquisition dose mode (effectively
input air kerma per frame for the image intensifier or flat panel detector);
image acquisition frame rate; number of frames per run and the total number
of acquisitions. Detailed guidance on appropriate choices for these factors and
features is available (see Refs [19, 117, 140, 146, 150, 152, 168–171]).
3.192. Many of the factors in para. 3.191 are automated through an algorithm
driven ADRC system. Nevertheless, in setting up the algorithm, scope exists
for the optimization of protection and safety through the selection of values
for these parameters. For example, the input air kerma rates (for fluoroscopy)
and input air kerma per frame (for image acquisition) for the image intensifier
or flat panel detector are set during installation and adjusted thereafter during
periodic maintenance and servicing. The values actually used for these settings
can vary considerably. High rate dose modes in fluoroscopy should be used only
during the minimum indispensable time necessary to the procedure. The use of
magnification modes should be kept to a minimum consistent with a successful
intervention.
3.193. In the course of the intervention, the tube orientation and position may
need to be changed. For long procedures, the area of skin upon which the X ray
beam is incident should be changed during the procedure to avoid deterministic
skin effects. As a default from a radiation protection perspective, it is preferable
to have the X ray tube under the patient (i.e. ‘under-couch’). Steep oblique
projections should be avoided. The distance between the X ray tube and patient
should always be maximized to reduce patient dose. Typically, this is achieved for
a vertical beam by having the table as high as possible for the primary operator.
In conjunction with this, the image intensifier or flat panel detector should be
positioned as close to the patient as possible.
3.194. Particular paediatric considerations include: the use of special filtration;
removal of the grid; and gonad protection.
3.195. In developing protocols for CT guided interventional procedures,
technique factors that should be considered, which can influence the image
quality and the patient dose for the intervention, include: tube potential, tube
current and beam width. The number of image acquisitions (tube rotations)
should be kept to a minimum consistent with a successful intervention.
101

Operational considerations: Fluoroscopy
3.196. Recommendations in paras 3.190–3.194 also apply to fluoroscopy used
in diagnostic radiology.
Operational considerations: Bone densitometry
3.197. Selection of the appropriate site for densitometry will take into
account both the anatomical area of clinical concern as well as the likelihood
of non-representative images and measurements owing to artefacts (e.g. massive
vertebral osteophytes may obviate the value of lumbar densitometry). Information
on best practices is given in Ref. [172].
Operational considerations: Emergency radiology
3.198. Special considerations for the emergency department include: judicious
patient positioning that takes into account the injury or disease (e.g. a lateral
shoot through projection of the hip); and CT protocols with the minimum number
of acquisitions (e.g. contrast enhanced CT for polytrauma, when one acquisition
only is needed for diagnosis and expedience).
Calibration: General
3.199. In accordance with para. 1.46 of GSR Part 3 [3], the dosimetric quantities
and units of the ICRU are to be used for diagnostic radiology and image guided
interventional procedures [10, 12]. Information on best practices in dosimetry in
diagnostic radiology is given in Refs [11, 173, 174].
3.200. Calibration requirements for medical radiological equipment and
dosimetry equipment are established in para. 3.167 of GSR Part 3 [3].
Responsibility is assigned to the radiology facility’s medical physicist. After the
initial calibration, the intervals for periodic calibrations might differ, depending
on the complexity of the medical radiological equipment. Relating to calibrations
are the constancy tests on equipment performance performed as quality control
tests. These are described in paras 3.235, 3.237 and 3.238.
Calibration: Medical radiological equipment
3.201. In diagnostic radiology, including the use of medical radiological
equipment for simulation of radiation therapy, treatment verification systems
and hybrid imaging systems, and for image guided interventional procedures,
102

‘source calibration’ is to be interpreted as the measurement of certain dosimetric
quantities that are modality dependent and which should be carried out in
reference conditions.
3.202. For diagnostic radiographic and fluoroscopic medical radiological
equipment, including conventional radiation therapy simulators, the dosimetric
quantities are: incident air kerma, in Gy; incident air kerma rate, in Gy·s-1; and
air kerma–area product, in Gy·m2 (some manufacturers use μGy·m2 or mGy·cm2
or Gy·cm2).
3.203.
(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

In CT, the dosimetric quantities are (see also Refs [10–12, 173–176]):

CT air kerma index, usually in mGy. In many States, the more colloquial
term computed tomography dose index (CTDI) is used, and is accepted by
the ICRU [12].
Weighted CT air kerma index, usually in mGy, which is the CT air kerma
calculated from measurements at the centre and periphery of a standard
polymethylmethacrylate CT head or body phantom. As in (a), this quantity
is often simply called the weighted CTDI.
Volume CT air kerma index, usually in mGy, which takes into account the
helical pitch or axial scan spacing. As in (a), this quantity is often simply
called volume CTDI.
CT air kerma–length product, usually in mGy·cm. In many States, the
more colloquial term dose–length product is used, and is accepted by the
ICRU [12].

3.204. In mammography, the three dosimetric quantities used are incident
air kerma, entrance surface air kerma and mean glandular dose, usually in
mGy [10, 11].
3.205. Measurements of these dosimetric quantities, when being used to
calibrate or characterize a given X ray, CT or mammography unit output or
performance, should be made for a range of representative technique factors used
clinically, and following recognized protocols such as those in Ref. [11].
Calibration: Dosimetry instrumentation
3.206. Dosimetry instrumentation used at a radiology facility should be
calibrated at appropriate intervals. A period of not more than two years is
recommended (see also para. 3.244 on quality assurance).

103

3.207. Paragraph 3.167(d) of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that the calibration of
dosimetry instrumentation be traceable to a standards dosimetry laboratory.
Ideally, this would be the national standards dosimetry laboratory (primary
or secondary) in the State concerned, with access either directly or through a
duly accredited calibration facility. However, it may be necessary for dosimetry
instruments to be sent to another State or region if there is no national standards
dosimetry laboratory in the State or region where the instruments are used.
At present, only some of the secondary standards dosimetry laboratories of
the IAEA/WHO Network of Secondary Standards Dosimetry Laboratories
(SSDL Network) provide calibration services using diagnostic radiology
spectra and dose rates representative of clinical practice. However, since
dosimetry accuracy is not as critical in diagnostic radiology as in radiation
therapy, calibrations with comparable radiation qualities should be sufficient.
Alternatively, the regulatory body might accept instrument manufacturers’
calibrations as described in the ‘certificate of calibration’ issued by the instrument
manufacturer, provided that the manufacturer operates or uses a calibration
facility that is itself traceable to a standards dosimetry laboratory and appropriate
calibration conditions have been used. This certificate should state the overall
uncertainty of the calibration coefficient.
3.208. Records of calibration measurements and associated calculations,
including uncertainty determinations (uncertainty budgets), should be maintained
as described in para. 3.272. Information on best practices in performing
uncertainty determinations for several modalities is given in Refs [11, 152].
3.209. There is a role for cross-calibration of dosimeters, where the radiology
facility’s dosimeters that have been officially calibrated are used to check
or compare with other dosimeters. This is particularly important for field air
kerma–area product meters, which should be calibrated (or cross-calibrated)
against a reference air kerma–area product meter or air kerma dosimeter in situ
in the clinical environment rather than in a standards dosimetry laboratory
environment [11]. It might also be done when a radiology facility has many
dosimeters, and to calibrate all dosimeters could be too costly. Cross-calibration
can also be utilized as a constancy test as part of periodic quality control tests.
Dosimetry of patients: General
3.210. Paragraph 3.168 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that registrants and licensees
of radiology facilities ensure that patient dosimetry be performed in diagnostic
radiology and image guided interventional procedures and that typical doses to
patients for radiological procedures be determined. Knowledge of the typical
104

doses at a facility forms the basis for applying methods of dose reduction as part
of optimization of protection and safety. It also enables the radiology facility
to use DRLs (see paras 3.224–3.231) as another tool for the optimization of
protection and safety.
3.211. Clearly, the more radiological procedures at the radiology facility
for which typical doses are known, the better the basis for the optimization of
protection and safety. GSR Part 3 [3] requires determination of typical doses for
common radiological procedures in radiology facilities. The procedures that are
considered to fall into this category will vary from facility to facility, and State to
State, but common core examinations generally include the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

Radiography: head, chest, abdomen and pelvis.
CT: head, chest, abdomen and pelvis, for specified clinical indications.
Fluoroscopy: barium swallow and barium enema.
Mammography: craniocaudal and mediolateral oblique.
Dentistry: intraoral, panoramic and CBCT.
Bone densitometry (DXA): spine and hip.

3.212. For image guided interventional procedures, typical doses for the
broad types of procedure performed at the facility should be ascertained. For
example, an interventional cardiology facility would characterize typical doses
for percutaneous coronary interventions, including percutaneous transluminal
coronary angioplasty. A facility performing neurological procedures might
characterize typical doses for diagnostic cerebral angiograms and for embolization
interventions. Other image guided interventional procedures might include
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography and transjugular intrahepatic
portosystemic shunt.
3.213. The term ‘typical dose’, as used in para. 3.168 of GSR Part 3 [3], is the
median or average dose for a representative sample of normal size patients, at
clinically acceptable image quality. Patient size has a large influence on dose,
so some selection or grouping of patients is recommended. Such groupings
include ‘standard adult’, often based on an average mass of 70 kg with a range
of ±20 kg. Groupings for children have sometimes been based on age, such
as newborn (0 years), infant (1 year), small child (5 years), child (10 years)
and teenager (15 years), but more recently size specific groupings are being
recommended and used, for example by using body mass intervals [14]. Patient
size groupings should be adopted that correspond to the groupings used for the
DRLs in the State or region. The sample size used for each patient grouping and
radiological procedure should be of sufficient size to assure confidence in the
105

determination of the typical dose. A representative sample of 10–20 patients per
procedure type is needed for non-complex examinations such as radiography and
CT, preferably 20–30 patients for complex procedures such as fluoroscopy and
fluoroscopically guided procedures, and 50 patients for mammography [14] (see
also paras 2.39–2.41).
3.214. The dose in the term ‘typical dose’, as used in para. 3.168 of
GSR Part 3 [3], means, for the given radiological procedure, an accepted
dosimetric quantity as described in paras 2.40 and 3.202–3.204. For particular
reasons (e.g. for risk estimation or for collective dose estimation), the dose to a
particular organ or the effective dose can be estimated from the typical dose.
3.215. Patient dosimetry to determine typical doses should be carried out in
conjunction with an assessment of the diagnostic image quality. Exposure
alone is not meaningful if it does not correspond to images that are adequate
for an accurate diagnosis. Therefore, patients included in the sample used for
determining typical doses should only be those whose radiological procedure
resulted in acceptable image quality.
3.216. The results of the surveys used to determine typical doses at the
radiology facility should be used as part of the ongoing review of the optimization
of protection and safety at the facility, and should be used for comparison with
established DRLs (see paras 2.34, 2.45 and 3.224–3.231). The results should
also be submitted to the organization in the State or region that is responsible for
establishing and reviewing national or regional DRLs. Patient dosimetry surveys,
required by GSR Part 3 [3], should take place at intervals of no more than five
years and preferably no more than three years. Another trigger for a survey would
be the introduction of new equipment or technology into the radiology facility or
when significant changes have been made to the protocols or the equipment.
3.217. Sometimes, patient dosimetry in diagnostic radiology or image guided
interventional procedures may be required for specific individual patients, either
through measurements or calculations. Reasons might include an unintended or
accidental medical exposure, where an estimation of patient doses is required as
part of the investigation and report (see para. 3.265), or because there is a need to
estimate the dose to an embryo or fetus (see para. 3.161).
3.218. There are several indirect and direct methods to estimate patient dose in
diagnostic radiology and image guided interventional procedures. Methodologies
for these determinations are explained in detail in Refs [10–12, 171, 173–178]
and are summarized in the following:
106

(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)

(e)

(f)

Estimations based on incident air kerma or entrance surface air kerma
measurements corrected for the techniques used (e.g. X ray tube potential,
current and time, and source–skin distance). This approach can be used in
radiography (medical and dental), fluoroscopy and mammography.
Estimations based on measured air kerma–area product. This approach can
be used in radiography (medical and dental), fluoroscopy and CBCT.
Estimations based on measurements of CT air kerma index and CT air
kerma–length product. This approach can be used for CT.
Reported values of dose quantities from DICOM headers or the
DICOM radiation dose structured reports. The accuracy of the reported
dose quantities should have been validated in acceptance testing and
commissioning and by means of quality assurance procedures as explained
in para. 3.244. This approach is applicable to all digital modalities.
Direct measurements for selected organs, such as the skin for interventional
procedures. For this, thermoluminescent dosimeters and optical stimulated
luminescent dosimeters as well as radiochromic or silver halide film can be
used.
In the case of CT, size specific dose estimates can be made, where CT
air kerma index values are corrected by taking into consideration the size
of the patient using linear dimensions measured on the patient or patient
images [12, 177].

3.219. When necessary, organ doses can be derived from the quantities
mentioned in para. 3.218 by using conversion coefficients derived from Monte
Carlo codes applied to anatomical models. Methods for doing this are described
in Ref. [11].
Dosimetry of patients: Specific considerations for image guided interventional
procedures
3.220. For interventional procedures using X rays, in addition to the
quantities that relate to stochastic effects, such as air kerma–area product, the
cumulative doses to the most exposed areas of skin should be monitored because
of the potential for reaching the threshold for tissue effects in complicated
cases [179, 180].
3.221. The determination of the dose to the most exposed area of skin is not
straightforward, since exposure parameters and projection angles change during
the procedure and the most exposed area cannot always be anticipated. This
makes knowledge of the distribution of the dose over the skin (sometimes called
‘dose mapping’ over the skin) necessary. A comprehensive review of approaches
107

to dose mapping and to determining the most exposed area of the skin is given in
Ref. [171].
3.222. An established method for dose mapping uses low sensitivity X ray
films, such as films used in radiation therapy and radiochromic films. However,
determination of the dose is only possible after the procedure.
3.223. The cumulative reference air kerma at the patient entrance reference
point, defined as the kerma in air at 15 cm from the isocentre in the direction
of the X ray tube [69], either displayed during the procedure or obtained from
the DICOM header, may be used as a conservative estimate for peak skin dose.
The degree of overestimation depends on several factors, including how often
the beam projection was changed. The cumulative reference air kerma gives the
least overestimation when most of the radiation is delivered in just one beam
projection. The accuracy of the reported cumulative reference air kerma should
have been validated in acceptance testing and commissioning and by means of
quality assurance procedures, as explained in para. 3.244.
Diagnostic reference levels
3.224. Paragraphs 3.168 and 3.169 of GSR Part 3 [3] require that patient
dosimetry surveys be performed for the diagnostic procedures at a radiology
facility, as described in paras 3.210–3.219, and that these results be compared
with the established DRLs for the State or region. The purpose is to ascertain
whether or not the typical dose for the facility for a given radiological procedure
compares favourably with the value of the DRL for that radiological procedure.
Guidance on establishing national or regional DRLs is given in paras 2.34–2.45.
3.225. A review of optimization of protection and safety for that particular
radiological procedure is triggered if the comparison shows that the typical
dose for the facility exceeds the DRL, or that the typical dose for the facility is
substantially below the DRL and it is evident that the exposures are not producing
images of diagnostic usefulness or are not yielding the expected medical benefit
to the patient.
3.226. Given the uncertainties in determining the typical dose for a facility (see
paras 3.213 and 3.214), questions can arise over whether or not a DRL has really
been exceeded. Some States adopt an algorithmic approach, for example where
the typical dose for the facility, minus two times its standard error, should be
greater than the value of the DRL [16]. A simpler approach, based purely on the

108

typical value for the facility, may be sufficient, as the purpose is to identify the
need for a review.
3.227. No individual patient’s dose should be compared with a DRL. It is the
typical dose for the facility, as determined by the representative patient sample,
which should be compared.
3.228. Furthermore, the comparison should not simply determine whether
the radiology facility complies with the DRL. DRLs are not dose limits. DRLs
should be used for the comparison exercise in the review process of optimization
of protection and safety to identify practices that warrant further investigation.
3.229. The review of how the given radiological procedure is being performed
and of the optimization of protection and safety, triggered by the DRL
comparison, might conclude that there are valid reasons supported by sound
clinical judgement why the radiology facility has a typical dose that exceeds the
DRL. These reasons should be documented as part of the facility’s programme
of quality assurance. Adequateness of image quality should always be taken into
account. On the other hand, the review might identify areas for improvement
resulting in revised protocols for that radiological procedure. The results of the
DRL comparison and any ensuing review and actions should be documented as
part of the facility’s programme of quality assurance.
3.230. The fact that the typical dose for a radiological procedure at a radiology
facility is less than the DRL for that procedure does not necessarily mean that
optimization of protection and safety for that radiological procedure has been
fully achieved. DRLs are only one of the tools for optimization, and are aimed
specifically at identifying the outliers in performance.
3.231. The regulatory body in a given State may specify frequencies for
performing DRL comparisons. Otherwise, the general guidance for patient
dosimetry, described in para. 3.216, would be applicable.
Quality assurance for medical exposures
3.232. Paragraph 3.170 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that radiology facilities have
in place a comprehensive programme of quality assurance for medical exposures.
General guidance on the management system is given in paras 2.138–2.149, and
it is reiterated here that the programme of quality assurance for medical exposures
should fit in with, and be part of, the wider management system at the facility.

109

3.233. The purpose of the programme of quality assurance for medical
exposures is to help to ensure successful optimization of protection and safety
in the radiology facility and to minimize the occurrence of unintended and
accidental medical exposures.
3.234. The complexity of the programme of quality assurance for medical
exposures will depend on the type of facility. A dental practice with only intraoral
radiography will have a simpler programme compared with a facility that offers
all modalities of diagnostic radiology as well as image guided interventional
procedures. Nonetheless, most of the elements of the programme are common, and
it is more in the degree of application that there are differences. Paragraph 3.171
of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes the common elements of the programme.
3.235. Measurements on medical radiological equipment are one of the
components of the comprehensive programme of quality assurance. Acceptance
tests are required for new or significantly refurbished or repaired equipment,
or after the installation of new software or modification of existing software
that could affect protection and safety. The acceptance test should be followed
immediately by commissioning, and then ongoing periodic quality control
tests, including constancy tests. The purpose is to ensure that, at all times, all
medical radiological equipment performs correctly, accurately, reproducibly and
predictably. Acceptance and commissioning tests should be performed in the
same way for equipment and software that has been donated.
3.236. Depending on the equipment purchase agreement, acceptance tests can
be performed by the manufacturer in the presence of the local medical physicist
and the radiological medical practitioner representing the user, or, if acceptable
to the manufacturer and the purchaser, by a medical physicist jointly with the
manufacturer. The process should involve verification of all specifications and
features of the equipment.
3.237. After acceptance and before clinical use on patients, commissioning
should be carried out by, or under the supervision of, the medical physicist.
Commissioning should include measurements of all parameters and conditions
of use that are expected in clinical use, including setting up and validating image
acquisition protocols. For most modalities (CT, image guided interventional
procedures, tomosynthesis, mammography, radiography and fluoroscopy), the
medical physicist should be directly involved in the measurements, calculations
and interpretation of data to characterize the equipment’s performance. For the
least complex modalities (dental radiography and DXA), the medical physicist
should provide documented advice on how the commissioning should be
110

performed. During commissioning, the baseline for subsequent constancy tests
is established.
3.238. In addition to the acceptance testing and commissioning, para. 3.171 of
GSR Part 3 [3] requires, periodically and after any major maintenance procedure
or upgrade, the measurement of physical parameters of medical radiological
equipment. There are many published reports from international and national
organizations and national and regional professional bodies giving detailed
guidance on the performance tests and quality control tests that should be
performed on the various modalities, including recommended frequencies (see
Refs [104, 105, 109–114, 156, 161, 166, 167, 170–173, 181–201]). In addition,
many of these organizations and professional bodies publish on their web sites
new or updated publications on the topic. The regulatory body may have its own
specific requirements for the tests that should be performed, their frequencies and
the competence of the specialists involved. Such specific requirements should
be established with consultation between the regulatory body and the relevant
professional bodies.
3.239. While traditional approaches to constancy testing are based on
measurements of technical parameters for the system or using test objects and
phantoms, it is likely that in the future clinically derived data could be used in
the monitoring of equipment and in ensuring consistency in clinical practice. For
example, a particular region of an anatomical image could be analysed to produce
an index of noise performance.
3.240. Quality control tests should also be performed on other equipment
or devices that have an impact on the successful outcome of the radiological
procedure. Such equipment and devices include, but are not limited to: film
processors, darkrooms and cassettes for facilities using film based imaging; flat
detectors for DR systems; CR imaging plates and CR readers for facilities with
CR systems; and view boxes, workstations, and display and interpretation rooms.
Many of the references given in para. 3.238 are applicable here.
3.241. The results of the quality control tests should be compared with
established tolerance limits. These limits may have been established to ensure
compliance with a regulatory requirement for the performance of particular
physical parameters or they may be set on the basis of recommended values given
in published reports, such as those referenced in para. 3.238. Paragraph 3.171(b)
of GSR Part 3 [3] requires the implementation of corrective actions if the
measured values fall outside established tolerance limits. Such corrective actions
are likely to include maintenance or servicing of the equipment, and hence a
111

preventive maintenance programme should be put in place at the radiology
facility. In some cases, the equipment might be outside the tolerance limits by a
significant amount and the equipment should be immediately taken out of clinical
use and not returned until servicing has taken place and it has been ascertained
that the equipment now meets the performance requirements.
3.242. The programme of quality assurance for medical exposures in the
radiology facility should include the use of checks to ensure that the facility’s
protocols and procedures for imaging and interventional procedures, including
radiation protection and safety, are being followed. The periodic review of the
protocols and procedures themselves is part of the radiological review at the
facility (see paras 3.269–3.271). In addition, a review of imaging procedures may
have been triggered by a comparison with DRLs (see paras 3.224–3.231).
3.243. As part of the programme of quality assurance for medical exposure,
‘repeat and reject analysis’ should be performed on a periodic basis. Further
guidance is given in Refs [48, 111, 153].
3.244. Paragraph 3.171(e) of GSR Part 3 [3] specifically requires that periodic
checks of the calibration and conditions of operation of dosimetry equipment and
monitoring equipment be part of the programme of quality assurance. This is to
ensure that such instrumentation has a current calibration, typically conducted
within the last two years (see para. 3.206), and that it is functioning correctly.
The programme of quality assurance for medical exposures should establish a
frequency for calibration for each instrument and a set of quality control checks
on the operation of each instrument to be performed at set intervals. This applies
to stand alone dosimetry equipment and to dosimeters integrated into the medical
radiological equipment, such as air kerma–area product meters in fluoroscopic
systems, and to software of the medical radiological equipment itself that
calculates, displays and reports dose metrics such as CT air kerma index and
air kerma–length product in CT and reference air kerma at the patient entrance
reference point in image guided interventional procedures. Phantoms used in
quality assurance and dosimetry should fulfil the requirements specified in the
corresponding international standards.
3.245. Maintaining records is a crucial aspect of the programme of quality
assurance for medical exposures. This includes the procedures used in the
programme and the results of the quality control tests, the dosimetry surveys, the
DRL comparisons, the corrective actions, and the investigations of unintended
and accidental medical exposures. When planning and developing an effective
programme of quality assurance, the licensee should recognize that it demands
112

strong managerial commitment and support in the form of training and allocation
of time, personnel and equipment resources. The regulatory body, in its
inspections of a radiology facility, should review the records of the programme of
quality assurance for medical exposures.
3.246. In line with standard practices for quality management, para. 3.172 of
GSR Part 3 [3] requires that “regular and independent audits are made of the
programme of quality assurance for medical exposures, and that their frequency is
in accordance with the complexity of the radiological procedures being performed
and the associated risks.” Such audits may be external audits or internal audits.
Internal audits are usually logistically simpler to conduct, while an external audit
generally has the advantage of bringing in an outside perspective. The audit of the
programme of quality assurance for medical exposures can be incorporated into
more comprehensive audits of the management system performed by the licensee.
Furthermore, the results of the audit of the programme of quality assurance for
medical exposures will be a major input into the radiological review performed at
the facility (see paras 3.269–3.271).
Dose constraints: Carers and comforters
3.247. Some diagnostic radiological procedures, particularly of children, can
be better performed with the assistance of a carer or comforter, for example a
relative in the case of a paediatric patient, or a relative or friend for a disabled or
very elderly or very ill patient. In these circumstances, the carer or comforter will
be exposed, usually to a low dose.
3.248.

Paragraph 3.153 of GSR Part 3 [3] states that:
“Registrants and licensees shall ensure that no individual incurs a
medical exposure as a carer or comforter unless he or she has received,
and has indicated an understanding of, relevant information on radiation
protection and information on the radiation risks prior to providing care
and comfort to an individual undergoing a radiological procedure….”

The carer or comforter should indicate that he or she is still willing to provide
support, care and comfort to the patient that is undergoing the radiological
procedure.
3.249. The radiation protection afforded the carer or comforter should be
optimized, and, as part of this process, dose constraints are required to be applied
(para. 3.173 of GSR Part 3 [3]). These are the dose constraints established by
113

government, as a result of consultation with the health authority, relevant
professional bodies and the regulatory body, as required by para. 3.149(a)(i) of
GSR Part 3 [3] (see also paras 2.48 and 2.49).
3.250. Written protocols should be drawn up for implementing measures for
the optimization of protection and safety for carers and comforters who hold
patients during radiological procedures. The measures should utilize the basic
methods for radiation protection (i.e. time, distance and shielding). The protocols
should include the following:
(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)

Methods to avoid the need for holding patients, for example the
administration of sedatives (especially for long procedures such as CT
examinations) and the use of infant restraints.
Criteria specifying which carers and comforters are allowed to hold
patients, for example friends and relatives, provided that they are not
pregnant, but not employees of the facility, such as porters and nurses (see
also para. 2.49).
Methods for positioning and protecting the carer or comforter so that his or
her exposure is as low as reasonably achievable, for example by ensuring
that the carer or comforter is not in the direct beam of the radiation device
and that appropriate personal protective equipment is used, for example a
protective apron or ancillary shields of a specified lead equivalence.
The values of the dose constraints to be applied (see para. 2.49) depend on
the radiological exam or intervention; a common value is 5 mSv per event,
as stated in para. 2.49. Although it is unlikely that a child, such as a child
closely related to the patient, would be a carer or comforter for a diagnostic
radiological procedure, in cases where this is unavoidable, his or her dose
should be constrained to less than 1 mSv.

3.251. The licensee should be able to demonstrate that the effective dose to
the carer or comforter, by applying the protocols, is unlikely to exceed the dose
constraint. It is relatively straightforward to estimate effective doses to carers
and comforters from measurements of the ambient dose equivalent rates at the
positions where they will be situated. These determinations should be made in
advance to ensure that dose constraint is not exceeded. Therefore, individual dose
monitoring is normally not necessary.
Dose constraints: Volunteers in biomedical research
3.252. Some individuals will undergo diagnostic radiological procedures as
part of their voluntary participation in an approved programme of biomedical
114

research (see para. 2.99). Part of the approval process for the biomedical research
will have been the setting of dose constraints for the radiological procedures (see
para. 2.100). When the volunteer presents himself or herself at the radiology
facility, he or she is to be afforded the same radiation protection as if he or she
were a patient ready to undergo a radiological procedure, but with the additional
restriction that his or her exposure will be subject to a dose constraint, either a
nationally established dose constraint or a dose constraint specified by the ethics
committee that approved the biomedical research programme (see paras 2.50,
2.99 and 2.100).
Pregnant patients
3.253. Patients who are pregnant form a special subgroup of patients that should
be given particular consideration with respect to radiation protection. These
considerations are described in para. 3.147(a) with respect to justification and
para. 3.161 with respect to optimization. None of these considerations can take
place if it is not known whether the patient is pregnant. Therefore, it is crucial, as
is required in paras 3.175 and 3.176 of GSR Part 3 [3], for the radiology facility to
have in place means for ensuring that the pregnancy status of patients is known.
3.254. The first approach is through the posting of clear signs (possibly
including a pictorial representation of pregnancy) in languages easily understood
by the people using the radiology facility, posing the question ‘Are you pregnant
or possibly pregnant?’ and ‘If so, please tell the staff’. Such signs should be
posted widely in the facility, including in waiting rooms and cubicles. The second
approach is to ask patients directly whether they are or might be pregnant. This
might not always be so easy given social and cultural sensitivities, but it should
be done when necessary.
3.255. Neither of the approaches described in para. 3.254 will work if the
patient does not know whether she is pregnant. For this reason, para. 3.176 of
GSR Part 3 [3] has an additional requirement on facilities to “ensure that there
are procedures in place for ascertaining the pregnancy status of a female patient
of reproductive capacity before the performance of any radiological procedure
that could result in a significant dose to the embryo or fetus”. Such radiological
procedures would include those that involve primary beam irradiation of the
abdomen or pelvis area delivering relatively high patient doses directly to the
embryo or fetus, or to volumes near the uterus such that significant scatter
radiation reaches the embryo or fetus. Cooperation with the referring medical
practitioner, through standard requests for pregnancy status for specified
procedures, is one approach. The referral form should include a ‘tick box’
115

for pregnancy status. In case of doubt, a pregnancy test or a determination of
hormone levels to assess menopausal status can be carried out.
Unintended and accidental medical exposures
Prevention of unintended and accidental medical exposures
3.256.

Paragraph 3.179 of GSR Part 3 [3] states that:
“Registrants and licensees…shall ensure that all practicable measures
are taken to minimize the likelihood of unintended or accidental medical
exposures arising from flaws in design and operational failures of
medical radiological equipment, from failures of and errors in software,
or as a result of human error.”

Paragraph 3.180 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that the registrants and licensees
promptly investigate if such exposures occur. General strategies for addressing
those problems include the regular maintenance of medical radiological
equipment and software, a comprehensive programme of quality assurance,
continuing education and training of staff, and the promotion of a safety culture.
Lessons identified from events that have occurred should be used for preventing
or minimizing unintended and accidental medical exposures, as described in
para. 3.266.
3.257. Minimization of the likelihood of unintended or accidental medical
exposures in diagnostic radiology and image guided interventional procedures
can be brought about by:
(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

116

The introduction of safety barriers at identified critical points in the process,
with specific quality control checks at these points. Quality control should
not be confined to physical tests or checks but can include actions such as
the correct identification of the patient.
Actively encouraging a culture of always working with awareness and
alertness.
Providing detailed protocols and procedures for each process.
Providing sufficient staff who are educated and trained to the appropriate
level, and an effective organization, ensuring reasonable patient throughput.
Continuous professional development and practical training and training in
applications for all staff involved in providing radiology services.
Clear definitions of the roles, responsibilities and functions of staff in the
radiology facility that are understood by all staff.

3.258. Preventive measures should include reporting of incidents and
near incidents, analysis and feedback, including lessons from international
experience [123]. Preventive measures should also include checking of the
robustness of the safety system of the facility against reported incidents (see
Ref. [123] for a review of case histories from a collection of unintended and
accidental medical exposures in image guided interventional procedures).
3.259. In addition to the guidance in paras 3.256–3.258, the following three-step
strategy (commonly called ‘prospective risk management’) can help to prevent
unintended and accidental medical exposures in a radiology facility:
(a)
(b)
(c)

Allocation of responsibilities to appropriately qualified health professionals
only and ensuring that a management system is in place that includes
radiation protection and safety;
Use of the lessons from unintended and accidental medical exposures to
test whether the management system, including for radiation protection and
safety, is robust enough against these types of event;
Identification of other latent risks by posing the questions ‘What else
could go wrong?’ or ‘What other potential hazards might be present?’ in
a systematic, anticipative manner for all steps in the diagnostic and image
guided interventional radiology process.

Investigation of unintended and accidental medical exposures
3.260. The events that constitute unintended or accidental medical exposures
are detailed in para. 3.180 of GSR Part 3 [3]. Unintended and accidental medical
exposures can occur in all imaging procedures; however, the consequences in CT
may be more severe and in image guided interventional procedures may be even
more severe [123, 159, 160].
3.261. Exposure of the wrong patient or the wrong body part is always
a possibility in a radiology facility. Many patients have similar names, for
example, or patients might not have a clear understanding of what procedures
are meant to take place. Procedures should be put in place that consist of several
independent methods of patient identification, and verification of requisition of
the examination and of the orientation of the patient.
3.262. One of the events requiring investigation is when the exposure was
substantially greater than was intended. This situation might occur when the
radiological procedure did not go according to plan, for example: the AEC in
radiography might not have terminated the exposure when expected because the
117

wrong sensors had been selected or there had been a hardware malfunction; or
one or more of the technique factors in the examination protocol, for example
for a CT examination, had been incorrectly set, giving a much higher dose than
intended.
3.263. Another event that should be investigated is the inadvertent exposure of
the embryo or fetus in the course of a radiological procedure, where at the time of
the procedure it was not known that the woman was pregnant.
3.264. Radiation injuries will continue to occur in image guided interventional
procedures. A given procedure performed in accordance with the facility’s
protocol still has the potential to result in tissue effects because of difficulties
with the particular patient. However, most reported cases of severe radiation
injuries involving ulceration and necrosis have been associated with unnecessary
and extreme exposure conditions, such as: (i) a very short distance between the
X ray source and the patient; (ii) the use of a high dose rate mode for much
longer than necessary; (iii) a fixed projection exposing the same area of skin; and
(iv) a malfunction of the AEC system. These situations cannot be considered to
be normal, their occurrence can be avoided and their severity can be substantially
reduced by optimization; they should be considered accidental medical exposures
and should be investigated. Facilities at which image guided interventional
procedures are performed should have systems in place for identifying patients
who may be at risk of late radiation injuries, typically based on estimates of peak
skin dose, cumulative reference air kerma or air kerma–area product, which take
account of the fact that patients have different sensitivities to radiation. For these
patients, information should be added to their medical records so that appropriate
observation and follow-up is ensured. For example, it is recommended that
patients with estimated skin doses of 3 Gy should be followed up 10–14 days
after exposure [123]. Further information on trigger levels for patient follow-up
are available on the SAFRAD web site.23 Any resulting radiation injury should
receive appropriate medical attention.
3.265. Paragraph 3.181 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes what is required during
the course of the investigation. This includes calculation or estimation of patient
doses, which should be performed by a medical physicist, and notification of the
event to the patient’s referring medical practitioner. A record of the calculation
method and results should also be placed in the patient’s file. When required,

23

118

See www.iaea.org/resources/rpop/resources/databases-and-learning-systems/safrad

counselling of the patient should be undertaken by an individual with appropriate
experience and clinical knowledge. In the particular case of inadvertent exposure
of the embryo or fetus, further detailed advice is given in Ref. [124].
3.266. The investigation of unintended and accidental medical exposures, as
required by paras 3.180 and 3.181 of GSR Part 3 [3], has three main purposes.
The first is to assess the consequences for the patients affected and to provide
remedial and health care actions if necessary. The second is to establish what
went wrong and how to prevent or minimize the likelihood of a recurrence in
the radiology facility (i.e. the investigation is for the facility’s benefit and the
patients’ benefit). The third purpose is to provide information to other persons
or other radiology facilities. Dissemination of information about unintended
and accidental medical exposures and radiation injuries (e.g. see Refs [123,
179, 202, 203]) has greatly contributed to increasing awareness and improving
methods for minimizing the occurrence of radiation injuries. The regulatory body
and/or the health authorities could disseminate information on significant events
reported to them and on the corrective actions taken, so that other facilities might
learn from these events. Independently from any legal requirement for reporting
to the regulatory body, the implementation of voluntary and anonymous safety
reporting and learning systems can significantly contribute to improving safety
and safety culture in health care. This includes participation in voluntary
international or national databases designed as educative tools. One such database
for image guided interventional procedures is the SAFRAD reporting system.
Facilities performing image guided interventional procedures should participate
in SAFRAD or similar databases.
3.267. Paragraph 3.181 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes requirements for
the reporting (in writing) of significant events to the regulatory body and, if
appropriate, to the relevant health authority. The regulatory body may specify
its own requirements for the reporting of events by registrants and licensees. It
is difficult to quantify the term ‘significant’: specification of a numerical trigger
value immediately creates an artificial distinction between values immediately
below that value (and hence would not be reported) and those just above the value
(which would be reported). However, the attributes of significant events can be
elaborated, and events with one or more of these attributes should be reported
to the regulatory body and the health authority. Such attributes would include
the occurrence of, or the potential for, serious unintended or unexpected health
effects due to radiation exposure, the likelihood of a similar event occurring in
other radiology facilities, a large number of patients having been affected, and
gross misconduct or negligence by the responsible health professionals. As
stated in para. 3.266, one of the roles of the regulatory body for such a reported
119

event is to disseminate information on the event and any lessons identified to
all potentially affected parties, typically other radiology facilities and relevant
professional bodies, but also in some cases manufacturers, suppliers and
maintenance companies.
3.268. Irrespective of whether the event is also reported to the regulatory
body, feedback to staff should be provided in a timely fashion and, where
changes are recommended, all staff should be involved in bringing about their
implementation.
Records and review
Radiological review
3.269. Paragraph 3.182 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that radiological reviews be
performed periodically at the radiology facility. This involves considering both
justification and optimization aspects of radiation protection. For the latter, the
results of the programme of quality assurance for medical exposures, including
the periodic independent audit, will be a significant input to the process. As
described in paras 2.148 and 2.149, the wider clinical audit could include the
radiological review with its assessment of the effective application of the
requirements for justification and optimization in the facility for the radiological
procedures being performed [48].
3.270. To facilitate compliance with para. 3.182 of GSR Part 3 [3] and to learn
from periodic radiological reviews, the methodology used, the original physical,
technical and clinical parameters considered and the conclusions reached should
be documented and taken into account prior to any new review that may result in
an update of the radiology facility’s policies and procedures.
3.271. Radiological reviews should consider changes in patient management
that result from the diagnostic or interventional procedure, the effect of
introducing new technologies on efficiency and cost, and comparisons of
different imaging modalities and of protocols for the same pathologies.
Records
3.272. Records should be in place to demonstrate ongoing compliance with
radiation protection requirements. Paragraphs 3.183–3.185 of GSR Part 3 [3]
establish the requirements for maintaining personnel records, records of
calibration, dosimetry and quality assurance, and records of medical exposure.
120

These records are required to be kept for the period specified by the regulatory
body. In the absence of such a requirement, a suggested period for keeping
records is ten years. In the case of children, records should be kept for a longer
time.
RADIATION PROTECTION OF THE PUBLIC
3.273. Public exposure can arise from the performance of diagnostic radiology
and image guided interventional procedures for persons in and around the
radiology facility.
3.274. The requirements for public protection established in paras 3.117–3.123,
3.125–3.129 and 3.135–3.137 of GSR Part 3 [3] apply to radiology facilities.
This subsection contains guidance that is specific to radiology facilities. More
general and comprehensive guidance on radiation protection of the public is
given in GSG-8 [24].
3.275. Persons who will be undergoing a radiological procedure are also
considered members of the public during the time when the radiological
procedure is not taking place, for example, while they are sitting in the waiting
room. Similarly, for carers and comforters any exposure incurred other than
during the radiological procedure in which they are involved will be public
exposure.
3.276. Members of the public also include visitors, such as persons delivering
goods or supplies, sales personnel, accompanying persons and other patients in
the facility.
External exposure
3.277. The primary means for protecting the public from external exposure is
the shielding in place at the radiology facility (see paras 3.18–3.24), which should
be sufficient so that public exposure resulting from being in any immediately
adjacent areas, including accessible rooms above and below, is in compliance
with the public dose limits, and preferably less than any dose constraint that the
regulatory body may have applied (see paras 2.16 and 2.46).
3.278. Particular consideration should be given to persons in the radiology
facility who are not undergoing a radiological procedure, but are in the vicinity
when mobile radiography is being performed in their ward or area, or when
121

fixed radiography is being performed in an open area, such as in an emergency
department. In these cases, a combination of distance, placement of mobile
shielding and careful control of the X ray beam direction should ensure that
appropriate public radiation protection is being afforded.
Control of access
3.279. Access to areas where radiation is being used should be controlled to
ensure doses to visitors are below the dose limits and constraints for the public.
Paragraph 3.128 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that access of visitors to controlled
areas or supervised areas be restricted. In exceptional cases, a visitor may be
permitted to enter a controlled area, but he or she should be accompanied at all
times by a staff member who knows the protection and safety measures for the
area. Written procedures should be drawn up specifying when such exceptions
can take place and who may accompany the visitor. Particular consideration, in
all cases, should be given with respect to women who are or may be pregnant.
3.280. Controlled areas and supervised areas should be clearly identified to help
to prevent inadvertent entry to areas where diagnostic radiology or image guided
interventional procedures are being performed [56] (see also para. 3.14). Further
control can be afforded by the use of keys (or passwords) to restrict access to the
control panels of medical radiological equipment to authorized persons only.
Monitoring and reporting
3.281. Requirement 32 and para. 3.137 of GSR Part 3 [3] establish the
requirements to be met by the radiology facility with respect to monitoring and
reporting. At the radiology facility, procedures are to be in place to ensure that:
(a)
(b)

The requirements for public exposure are satisfied and such exposure is
assessed;
Appropriate records of the results of the monitoring programmes are kept.

3.282. The programme for monitoring public exposure arising from diagnostic
radiology and image guided interventional procedures should include dose
assessment in the areas in and surrounding the radiology facility that are
accessible to the public. Doses can be derived from the shielding calculations in
the planning stage, combined with the results from area monitoring at the initial
operation of the facility and periodically thereafter. Records of dose assessments
should be kept for a period that meets any relevant regulatory requirements. In

122

the absence of such requirements, a suggested period for keeping records is seven
to ten years.
PREVENTION AND MITIGATION OF ACCIDENTS
Safety assessments of potential exposure
3.283. To comply with the requirements for safety assessments established
in paras 3.29–3.36 of GSR Part 3 [3], the registrant or licensee is required to
conduct a safety assessment applied to all stages of the design and operation
of the radiology facility. Furthermore, para. 3.29 of GSR Part 3 [3] states that:
“the responsible person or organization shall be required to submit a safety
assessment, which shall be reviewed and assessed by the regulatory body.”
Paragraphs 2.150–2.154 describe general considerations for facilities using
ionizing radiation for medical purposes.
3.284. The safety assessment of potential exposure should be systematic,
should identify unintended events that can lead to potential exposure, and should
consider their likelihood and potential consequences (see Appendix I for a
summary of typical causes and contributing factors to accidental exposures in
diagnostic radiology and image guided interventional procedures). The safety
assessment should cover not only these events, but should also aim at anticipating
other events that have not previously been reported. Clearly, the safety assessment
should be documented.
3.285.
(a)
(b)
(c)

The safety assessment should be revised when:

New or modified medical radiological equipment or accessories are
introduced;
Operational changes occur, including changes in workload;
Operational experience or information on accidents or errors indicates that
the safety assessment should be reviewed.

Prevention of accidents
3.286. Accident prevention is clearly the best means for avoiding potential
exposure, and paras 3.39–3.42 of GSR Part 3 [3] establish the requirements for
good engineering practice, defence in depth and facility based arrangements to
achieve this. Design considerations for medical radiological equipment and the
radiology facility are described in paras 3.9–3.50.
123

3.287.
(a)
(b)

The licensee should incorporate:

Defence in depth measures to cope with events identified in the safety
assessment, and evaluation of the reliability of the safety systems (including
administrative and operational procedures, equipment and facility design).
Operational experience and lessons from accidents and errors. This
information should be incorporated into the training, maintenance and
quality assurance programmes.

3.288. Potential exposure of the public from a radiation generator can occur
if a person (e.g. a cleaner) enters an interventional or conventional fluoroscopy
room in between cases and depresses the exposure foot switch (usually a foot
pedal placed on the floor). To prevent such potential exposure, equipment should
be provided with a special X ray interlock in the control panel to disconnect the
exposure foot switch in between cases, as described in para. 3.38(g).
3.289. Inadvertent entry into the room when a patient is undergoing a
radiological procedure is another way for potential public exposure to occur.
Means for control of entry are addressed in paras 3.279 and 3.280.
3.290. Means for preventing or minimizing unintended and accidental medical
exposures are described in paras 3.256–3.259, and the ensuing investigation and
corrective actions are described in paras 3.260–3.268.
Mitigation of the consequences of accidents
3.291. Because the radiation source in almost all cases is an X ray generator and
tube, turning off the primary electrical source immediately stops any radiation
being produced. All relevant staff should be adequately trained to be able to
recognize when medical radiological equipment is not functioning correctly or,
for example, when a programming error in the software is suspected. If there are
implications for occupational protection and/or patient protection, and if medical
considerations allow it, the radiological procedure should be discontinued and
the X ray unit turned off.
3.292. Some interventional radiology facilities may use sealed or unsealed
radioactive sources for implantation or administration as part of the image
guided interventional procedure. Loss of a source, rupture of the encapsulation or
spillage of radioactivity can lead to contamination. For use of unsealed sources,
the relevant guidance in paras 4.290–4.301 applies; and for use of sealed sources,
the relevant guidance in paras 5.306–5.323 applies.
124

4. SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS FOR RADIATION
PROTECTION AND SAFETY IN NUCLEAR MEDICINE
GENERAL
4.1. This section covers nuclear medicine, the branch of clinical medicine in
which unsealed radioactive materials are administered to patients for diagnosis
or treatment of disease, or for clinical or pre-clinical research. Treatment using
sealed sources is covered in Section 5. X ray imaging such as CT, which can
occur in conjunction with a nuclear medicine procedure, such as in hybrid
imaging, is mainly covered in Section 3, with appropriate cross-references.
4.2. All nuclear medicine procedures involve the administration of a
radiopharmaceutical to the patient. For diagnostic nuclear medicine procedures,
trace amounts of compounds are labelled with photon or positron emitters, forming
what is called a radiopharmaceutical. For photon emitters, the distribution of the
radiopharmaceutical in the human body can be imaged with different modalities,
such as planar imaging (including whole body imaging) or SPECT. In the case of
positron emitters, the detection of annihilation photons allows registering of the
3-D spatial distribution of the radiopharmaceutical using PET. In hybrid imaging,
SPECT and PET are combined with an X ray based modality, such as in PET–CT
and SPECT–CT, and more recently also with MRI, such as in PET–MRI. In
addition, probes may be used for the intraoperative localization of tumours and
lymph nodes or leaks, and for uptake measurements in specific organs, such as
the thyroid or lungs. In therapeutic nuclear medicine, therapeutic activities of
radiopharmaceuticals are administered that are usually labelled with beta and/or
gamma emitting radionuclides, more recently also with alpha emitters; therapy
with Auger electrons is mostly experimental. The nuclear medicine facility might
also perform in vitro studies, although these are not a primary focus of this Safety
Guide. Some nuclear medicine facilities might also have an associated cyclotron
facility for on-site radionuclide production. Detailed guidance for such cyclotron
facilities is beyond the scope of this Safety Guide.
4.3. The generic term ‘medical radiation facility’ is used widely in Section 2
to mean any medical facility where radiological procedures are performed. In
Section 4, the narrower term ‘nuclear medicine facility’ is used to cover any
medical radiation facility where nuclear medicine procedures are performed.
A nuclear medicine facility may be a nuclear medicine department inside a larger
hospital or medical centre, or it may be a stand alone facility providing nuclear

125

medicine services. In some cases, the nuclear medicine facility may be a mobile
facility.
4.4. The defined term ‘radiological procedure’ is used in GSR Part 3 [3] to cover
all imaging and therapeutic procedures using ionizing radiation. In a nuclear
medicine facility, both imaging and therapeutic radiological procedures may
occur, and this needs to be borne in mind when reading the guidance in Section 4.
In cases where the guidance is specific to one of either imaging or treatment,
additional qualifiers, such as ‘imaging’, ‘diagnostic’, ‘therapy’ or ‘treatment’, are
used.
4.5. Different health professionals can take on the role of the radiological
medical practitioner (see para. 2.90) in nuclear medicine procedures, depending,
inter alia, on national laws and regulations. They primarily include nuclear
medicine physicians, but they may include other specialists such as radiologists,
cardiologists and radiation oncologists.
4.6. As stated in para. 2.92, the term ‘medical radiation technologist’ is used in
GSR Part 3 [3] and this Safety Guide as a generic term for the health professional
known by several different terms in different States; such terms include
radiographer, radiological technologist and others. Clearly, each State will use its
own term in its own jurisdiction.
4.7. Section 2 of this Safety Guide provides general guidance on the framework
for radiation protection and safety in medical uses of radiation, including roles
and responsibilities, education, training, qualification and competence, and
the management system for protection and safety. This guidance is relevant to
nuclear medicine, and reference to Section 2 should be made as necessary.
SAFETY OF MEDICAL RADIATION FACILITIES AND MEDICAL
RADIOLOGICAL EQUIPMENT
Nuclear medicine facilities
4.8. Provisions for the incorporation of radiation protection and safety features
should be made at the facility design stage. The siting and layout should take into
account workload and patient flow, both within the nuclear medicine facility and,
in cases where the nuclear medicine facility is part of a larger hospital or medical
centre, within other departments of the facility. The nuclear medicine facility is
likely to provide services to both inpatients and outpatients, so the location of
126

the facility should give easy access to both groups. Consideration should also be
given to providing easy exit routes for patients, after the examination or treatment
has been performed, that minimize movement through the facility.
4.9. A typical nuclear medicine facility using unsealed sources24 will have areas
for the following: source storage and preparation (radiopharmacy, radioisotope
laboratory or ‘hot lab’), radiopharmaceutical administration to patients, uptake
rooms, imaging (in vivo), sample measurement (in vitro), waiting areas, changing
areas and toilets, radioactive waste storage and predisposal processing. Separate
waiting areas for patients before and after radiopharmaceutical administration
should be considered. For those nuclear medicine facilities at which therapy with
radiopharmaceuticals is performed, a dedicated ward for patients undergoing
such treatments should be considered. The facility will also have areas where
radioactive materials are not expected to be found, such as in offices, reporting
areas and staff rooms, including cloakrooms, showers and toilets for staff.
Detailed guidance on setting up nuclear medicine facilities, including PET–CT
facilities, is given in Refs [62, 204–210].
4.10. For security purposes, nuclear medicine facilities should be located in areas
where access by members of the public to the rooms where sources, including
radionuclide generators, and radiopharmaceutical dispensing equipment are
used and stored can be restricted. Furthermore, the proximity of source storage
facilities to personnel that may need to respond in the event of a security breach
should also be considered.
4.11. As a general rule, the design of the nuclear medicine facility should make
provision for safety systems or devices associated with the equipment and rooms.
This includes electrical wiring relating to emergency off switches, as well as
safety interlocks and warning signs and signals.
4.12. A stable power supply should be available for the facility. An uninterruptible
power supply or battery backup systems should be installed to capture the active
information at the time of the outage and to shut down all software in a controlled
manner. Servers should be programmed to shut down automatically when the
power supply is interrupted.

24

In a nuclear medicine facility, sealed sources are also present, such as those used
as check sources for the calibration of activity meters and nuclear flood sources to check the
uniformity of gamma cameras and for the quality assurance and calibration of PET scanners.

127

4.13. The design of the facility should include an air conditioning system
sufficient to maintain the temperature in the examination room within the
parameters defined by the equipment manufacturers. Alternatively, in the case of
PET scanners, water cooling can also be used, depending on the equipment. In
addition, temperature control is necessary for uptake rooms in a PET facility to
prevent artefacts (e.g. brown fat uptake) occurring if room temperatures are too
low.
4.14. Issues to be considered for the design of the nuclear medicine facility
include: optimization of protection and safety against external radiation
and contamination; maintaining of low radiation background levels to
avoid interference with imaging equipment; meeting requirements for
radiopharmaceuticals (see para. 4.39); and ensuring safety and security of sources
(locking and control of access).
4.15. For external exposure, the three factors relevant to dose reduction (time,
distance and shielding) should be combined in the design to optimize occupational
radiation protection and public radiation protection. Larger rooms are preferable
to allow easy access for patients on bed trolleys and to reduce exposure of staff
as well as the public. Larger rooms also allow for easier patient positioning
and movement during the procedures. For internal exposure, the principles of
control, containment and radiation protection by means of barriers should also be
considered in the design, to optimize occupational radiation protection and public
radiation protection (see paras 4.21 and 4.22).
4.16. The design of the nuclear medicine facility should include provision for
secure and shielded storage for radioactive sources. Facility design personnel
and engineers should be consulted with regard to floor-loading requirements,
with account taken of factors such as radiation shielding, imaging and ancillary
equipment. Shielding should be appropriate to the type and energy of the emitted
radiation. Storage may be provided in a room or a separate space outside the
work area or in a locked cupboard, safe, refrigerator or freezer situated in the
work area. Separate storage compartments for radiopharmaceuticals and an area
for temporary storage of radioactive waste should be provided, with appropriate
protective barriers.
4.17. Special consideration should be given to avoiding interference with work
in adjoining areas, such as imaging or counting procedures, or where fogging of
films stored nearby can occur.

128

4.18. Signs and warning lights should be used at the entrances of controlled
areas and supervised areas to prevent inadvertent entry (see also paras 4.269 and
4.270 on control of access). For controlled areas, para. 3.90(c) of GSR Part 3 [3]
requires the use of the basic ionizing radiation symbol recommended by ISO [56].
Signs should also be available at the entrances to areas for source preparation and
storage, hybrid imaging rooms and rooms for hospitalized patients undergoing
radiopharmaceutical therapy (see also the guidance on treatment rooms and
wards, in paras 4.29–4.31). The signs should be clear and easily understandable.
Warning lights, such as illuminated and flashing signs, should be activated when
CT is being used in hybrid imaging procedures.
4.19. Bathrooms designated for use by nuclear medicine patients should be
finished in materials that can be easily decontaminated. Staff of the nuclear
medicine facility should not use the patient bathrooms, as it is likely that the
floors, toilet seats and tap handles of the sink will be contaminated.
Mobile facilities
4.20. In some States, PET–CT scanners are mounted on a truck and this mobile
unit provides a service to specific regions of that State. These mobile units should
meet the same requirements of GSR Part 3 [3] as fixed facilities and the relevant
guidance in this Safety Guide is applicable.
Areas where unsealed radioactive materials are handled
4.21. Radiopharmacies or laboratories where unsealed radioactive materials are
handled, such as the source preparation area, should have:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)

Means to prevent access by unauthorized persons;
Adequate storage space for equipment used in the given room or area to be
available at all times to minimize the potential for spreading contamination
to other areas;
A contained workstation for easy decontamination;
Shielded storage for radioactive sources;
Shielded temporary storage for both solid and liquid radioactive waste, and
places designated for the authorized discharge of liquid radioactive effluent;
Shielding to protect workers where significant external exposure might
occur;
A wash-up area for contaminated articles, such as glassware;

129

(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)

An entry area where protective clothing can be stored, put on and taken
off, and which is provided with a hand washing sink and a contamination
monitor;
Taps and soap dispenser that are operable without direct hand contact and
disposable towels or a hot air dryer;
An emergency eyewash, installed near the hand washing sink;
An emergency shower for decontamination of persons.

Detailed guidance is given in Refs [62, 204–210].
4.22. Radiopharmacies, laboratories and other work areas for manipulation
of unsealed radioactive materials should be provided with equipment kept
specifically for this purpose, which should include:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)

Tools for maximizing the distance from the source, for example tongs and
forceps;
Syringe shields;
Containers for radioactive materials, with shielding as close as possible to
the source;
Double walled containers (with an unbreakable outer wall) for liquid
samples;
Drip trays for minimizing the spread of contamination in the case of
spillage;
Disposable tip automatic pipettes (alternatively, hypodermic syringes to
replace pipettes);
Lead walls or bricks for shielding;
Lead barriers with lead glass windows;
Barriers incorporating a low atomic number material (i.e. acrylic) for work
with beta emitters;
Radiation and contamination monitoring equipment (surface and air);
Shielded carrying containers, wheeled if necessary, for moving radioactive
materials from place to place;
Equipment to deal with spills (decontamination kits).

4.23. Drainpipes from sinks in a radiopharmacy or laboratory should go as
directly as possible to the main building sewer and should not connect with
other drains within the building, unless those other drains also carry radioactive
material. This is to minimize the possibility of the drainage system ‘backing up’
and contaminating other, non-controlled, areas. The final plans of the drainage
system, which should be supplied to maintenance personnel, should clearly
identify the drains from radiopharmacies and laboratories. Pipelines through
130

which radioactive materials flow should be marked to ensure that monitoring
precedes any maintenance.
4.24. Some States require that drainpipes from a nuclear medicine facility
and especially from radionuclide therapy wards terminate in a delay tank.
Requirements on this issue differ very much among States, but each nuclear
medicine facility should comply with the State’s regulations (see para. 4.280(g)).
4.25. The floors of areas with the potential for contamination should be finished
in an impermeable material that is washable and resistant to chemical change,
curved to the walls, with all joints sealed and glued to the floor. The walls
should be finished in a smooth and washable surface, for example painted with
washable, non-porous paint. The surfaces of the room where unsealed radioactive
materials are used or stored, such as benches, tables, seats, and door and drawer
handles, should be smooth and non-absorbent, so that they can be cleaned and
decontaminated easily. Supplies (e.g. gas, electricity and vacuum equipment)
should not be mounted on bench tops, but on walls or stands.
4.26. The floor and benches, including worktops, should be strong enough
to support the weight of any necessary shielding materials or of radionuclide
generators. The need for lifting equipment for radionuclide generators should be
assessed.
4.27. Radiopharmacies or laboratories in which radioactive aerosols or gases are
produced or handled should have an appropriate ventilation system that includes
a fume hood, laminar airflow cabinet or glove box. The fume hood should be
constructed of material that is smooth, impervious, washable and resistant to
chemicals, and it should exhibit a negative flow rate. The work surface should
have a slightly raised lip to contain any spills. The ventilation system should be
designed such that the radiopharmacy or laboratory is at negative pressure relative
to surrounding areas and should be adequate to the radioisotopes used [210].
4.28. The airflow should be from areas of minimal likelihood of airborne
contamination to areas where such contamination is likely. Room air from a
radiopharmacy or radiochemistry laboratory should be vented through a filtration
system or other mechanism for trapping airborne radioactive materials and should
not be recirculated, neither directly, in combination with incoming fresh air in a
mixing system, nor indirectly, as a result of proximity of the exhaust to a fresh
air intake. The possibility for competitive airflow should be considered in the
design. For reasons of asepsis, some radiopharmacies may need a positive rather
than a negative pressure. In this case, the pressure gradient can be obtained by
131

locating other workstations requiring negative pressure next to the radiopharmacy
workstation.
Treatment rooms and wards
4.29. Floors and other surfaces of rooms designated for patients undergoing
radiopharmaceutical therapy should be covered with smooth, continuous and
non-absorbent materials that can be easily cleaned and decontaminated. Shielding
should be designed using appropriate dose constraints for workers and the public.
Bins for the temporary storage of linen and waste contaminated with radioactive
materials should be located in secure areas. Storage areas should be clearly
marked, using the basic ionizing radiation symbol recommended by ISO [56].
4.30. Rooms designated for patients undergoing radiopharmaceutical therapy
should have separate toilets and washing facilities. A sign requesting patients
to flush the toilet at least twice and to wash their hands should be displayed
to ensure adequate dilution of excreted radioactive materials and to minimize
contamination. The facilities should include a hand washing sink as a normal
hygiene measure (see para. 4.19 for guidance on bathrooms and their use).
4.31. The design of safe and comfortable accommodation for carers and
comforters (see also paras 4.235–4.239) should be considered for nuclear
medicine facilities with radiopharmaceutical therapy patients.
Shielding calculations
4.32. The shielding should be designed to meet the requirements for the
optimization of protection and safety and should take into consideration the
classification of the areas within the facility, the type of work to be done and the
radionuclides (and their activity) intended to be used. Shielding should consider
both structural and ancillary protective barriers at the design stage. It is convenient
to shield the source, where possible, rather than the room or the person. The need
for wall, floor and ceiling shielding should be assessed, for example in the design
of therapy facilities and of PET–CT facilities, to reduce occupational and public
exposure to acceptable levels. Wall shielding may be needed in the design of
rooms housing sensitive instruments (to keep a low background), such as well
counters, probes and imaging equipment (gamma cameras and PET scanners).
In designing such wall shielding, consideration should be given to the height of
the wall to ensure that scatter radiation, such as from a CT scanner, does not pass
over the wall into the area being protected.

132

4.33. Methodologies and data for shielding calculations for nuclear medicine
facilities are given in Refs [54, 61, 205] (see also paras 3.18–3.22) for shielding
with respect to X ray imaging systems (e.g. CT) used as part of hybrid imaging
equipment. The nominal design dose in an occupied area is derived by the process
of constrained optimization (i.e. selection of a source related dose constraint), with
the condition that each individual dose from all relevant sources is well below
the dose limit for a person occupying the area to be shielded. Nominal design
doses are levels of air kerma used in the design calculations and evaluation of
barriers for the protection of individuals, at a reference point beyond the barrier.
Specifications for shielding are calculated on the basis of the attenuation that the
shielding needs to provide to ensure that the nominal design doses are achieved.
Potential changes in practice and increases in workload should be considered.
4.34. Care should be taken to avoid multiplication of conservative assumptions,
which can lead to unrealistic overestimates of the shielding required. Typical
conservative assumptions are: attenuation by the patient is not considered;
decay of short lived radionuclides, such as 18F, is not considered; workload, use
and occupancy factors are overestimated; and the persons to be protected are
considered as remaining permanently in the most exposed place of the adjacent
room. Therefore, a balanced decision should be achieved and accumulation
of overly conservative measures that may go beyond optimization should be
avoided.
4.35. Specification of shielding, including calculations, should be performed by
a medical physicist or a qualified expert in radiation protection. In some States,
there may be a requirement for shielding plans to be submitted to the regulatory
body for review or approval prior to any construction (see also para. 2.74).
4.36. The adequacy of the shielding should be verified, preferably during
construction, and certainly before the facility, room or area comes into clinical
use. Clearly, requirements of the regulatory body should be met (para. 2.74).
Design of display and interpretation (reading) rooms
4.37. To facilitate their interpretation by the radiological medical practitioner,
images should be displayed in rooms specifically designed for such purposes.
A low level of ambient light in the viewing room should be ensured (see also
paras 3.45 and 3.46 on image display devices and view boxes).
4.38. Viewing rooms with workstations for viewing digital images should be
ergonomically designed to facilitate image processing and manipulation so that
133

reporting can be performed accurately. The viewing monitors of the workstations
should meet applicable standards (see para. 3.46).
Radiopharmaceuticals
4.39. Radiopharmaceuticals should be manufactured according to good
manufacturing practice following relevant international standards [207, 208,
210–214] for:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Radionuclide purity;
Specific activity;
Radiochemical purity;
Chemical purity;
Pharmaceutical aspects, such as toxicity, sterility and pyrogenicity.

Medical radiological equipment, software and ancillary equipment
4.40. This subsection considers medical radiological equipment, including its
software, used in a nuclear medicine facility. Such equipment falls into two
categories: those that detect ionizing radiation from unsealed or sealed sources
and those that generate ionizing radiation. The former includes probes, gamma
cameras (planar and SPECT systems) and PET scanners, since these have an
influence on the activity that needs to be administered to the patient in order
to obtain the desired diagnosis. The latter includes CT, typically as part of a
hybrid imaging system such as a PET–CT or SPECT–CT scanner. Some hybrid
equipment utilizes MRI, and although MRI does not generate ionizing radiation
and so is outside the scope of this Safety Guide, the performance of MRI can
influence the efficacy of the nuclear medicine procedure, and hence such
equipment should meet relevant IEC standards or equivalent national standards.
4.41. The requirements for medical radiological equipment and its software are
established in paras 3.49 and 3.162 of GSR Part 3 [3]. The IEC has published
international standards applicable to medical radiological equipment. Current
IEC standards relevant to nuclear medicine include Refs [215–221] (for those
relevant to the X ray based component of hybrid imaging, see para. 3.28). It
is recommended that the IEC web site be visited to view the most up to date
list of standards. ISO publishes international standards applicable to medical
radiological equipment. It is recommended that the ISO web site be visited to
view the most up to date list of standards.

134

4.42. As licensees take responsibility for the radiation safety of medical
radiological equipment they use, they should impose purchasing specifications
that include conditions to meet relevant international standards of the IEC and
ISO or equivalent national standards. In some States, there may be an agency
with responsibilities for medical devices or a similar organization that gives type
approval to particular makes and models of medical radiological equipment.
4.43. Some nuclear medicine facilities operate a cyclotron for on-site radionuclide
production. As the cyclotrons are not directly involved in the exposure of the
patient, they need not comply with the requirements of GSR Part 3 [3] for medical
radiological equipment. Nevertheless, they should comply with the more general
requirements of GSR Part 3 [3] for radiation generators (Requirement 17 and
paras 3.49–3.60 of GSR Part 3 [3]), as well as additional regulatory requirements,
in a given State, for the preparation and control of radiopharmaceuticals.
4.44. Displays, gauges and instructions on operating consoles of medical
radiological equipment, and accompanying instruction and safety manuals, might
be used by staff who do not understand, or who have a poor understanding of, the
manufacturer’s original language. In such cases, the accompanying documents
should comply with IEC and ISO standards and should be translated into the local
language or into a language acceptable to the local staff. The software should
be designed so that it can be easily converted into the local language, resulting
in displays, symbols and instructions that will be understood by the staff. The
translations should be subject to a quality assurance process to ensure proper
understanding and to avoid operating errors. The same applies to maintenance
and service manuals and instructions for maintenance and service engineers and
technicians who do not have an adequate understanding of the original language
(see also paras 2.104 and 2.137).
Design features for medical radiological equipment
4.45. The performance of probes, gamma cameras (planar and SPECT systems)
and PET scanners determines the efficacy of the diagnostic radiological
procedures and hence can influence the amount of radioactive material that needs
to be administered to the patient, or even whether the procedure is diagnostically
successful. Many design features contribute to the performance of such equipment
and should be considered when purchasing such equipment, as indicated briefly
in paras 4.46–4.51 and described in detail in Refs [183, 200, 201, 209, 215–228].

135

4.46. Design features that should be considered for probes used for uptake
measurements include energy response, energy resolution, sensitivity, counting
precision, linearity of count rate response and geometrical dependence.
4.47. Design features that should be considered for probes used intra-operatively
include energy resolution, background count rate, sensitivity in scatter, sensitivity
to scatter radiation, shielding (side and back), counting precision, linearity of
count rate response (with scatter radiation), and count rate recorded by visual
display and by an audible sound, the intensity of which is proportional to the
count rate.
4.48. Design features that should be considered for gamma cameras (planar and
SPECT systems) as well as their accessories include:
(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)

(h)

136

Detector features:
——Pulse height analysis;
——Uniformity;
——Spatial resolution and linearity;
——Energy resolution;
——Sensitivity;
——Count rate performance;
——Detector head shielding leakage.
Detector head motion.
Automatic patient–detector distance sensing.
Collision detection and emergency stops.
Collimators and collimator exchange mechanisms.
Imaging table and attachments.
Data acquisition features:
——General acquisition features;
——Static acquisition;
——Dynamic acquisition;
——List mode acquisition;
——Gated cardiac acquisition;
——Whole body imaging;
——Tomography.
Data processing system:
——Data display;
——Image manipulation;
——Region of interest generation and display;
——Curve generation;
——Display and arithmetic;

(i)

——Processing of SPECT data;
——Quality control software;
——Test data.
Accessories, such as features for physiological triggering, anatomical
landmarking and phantoms.

4.49. Design features that should be considered for PET scanners include:
(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Detector features:
——Spatial resolution;
——Sensitivity;
——Scatter fraction, count losses and random measurements;
——Energy resolution;
——Image quality and accuracy of attenuation, and scatter correction and
quantitation;
——Coincidence timing resolution for time of flight PET accuracy.
Time of flight capability.
Data acquisition features, including 2-D and 3-D whole body imaging, and
cardiac and respiratory gating.
Data processing system, including image reconstruction algorithms, image
manipulation and image correction.
Emergency stop.

4.50. Guidance on medical radiological equipment using X rays, used for
imaging as part of nuclear medicine, is given in paras 3.27–3.41.
4.51. All digital medical radiological equipment should have connectivity to RIS
and to PACS.
Ancillary equipment
4.52. All equipment used for digital image display should meet appropriate
international or national standards, for example meeting the performance
specifications in Ref. [115]. Workstations and image processing and display
software should be specifically designed for nuclear medicine, ensuring DICOM
conformance and network interconnectivity. Guidance on DICOM image and
data management for nuclear medicine is given in Ref. [229] (see paras 4.37
and 4.38 for guidance on display and interpretation rooms).
4.53. The nuclear medicine facility should have equipment, instruments and test
objects for measurements, dosimetry and quality control. This may include liquid
137

scintillation counters, well counters, activity meters (dose calibrators), probes,
check sources, flood sources, phantoms, and geometry and mechanical test tools.
Where applicable, such instrumentation should adhere to relevant IEC standards
or equivalent national standards. Further guidance on appropriate equipment,
instruments and test objects is given in Refs [215, 224, 227, 230].
4.54. The nuclear medicine facility should be equipped with properly calibrated
workplace monitoring instruments, including survey meters and portable
contamination monitors.
4.55. Radiopharmaceutical dispensing equipment should adhere to relevant IEC
standards or equivalent national standards.
Security of sources
4.56. The objective of source security is to ensure continuity in the control
and accountability of each source at all times in order to meet the requirement
of para. 3.53 of GSR Part 3 [3]. In a nuclear medicine facility, the sources
include unsealed radiopharmaceuticals as well as radionuclide generators,
radiopharmaceutical dispensing equipment and sealed sources used for
calibration or quality control tests. Standards for the identification and
documentation of unsealed radioactive substances are issued by ISO [231].
Situations that are particularly critical with respect to security of sources in a
nuclear medicine facility include receipt of radiopharmaceuticals, storage of
sources, movement of sources within the facility and storage of radioactive waste
(see Ref. [232]). The licensee of the nuclear medicine facility should develop
procedures to ensure the safe receipt and movement of radioactive sources
within the facility and should establish controls to prevent the theft, loss and
unauthorized withdrawal of radioactive materials or the entrance of unauthorized
personnel to controlled areas. An inventory of sources should be maintained, and
procedures should be put in place to check and confirm that the sources are in
their assigned locations and are secure. Written procedures should be developed
to encourage proactive behaviour, for example to trigger a search when a delivery
of radiopharmaceuticals is not received at the expected time.
Maintenance
4.57. Paragraphs 3.15(i) and 3.41 of GSR Part 3 [3] establish requirements for
maintenance to ensure that sources meet their design requirements for protection
and safety throughout their lifetime and to prevent accidents as far as reasonably
practicable. The registrant or licensee is required to ensure that adequate
138

maintenance (preventive maintenance and corrective maintenance) is performed
as necessary to ensure that medical radiological equipment used in the nuclear
medicine facility retains, or improves through appropriate hardware and software
upgrades, its design specifications for image quality and radiation protection and
safety for its useful life. The registrant or licensee should, therefore, establish
the necessary arrangements and coordination with the manufacturer or installer
before initial operation and on an ongoing basis.
4.58. All maintenance procedures should be included in the programme of
quality assurance and should be carried out at the frequency recommended by
the manufacturer of the equipment and relevant professional bodies. Servicing
should include a report describing the equipment fault, the work done and
the parts replaced and adjustments made, which should be filed as part of the
programme of quality assurance. A record of maintenance carried out should be
kept for each item of equipment. This should include information on any defects
found by users (a fault log), remedial actions taken (both interim repairs and
subsequent repairs) and the results of testing before equipment is reintroduced to
clinical use.
4.59. In line with the guidance provided in para. 2.113, after any modifications or
maintenance, the person responsible for maintenance should immediately inform
the licensee of the nuclear medicine facility before the equipment is returned to
clinical use. The person responsible for the use of the equipment, in conjunction
with the medical physicist, the medical radiation technologist and other
appropriate professionals, should decide whether quality control tests are needed
with regard to radiation protection, including image quality, and whether changes
to protocols are needed, especially in the amount of administered activity.
4.60. The electrical safety and mechanical safety aspects of the medical
radiological equipment are an important part of the maintenance programme,
as these can have direct or indirect effects on radiation protection and safety.
Authorized persons who understand the specifications of the medical
radiological equipment should perform this work (see also paras 2.112–2.114).
Electrical and mechanical maintenance should be included in the programme
of quality assurance and should be performed, preferably by the manufacturer
of the medical radiological equipment or an authorized agent, at a frequency
recommended by the manufacturer. Servicing should include a written report
describing the findings. These reports and follow-up corrective actions should be
archived as part of the programme of quality assurance.

139

OCCUPATIONAL RADIATION PROTECTION
4.61. In nuclear medicine, as described in paras 4.1–4.6, occupationally exposed
individuals are usually medical radiation technologists, radiological medical
practitioners (including, e.g., nuclear medicine physicians), radiopharmacists and
medical physicists. Other health professionals such as nurses and other support
staff involved in the management of patients who have been administered with
radiopharmaceuticals, particularly in nuclear medicine facilities providing
therapy services, may also be considered occupationally exposed.
4.62. Additional occupationally exposed personnel may include biomedical,
clinical and service engineers and some contractors, depending on their role.
4.63. Other nuclear medicine facility workers such as administrative personnel
and other service support personnel, cleaning personnel, and workers in the wider
medical facility where the nuclear medicine facility is located, for whom radiation
sources are not required by, or directly related to, their work, are required to
have the same level of protection as members of the public, as established in
para. 3.78 of GSR Part 3 [3]. Consequently, the recommendations provided in
paras 4.267–4.270 are also applicable in respect of such workers. Rules should be
established for these workers, especially with regard to access to controlled areas
and supervised areas.
4.64. This subsection contains guidance very specific to nuclear medicine. More
general and comprehensive guidance on occupational radiation protection is
given in GSG-7 [23], including guidance on radiation protection programmes,
assessment of occupational exposure and providers of dosimetry services,
applicable to all areas of radiation use (including non-medical uses).
Arrangements under the radiation protection programme
Classification of areas
4.65. Various areas and rooms in a nuclear medicine facility should be classified
as controlled areas or supervised areas, in line with the requirements established
in paras 3.88–3.92 of GSR Part 3 [3]. Once designated, these areas should meet
the requirements established in paras 3.89 and 3.90 (for controlled areas) and 3.91
and 3.92 (for supervised areas) of GSR Part 3 [3], including requirements for area
delineation, signage, protection and safety measures, control of access, provision
of personal protective equipment, provision of individual and area monitoring,
provision of equipment for monitoring for contamination, and provision of
140

personal decontamination facilities. All other rooms and areas that are not so
designated are considered as being in the public domain, and levels of radiation
in these areas should be low enough to ensure compliance with the dose limits
for public exposure. Classification of areas in a nuclear medicine facility should
be based on the analysis of the process as a whole, and not only on the location
of the equipment and the radiation sources. Paragraphs 4.66–4.69 give general
guidance, and it would be expected that final decisions by the licensee for a given
medical radiation facility would be based on the expert advice of the medical
physicist, a qualified expert in radiation protection or the RPO.
4.66. In a nuclear medicine facility, rooms for preparation of radiopharmaceuticals
(i.e. radiopharmacies or hot labs), for injection of radiopharmaceuticals and for
storage and decay of radiopharmaceuticals meet the criteria for a controlled
area and should be so designated. Imaging rooms, particularly those housing
radiopharmaceutical dispensing equipment (i.e. PET radiopharmaceutical and
radioactive gas and aerosol dispenser devices), as well as waiting rooms dedicated
to patients who have been injected with radiopharmaceuticals (e.g. uptake
rooms in a PET facility) should also be designated as controlled areas. Rooms
for patients undergoing radiopharmaceutical therapy should be designated as
controlled areas. Rooms housing hybrid machines that have an X ray component
(PET–CT and SPECT–CT) should be designated as controlled areas. A warning
light at the entry to the room should be used to indicate when the machine is on to
prevent unintended entry.
4.67. Supervised areas may include examination rooms with probes, corridors
and other areas where there are patients who have been administered with
radiopharmaceuticals.
4.68. The area around the control panel of hybrid imaging equipment
(e.g. PET–CT and SPECT–CT) should be classified as a supervised area, even
though the radiation levels may be very low owing to the shielding design.
Classification of this area as a supervised area will ensure restricted access and
hence, inter alia, avoid distraction of the operator, which could lead to accidental
or unintended medical exposure of patients (see also para. 3.59).
4.69. In order to avoid uncertainties about the extent of controlled areas and
supervised areas, the boundaries of such areas should, when possible, be walls
and doors or other physical barriers, clearly marked or identified with suitable
warning signs.

141

Local rules and procedures
4.70. Paragraph 3.93 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes a hierarchy of preventive
measures for protection and safety with engineered controls, including structured
and ancillary shielding, specific physical barriers, signs and interlocks, being
supported by administrative controls and personal protective equipment. To this
end, and as established in para. 3.94 of GSR Part 3 [3], local rules and procedures
are required to be established in writing in any nuclear medicine facility. Their
purpose is to ensure protection and safety for workers and other persons. Such
local rules and procedures should include measures to minimize occupational
radiation exposure both for normal work and in unusual events. The local rules
and procedures should also cover the wearing, handling and storing of personal
dosimeters, and should specify investigation levels and ensuing follow-up actions
(see paras 4.118–4.140).
4.71. Since all personnel involved in using radiation in nuclear medicine need
to know and follow the local rules and procedures, the development and review
of these local rules and procedures should involve representatives of all health
professionals involved in nuclear medicine.
4.72. Equipment (both hardware and software) should be operated in a manner
that ensures satisfactory performance at all times with respect to both the tasks
to be accomplished and to radiation protection and safety. The manufacturer’s
operating manual is an important resource in this respect, but additional
procedures should also be considered. The final documented set of operational
procedures should be subject to approval by the licensee of the nuclear medicine
facility, and should be incorporated into the facility’s management system (see
paras 2.138–2.149).
4.73. Nuclear medicine staff should understand the documented procedures for
their work with radiopharmaceuticals and for the operation of the equipment
with which they work, including the safety features, and should be trained, with
periodic refresher training, in what to do if things go wrong. Additional training
should be conducted when new radiopharmaceuticals or devices are brought into
nuclear medicine practice.
4.74. Many local rules and procedures address some or all aspects of occupational
radiation protection, patient radiation protection and public radiation protection,
either directly or indirectly, as well as providing for a successful diagnostic
examination or application of the treatment. Paragraphs 4.75–4.109 give
recommendations that should be incorporated into the nuclear medicine facility’s
142

local rules and procedures. They are placed in this section on occupational
radiation protection because they are to be followed by workers, but they will
often also have significance for patient and public radiation protection (see also
para. 4.56 on the security of sources).
4.75. Work procedures should be formulated so as to minimize exposure from
external radiation and contamination, to prevent spillage from occurring and,
in the event of spillage, to minimize the spread of contamination (surface and
airborne). For instance, all manipulation for dispensing radioactive materials
should be carried out over a drip tray and/or plastic backed absorbent pad. Work
with unsealed sources should be restricted to a minimum number of specifically
designated areas.
4.76. No food or drink, cosmetic or smoking materials, crockery or cutlery
should be brought into an area where unsealed radioactive materials are used. An
exception to this is food that is radiolabelled for patient studies. Food or drink
should not be stored in a refrigerator used for unsealed radioactive materials.
Personal cell phones and handkerchiefs should not be used in such areas (with
respect to the latter, an adequate supply of paper tissues should be provided).
Before a person enters an area where radioactive material is handled, any cut or
break in the skin should be covered with a waterproof dressing.
4.77. In areas classified as controlled areas, protective clothing should be worn
as determined by the safety assessment. Protective clothing is unlikely to be
necessary for persons accompanying patients into gamma camera rooms. On
leaving the controlled area, protective clothing that is contaminated should be
placed in an appropriate container. The method of removing gloves should be
based on the surgical technique, in order to avoid transferring activity to the
hands.
4.78. Staff leaving a controlled area, classified as such on account of the
potential for contamination, should, after removal of their protective clothing,
wash their hands and then monitor their hands, clothing and body for residual
contamination. Liquid soap should be provided unless aseptic considerations
require an alternative cleaner. Non-abrasive nail brushes should only be used
if contamination persists after simple washing (see also paras 4.105–4.109 on
decontamination of persons).
4.79. Pipettes should never be operated by mouth. Syringes used for handling
radioactive liquids should be appropriately shielded wherever practicable. The
distance between the fingers and the radioactive liquid should be as large as
143

can be achieved. Needles that have been used to inject patients should not be
recapped. In other circumstances, needles should be recapped when working
with radioactive liquids to maintain containment. Specific recapping tools should
be used to prevent injuries from needles.
4.80. The work area should be kept tidy and free from articles not required for
work. A monitoring and cleaning programme should be established to ensure
minimal spread of contamination. Cleaning and decontamination can be
simplified by covering benches and drip trays with disposable material such as
plastic backed absorbent paper.
4.81. All containers used for radioactive material should be clearly labelled,
indicating the radionuclide, chemical form and activity at a given date and time.
The batch number and the expiry date and time should be added as appropriate.
All such containers should be adequately sealed and shielded at all times.
Except for very small activities, containers should not be handled directly and, if
possible, tongs or forceps for vials and syringe shields should be used. Records
of stocks, administrations and predisposal waste management should be kept.
4.82. The amount of shielding material required can be minimized by positioning
the shielding material close to the source. A variety of materials can be used for
this purpose, such as lead, tungsten, lead glass and lead composite. Shielding
incorporating acrylic is usually more suitable for beta emitters, as it lowers
the amount of bremsstrahlung produced. Lead should be coated to provide a
cleanable surface.
4.83. The attenuation by lead aprons at the typical gamma energies used in
nuclear medicine is modest and is even less for non-lead based protective aprons.
More effective ways for dose reduction are automatic dispensers and injectors,
and mobile shields.
4.84. The following protective approaches can reduce occupational exposure
significantly:
(a)
(b)

144

For preparation and dispensing of radiopharmaceuticals, working behind
a lead glass bench shield, using shielded vials and syringes, and wearing
disposable gloves;
During examinations, when the distance to the patient is short, using a
movable transparent shield.

4.85. All radioactive sources should be returned to safe storage immediately
when no longer required.
4.86. All operations involving radioactive gases or aerosols should be carried out
in a fume hood or similar ventilated device to prevent airborne contamination.
Exhaust vents should be situated well away from air intakes. The administration
of aerosols to patients, such as for ventilation studies, should be performed using
a mouthpiece and nose clip or mask for the patient. The placing of extracting
devices close to the patient could be considered to improve radiation protection.
4.87. Glassware and implements for use in the radiopharmacy should be
appropriately marked, and under no circumstances should they be removed from
that area.
4.88. Packaging and containers for radioactive material should be checked for
contamination on opening.
4.89. Items such as containers and lead pots that no longer contain radioactive
material are required to be managed as non-radioactive waste. They should have
any radiation warning labels removed or obliterated before removing them from
regulatory control.
4.90. For X ray based imaging (e.g. CT) in the nuclear medicine facility, reference
should be made to the guidance, where appropriate, in paras 3.65–3.77.
4.91. Local rules for pregnant workers and persons under the age of 18 should
reflect the guidance given in paras 4.145–4.149 and 4.150, respectively.
Specific local rules and procedures for radiopharmaceutical therapy
4.92. Administration of radiopharmaceuticals is normally by the oral route,
intravenous injection (systemic), intra-arterial injection (locoregional) or
instillation into closed joints (intra-articular/radiosynoviorthesis) or body cavities
(intracavitary):
(a)

Shielded syringes should be utilized during the intravenous or intra-arterial
administration of radiopharmaceuticals as necessary to ensure extremity
doses are maintained below occupational dose constraints. Absorbent
materials or pads should be placed underneath an injection or infusion site.
The RPO at the facility should be consulted to determine the necessity of

145

(b)

(c)

other protective equipment (e.g. shoe covers and step off pads) for particular
radiopharmaceutical therapies.
For intravenous or intra-arterial administration by bolus injection, when
dose rates warrant, the syringe should be placed within a syringe shield
(usually a plastic shield for beta emitting radionuclides to minimize
bremsstrahlung or a shield of high atomic number material for photon
emitting radionuclides) with a transparent window to allow the material in
the syringe to be seen. For intravenous administration by slower drip or
infusion, the container containing the radioactive material should be placed
within a suitable shield. For high energy photons, a significant thickness of
lead or other high atomic number material may need to be used. In addition,
consideration should be given to the shielding of pumps and lines.
For oral administration of therapeutic radiopharmaceuticals, the radioactive
material should be placed in a shielded, spill-proof container. Care should
be taken to minimize the chance of splashing liquid or of dropping
capsules. Appropriate long handled tools should be utilized when handling
unshielded radioactive materials.

4.93. Patients hospitalized for therapy with radiopharmaceuticals should be
attended by staff (physicians, nurses, aides and cleaning staff) trained in radiation
protection. This also includes night staff. The training should cover radiation
protection and specific local rules, in particular for situations where there is a risk
of significant contamination from urine, faeces or vomit. Ward nurses should be
informed when a patient may pose a radioactive hazard.
4.94. Local rules should be established concerning the type of nursing that can be
performed according to the level of the radiation hazard. In general, non-essential
nursing should be postponed to take advantage of the reduction of activity by
decay and excretion. Blood and urine analyses should be performed prior to
therapy. Procedures should be established for the handling of any potentially
contaminated item (e.g. bed linen, clothing, towels, crockery and bed pans).
4.95. As described in para. 4.66, rooms occupied by patients treated with
radiopharmaceuticals should be designated as controlled areas, and both the basic
ionizing radiation symbol recommended by ISO [56] and a warning sign should be
posted. Access should be restricted and a list of relevant contacts (such as nuclear
medicine physicians and on-call physicians, medical radiation technologists
and the RPO) should be provided. Protective clothing, such as laboratory coats,
gloves and shoe covers, should be made available at the entrance to the room.
The nursing staff should be familiar with the implications of the procedures for

146

controlled areas, the time and date the radiopharmaceuticals were administered,
and any relevant instructions to carers and comforters.
4.96. Values of ambient dose equivalent rates at suitable distances should be
determined by the RPO or medical physicist. This information will assist in
deriving appropriate arrangements for entry by staff and by carers and comforters.
These arrangements should be made in writing and included in the local rules.
4.97. On leaving the work area, staff should remove any protective clothing and
wash their hands.
4.98. Patients treated with radiopharmaceuticals should use designated
toilets. Measures to minimize contamination should be implemented (such as
laying plastic backed absorbent paper on the floor around the toilet bowl, and
instructions to sit down when using the toilet and to flush the toilet at least twice
in the absence of delay tanks).
4.99. Particular attention and measures to limit spread of contamination are
required in the case of incontinent patients and in the case of vomiting after oral
administration of the radiopharmaceutical. Plastic backed absorbent paper on the
bed and floor can help to reduce spread of contamination. Contaminated bedding
and clothing should be changed promptly and retained for monitoring.
4.100. Crockery and cutlery may become contaminated. Local rules should
specify washing up and segregation procedures and the management of single
use dishes, cutlery and food waste.
4.101. Nursing care items should be covered when possible to prevent
contamination. For example, a stethoscope can be covered with a glove. The
blood pressure cuff and the thermometer should remain in the room until the
release of patient, and then checked for contamination before being returned to
regular use.
4.102. The staff should be informed about the treatment procedure and any
relevant medical history. If the medical condition of a patient deteriorates
such that intensive care becomes necessary, the advice of the RPO should be
sought immediately. While urgent medical care is a priority and should not be
delayed, it may be necessary to restrict the maximum time that individual health
professionals spend with a patient.

147

Specific local rules and procedures for PET facilities
4.103. Personnel carrying out PET imaging can receive relatively large
annual occupational radiation doses compared to their counterparts in general
nuclear medicine. The main contribution to the occupational dose for personnel
comes from patient handling. PET radiopharmacists at facilities performing
radiopharmaceutical synthesis and unit dose preparations can receive significant
hand and body doses, even where heavily shielded ‘hot cells’ are available to
moderate doses. For these reasons, local rules and procedures for PET facilities
should emphasize the means described in paras 4.75–4.102 for minimizing the
dose to personnel when handling radiopharmaceuticals and patients containing
radiopharmaceuticals.
4.104. Radiopharmaceuticals should be stored and transported in lead or
tungsten containers specifically designed to limit external radiation levels
from radionuclides used for PET. An additional plastic shield inside a lead or
tungsten syringe shield will absorb positrons before striking the tungsten,
minimizing unwanted production of bremsstrahlung radiation. The use of tongs
to handle unshielded radiopharmaceutical vials markedly reduces hand doses.
Automatic systems are available that allow the safe and quick dispensing of
radiopharmaceuticals into syringes, thus minimizing the operator’s actions.
Decontamination of persons
4.105. Hands should be washed on completing work with unsealed radioactive
materials and on leaving an area that is classified as controlled because of
possible contamination. If detectable contamination remains on the hands after
simple washing, use of a surfactant or chelating agent specific to the chemical
form of the contaminant agent can be more successful. Guidance for monitoring
the contamination level should be made available. A decontamination kit and
procedures for its use should be available on the site.
4.106. The RPO should be consulted when contamination of parts of the body
other than the hands is suspected, or when the procedures for decontamination of
the hands are ineffective. Special care should be taken in the decontamination of
the face to restrict entry of radioactive material into the eyes, nose or mouth.
4.107. If the skin is broken or a wound is sustained under conditions where
there is a risk of radioactive contamination, the injury should be flushed with
water as soon as appropriate, and care should be taken not to wash contamination
into the wound. As soon as the first aid measures have been taken, the person
148

should seek further treatment, including decontamination if necessary. The RPO
should be consulted as needed.
4.108. Contaminated clothing should be removed as soon as practicable, and
care should be taken not to spread contamination.
4.109. All staff working with unsealed sources should be trained in the
procedures for dealing with accidents, spills or contaminated persons, with
refresher training at appropriate intervals. This includes instructions on
appropriate showering and eye washing.
Personal protective equipment and in-room protective devices
4.110. Paragraphs 3.93 and 3.95 of GSR Part 3 [3] require that personal
protective equipment and in-room protective devices be available and used when
structural shielding and administrative controls alone cannot afford the required
level of occupational radiation protection. The need for this protective equipment
should be established by the RPO at the nuclear medicine facility or by the
medical physicist.
4.111. In a nuclear medicine facility, protective equipment includes the
following:
(a)

Shields for bench tops, vials, syringes, activity meters and for the
preparation of the radiopharmaceuticals (i.e. L-blocks and side blocks) of
a material and thickness appropriate to the type and energy of the radiation.
Particular considerations for the choice of shield include the following:
——Alpha emitters may need to be shielded by high atomic number
materials because of their characteristic X rays and high energy gamma
components.
——223Ra does not need a high atomic number shield because the gamma
component does not contribute significantly to the dose.
——Solutions containing pure low energy beta emitters, such as 14C, require
a plastic shield to attenuate the beta particles.
——Solutions containing high energy beta emitters, such as 32P and 90Y,
require a plastic shield to attenuate the beta particles followed by a high
atomic number material shield for the bremsstrahlung radiation.
——Solutions containing radionuclides that have both beta radiation and
gamma radiation, such as 169Er, 177Lu, 186Re and 153Sm, may need lead
shielding to attenuate the high energy gamma photons.

149

(b)

(c)
(d)

(e)
(f)
(g)

——Gamma emitters always require shielding by high atomic number
materials.
Protective clothing should be used in work areas where there is a likelihood
of contamination, such as in areas for radiopharmaceutical preparation and
administration. The protective clothing may include laboratory gowns,
waterproof gloves (made of latex or non-latex material such as neoprene,
polyvinyl chloride or nitrile), overshoes, and caps and masks for aseptic
work. The clothing serves both to protect the body of the wearer and to help
to prevent the transfer of contamination to other areas. The clothing should
be monitored and removed before the wearer leaves a designated area.
When moving between supervised areas such as the camera room and the
injection area, the wearer might not need to change the protective clothing
unless a spill is suspected. It is good practice to change gloves after each
manipulation. Protective clothing should be removed before entering other
areas, such as staff rooms.
When lower energy beta emitters are handled, gloves should be thick
enough to protect against external beta radiation.
Lead aprons should be worn when entering a room with hybrid imaging
(e.g. PET–CT) if the X rays are about to be used and either a carer or
comforter or a staff member needs to be in the room with the patient. Lead
aprons may also be worn when preparing and administering high activities
of 99mTc, although their use is not recommended, as other protective
measures are more effective (see para. 4.83).
Tools for remote handling of radioactive material, including tongues and
forceps.
Containers for the transport of radioactive waste and radioactive sources.
Fume hoods, fitted with appropriate filters and adequate ventilation, should
be used with volatile radiopharmaceuticals, such as 131I and 133Xe. The
sterility of the intravenous or intra-arterial radiopharmaceuticals should be
preserved.

Workplace monitoring
4.112. Paragraphs 3.96–3.98 of GSR Part 3 [3] establish the requirements and
responsibilities for workplace monitoring. Workplace monitoring comprises
measurements made in the working environment and the interpretation of
the results. Workplace monitoring serves several purposes, including routine
monitoring, special monitoring for specific occasions, activities or tasks, and
confirmatory monitoring to check assumptions made about exposure conditions.
Workplace monitoring can be used to verify the occupational doses of personnel
whose work involves exposure to predictable low levels of radiation. It is
150

particularly important for staff members who are not individually monitored. In
the nuclear medicine facility, workplace monitoring should address both external
exposure and contamination. Further general guidance on workplace monitoring
is given in GSG-7 [23].
4.113. Laboratories and other areas in which work with unsealed sources
is undertaken should be monitored, both for external radiation and for surface
contamination, on a systematic basis. Contamination monitoring is required for:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

All work surfaces (including the interior of enclosures), tools, equipment
and devices (including dosimetry systems, computers and peripherals, and
stress testing units), the floor and any items removed from these areas;
Workstations, ventilation systems and drains, when any of these needs to be
accessed for maintenance purposes;
Protective and personal clothing, and shoes, particularly when the wearer is
leaving a controlled area (monitors should be available near the exit);
Clothing, bedding and utensils used by radiopharmaceutical therapy
patients.

4.114. Periodic monitoring with a survey meter and contamination monitor,
or by wipe tests, should be conducted for controlled areas and supervised areas.
Continuous monitoring with an area monitor should be considered for areas for
storage and handling of sources. If a package containing radioactive sources is
damaged upon arrival, a survey of removable contamination and the external
radiation field should be carried out.
4.115. Workplace monitoring with respect to X ray based imaging systems
used in nuclear medicine should follow the guidance given in paras 3.100–3.103.
4.116. Workplace monitoring should be performed and documented as part
of the nuclear medicine facility’s radiation protection programme. The nuclear
medicine facility’s RPO or medical physicist should provide specific advice
on the workplace monitoring programme, including any investigations that are
triggered when investigation levels are exceeded (see paras 4.131 and 4.132).
4.117. The survey meters used for external radiation monitoring should be
calibrated in terms of the relevant operational quantities. In nuclear medicine,
the relevant quantity is normally the ambient dose equivalent, H*(10), and the
unit is the sievert (Sv) and its submultiples. Contamination monitors should be
calibrated in appropriate quantities (see also further guidance on calibration in
paras 4.197–4.202).
151

Assessment of occupational exposure and health surveillance for workers
Assessment of occupational exposure
4.118. The purpose of monitoring and dose assessment is, inter alia, to provide
information about the exposure of workers and to confirm good working
practices and regulatory compliance. Paragraph 3.100 of GSR Part 3 [3]
establishes the requirement of individual monitoring for “any worker who
usually works in a controlled area, or who occasionally works in a controlled area
and may receive a significant dose from occupational exposure”. Workers who
may require individual monitoring include nuclear medicine physicians, other
specialist doctors, medical radiation technologists, medical physicists, the RPO,
radiopharmacists and any other persons involved in the preparing, dispensing and
administering of radiopharmaceuticals to patients for diagnosis and therapy, staff
dealing with radioactive waste, biomedical and clinical engineers, maintenance
and servicing personnel, and any nursing or other staff who need to spend time
with nuclear medicine patients or who work in controlled areas.
4.119. Monitoring involves more than just measurement. It includes
interpretation, assessment, investigation and reporting, which may lead to
corrective measures, if necessary. Individual external doses can be assessed
by using individual monitoring devices, which include thermoluminescent
dosimeters, optical stimulated luminescent dosimeters, radiophotoluminiscent
dosimeters, film badges and electronic dosimeters. Individual monitoring devices
should be calibrated and should be traceable to a standards dosimetry laboratory
(for more detailed guidance, see GSG-7 [23]).
4.120. With the exception of electronic dosimeters used sequentially by several
workers with individual doses recorded separately, each personal dosimeter
should be used for monitoring only the person to whom it is issued, for work
performed at that nuclear medicine facility, and it should not be taken to other
facilities where that person may also work. For example, if a person is issued with
a dosimeter at hospital A, it should be worn only at hospital A and not at any other
hospitals or medical centres where he or she also works. Monitoring results can
then be interpreted for the person working in a specific nuclear medicine facility,
and this will allow appropriate review of the effectiveness of the optimization
of protection and safety for that individual in that facility. However, national
regulatory requirements may differ from this advice, and they would need to be
followed in those jurisdictions in which they apply (see also paras 4.133–4.135).

152

4.121. The monitoring period (period of dosimeter deployment) specified by
regulatory bodies in most States is typically in the range of one to three months.
It is determined by such factors as service availability, work load and type of
work. A one month monitoring period is usually used for persons performing
procedures associated with higher occupational exposure. A longer monitoring
period (two or three months) is more typical for personnel exposed to lower
doses, as a one month cycle would usually mean that the actual occupational
dose is less than the minimum detection level of the dosimeter, resulting in no
detectable doses. With a longer cycle, it is more likely that a reading can be
obtained. In certain circumstances (e.g. the introduction of new procedures, and
work at high dose rates), shorter monitoring periods may be necessary. In these
situations, the supplementary use of electronic dosimeters may be appropriate.
Unnecessary delays in the return, reading and reporting of the recorded dose
on dosimeters should be avoided. Dosimeters should be sent from the nuclear
medicine facility to the dosimetry service provider, which should then process the
dosimeters and return the dose reports, all in a timely manner. Some regulatory
bodies may specify a performance criterion for timely reporting.
4.122. The operational dosimetric quantity used for external radiation is the
personal dose equivalent Hp(d ). For weakly penetrating radiation and strongly
penetrating radiation, the recommended depths, d, are 0.07 mm and 10 mm,
respectively. Both weakly penetrating radiation and strongly penetrating radiation
are used in nuclear medicine. Hp(10) is used to provide an estimate of effective
dose that avoids both underestimation and excessive overestimation [23].
4.123. For monitoring the skin and extremities, a depth of 0.07 mm (d = 0.07)
is recommended, and Hp(0.07) is used to provide an estimate of equivalent dose
to the skin and extremities. When there is a possibility of high exposure of the
hands, such as in the preparation and administration of radiopharmaceuticals,
extremity dosimeters should be worn (if this is compatible with good clinical
practice).
4.124. For monitoring the lens of the eye, a depth of 3 mm (d = 3) is
recommended, and Hp(3) is used to provide an estimate of equivalent dose to
the lens of the eye. In practice, however, the use of Hp(3) has not been widely
implemented for routine individual monitoring. In nuclear medicine, it is
generally expected that the dose to the lens of the eye is not significantly higher
than for the rest of the body. A possible exception is in the handling of sources
for preparation and administration, but with accepted practices (as described in
paras 4.70–4.91) the lens of the eye should be adequately protected. Nonetheless,
monitoring of dose to the lens of the eye may need to be considered.
153

4.125. There are three dose limits applicable to workers in nuclear medicine:
the limit for effective dose, and the limits for equivalent dose to the lens of the
eye and to the skin and extremities. However, in nuclear medicine, both exposure
from external radiation and exposure from internal contamination are relevant.
The dosimeter being worn will measure external radiation only and will be used
to estimate one or more of the quantities used for the dose limits. Depending on
the work performed by the person being individually monitored, there may be a
preferred position for wearing the dosimeter, and more than one dosimeter may
be used. In nuclear medicine, dosimeters are usually worn on the front of the
upper torso (and under any protective clothing), as occupational exposure arising
from most nuclear medicine procedures results in the whole body being fairly
uniformly exposed (see para. 4.123 for guidance on when extremity dosimeters
should be worn).
4.126. When a protective apron is being used, the assessment of effective dose
might not be straightforward:
(a)

(b)

(c)

A single dosimeter placed under the apron, reported in Hp(10), provides
a good estimate of the contribution to the effective dose of the parts of
the body protected by the apron, but underestimates the contribution of
the unprotected parts of the body (the thyroid, the head and neck, and the
extremities).
A single dosimeter worn outside the apron, reported in Hp(10), provides
a significant overestimate of effective dose and should be corrected
for the protection afforded by the apron by using an appropriate
algorithm [120, 122].
Notwithstanding (a) and (b), in nuclear medicine, a single dosimeter under
the apron provides an estimate of the effective dose that is sufficient for
radiation protection purposes.

4.127. In nuclear medicine, certain workers may be at risk of both surface (skin)
contamination and internal contamination by ingestion, inhalation or adsorption
of radioactive material. Employers are responsible for identifying those persons
and for arranging for appropriate monitoring (para. 3.102 of GSR Part 3 [3]).
This requirement is typically met by monitoring the thyroid with an external
detector that assesses the iodine uptake for individuals handling radioiodine
and by monitoring the hands after the protective gloves have been removed. In
some special cases, it may be required to measure the activity of urine samples.
The committed effective dose should be calculated as part of the worker’s total
effective dose [23].

154

4.128. When not in use, individual dosimeters should be kept in a dedicated
place and should be protected from damage or from irradiation. If an individual
loses his or her dosimeter, the individual should inform the RPO, who should
perform a dose assessment, record this evaluation of the dose and add it to the
individual’s dose record. Where there is a national dose registry, it should be
updated with the dose estimate in a timely manner. The most reliable method for
estimating an individual’s dose is to use his or her recent dose history. In cases
where the individual performs non-routine types of work, it may be better to use
the doses of co-workers experiencing similar exposure conditions as the basis for
the dose estimate.
4.129. In some cases, occupational doses can be estimated from the results of
workplace monitoring. The effective dose for personnel can be inferred from
the measured ambient dose equivalent H*(10), provided the dose gradient in the
workplace is relatively low. The ICRP [119] provides conversion coefficients
from ambient dose equivalent to effective dose for different types of radiation
and energy.
4.130. Additional direct reading operational dosimeters, such as electronic
dosimeters, should be considered for use in a nuclear medicine facility, for
example in a new facility or with the introduction of new procedures, as these
devices can give the worker an instant indication of both the cumulative dose and
the current dose rate and also allow pre-setting of an alarm to alert when a given
level has been reached [23]. These dosimeters are also useful for staff involved
in radiopharmaceutical therapies and for pregnant workers, where a ‘real time’
reading of the dose is recommended.
Investigation levels for staff exposure
4.131. Investigation levels are different from dose constraints and dose limits;
they are a tool used to provide a warning of the need to review procedures and
performance, to investigate what is not working as expected and to take timely
corrective action. The exceeding of an investigation level should prompt such
actions. In nuclear medicine, one could use predetermined values such as
0.5 mSv per month for effective dose or 15 mSv per month for finger dose.
Suitable alternatives can be doses that exceed an appropriate fraction (e.g. 25%),
pro rata per monitoring period, of the annual dose limits or a pre-set value above
a historical average. Abnormal conditions and events should also trigger an
investigation. In all cases, the investigation should be carried out with a view to
improving the optimization of occupational protection, and the results should be
recorded. Investigation levels should also be set for workplace monitoring, with
155

account taken of exposure scenarios and the predetermined values adopted for
investigation levels for workers. Details on investigation levels are provided in
GSG-7 [23].
4.132. An investigation should be initiated as soon as possible following a
trigger or event, and a written report should be prepared concerning the cause,
including determination or verification of the dose, corrective or mitigatory
actions, and instructions or recommendations to avoid recurrence. Such reports
should be reviewed by the quality assurance committee and the radiation safety
committee, as appropriate, and the licensee should be informed. In some cases,
the regulatory body may also need to be informed.
Persons who work in more than one place
4.133. Some individuals might work in more than one nuclear medicine
facility. The facilities may be quite separate entities in terms of ownership and
management, or they may have common ownership but separate management,
or they may even have common ownership and management but be physically
quite separate. Regardless of the ownership and management structure, the
occupational radiation protection requirements for the particular nuclear
medicine facility apply when the person is working in that facility. As described
in para. 4.120, a dosimeter issued for individual monitoring should be worn only
in the facility for which it is issued, as this facilitates the effective optimization
of protection and safety in that facility. This approach is logistically more easily
implemented, since each physical site has its own dosimeters, and so there is
no need to transport dosimeters between facilities, with the risk of losing or
forgetting them. In cases where the facilities are under common ownership, it
may be seen as an unnecessary financial burden to provide more than one set
of dosimeters for staff that work in more than one of its facilities. However,
the radiation protection advantages of having the dosimeter results linked to a
person’s work in only one nuclear medicine facility remain (see also para. 4.135).
4.134. There is, however, an important additional consideration, namely the
need to ensure compliance with the occupational dose limits. Any person who
works in more than one nuclear medicine facility should notify the licensee for
each of those facilities. Each licensee, through its RPO, should establish formal
contact with the licensees of the other nuclear medicine facilities and their RPOs,
so that each facility has an arrangement to ensure that a personal dosimeter is
available and that there is an ongoing record of the occupational doses for that
person in all the facilities he or she works.

156

4.135. Some individuals, such as consultant medical physicists or service
engineers, might perform work in many nuclear medicine facilities and, in
addition, in other medical radiation facilities. They can be employed by a
company or be self-employed, providing contracted services to the nuclear
medicine facility and the other facilities. In such cases, it is simpler for the
company or the self-employed person to provide the dosimeters for individual
monitoring. Therefore, in these cases, a worker uses the same dosimeter for
work performed in all nuclear medicine facilities (and other medical radiation
facilities) in the monitoring period.
Records of occupational exposure
4.136. Paragraphs 3.103–3.107 of GSR Part 3 [3] establish the detailed
requirements for records of occupational exposure and place obligations on
employers, registrants and licensees. In addition to demonstrating compliance
with legal requirements, records of occupational exposure should be used
within the nuclear medicine facility for additional purposes, including
assessing the effectiveness of the optimization of protection and safety at the
facility and evaluating trends in exposure. The regulatory body might specify
additional requirements for records of occupational exposure and for access to
the information contained in those records. Employers are required to provide
workers with access to records of their own occupational exposure (para. 3.106(a)
of GSR Part 3 [3]). Further general guidance on records of occupational exposure
is given in GSG-7 [23].
Health surveillance for workers
4.137. The primary purpose of health surveillance is to assess the initial and
continuing fitness of employees for their intended tasks, and requirements are
given in paras 3.108 and 3.109 of GSR Part 3 [3].
4.138. No specific health surveillance relating to exposure to ionizing radiation
is necessary for staff involved in nuclear medicine. Under normal working
conditions, the occupational doses incurred in nuclear medicine are low, and no
specific radiation related examinations are required, as there are no diagnostic
tests that yield information relevant to exposure at low doses. It is, therefore,
rare for considerations of occupational exposure arising from the working
environment of a nuclear medicine facility to influence significantly the decision
about the fitness of a worker to undertake work with radiation or to influence the
general conditions of service [23].

157

4.139. Only in cases of overexposed workers, at doses much higher than
the dose limits (e.g. a few hundred millisieverts or higher), would special
investigations involving biological dosimetry and further extended diagnosis and
medical treatment be necessary [23]. In case of internal contamination, additional
investigations to determine uptake and retention may be required. Interventions to
facilitate excretion or limit uptake of the radioactive agent should be considered,
as appropriate.
4.140. Counselling should be made available to workers who have or may have
been exposed in excess of dose limits, and information, advice and, if indicated,
counselling should be made available to workers who are concerned about their
radiation exposure. In nuclear medicine, the latter group may include women
who are or may be pregnant. Counselling should be given by appropriately
experienced and qualified practitioners. Further guidance is given in GSG-7 [23].
Information, instruction and training
4.141. All staff involved in nuclear medicine should meet the respective
training and competence criteria described in paras 2.119–2.137. This will include
general education, training, qualification and competence for occupational
radiation protection in nuclear medicine. Nuclear medicine physicians, medical
radiation technologists, medical physicists and nurses may not have been trained
with respect to the X ray based component of hybrid imaging systems, such
as PET–CT, and as such they should undertake radiation protection and safety
training relevant to the additional imaging modalities in their nuclear medicine
facility.
4.142. Paragraph 3.110 of GSR Part 3 [3] places responsibilities on the
employer to provide, inter alia, adequate information, instruction and training for
protection and safety as it pertains to the nuclear medicine facility. This is not
only for new staff but also for all staff as part of their continuing professional
development. Specific instruction and training should be provided when new
radiopharmaceuticals, medical radiological equipment, software and technologies
are introduced.
4.143. Information on potential contamination risks should be given to ancillary
staff, including IT specialists, and contractors performing occasional work in a
nuclear medicine facility or radiopharmaceutical laboratory.

158

Conditions of service and special arrangements
4.144. Paragraph 3.111 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that no special benefits be
offered to staff because they are occupationally exposed. It is not acceptable to
offer benefits as substitutes for measures for protection and safety.
Pregnant or breast-feeding workers
4.145. There is no requirement in GSR Part 3 [3] for a worker to notify the
licensee that she is pregnant, but it is necessary that female workers understand
the importance of making such notifications so that their working conditions
can be modified accordingly. Paragraph 3.113(b) of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes
the requirement that employers, in cooperation with registrants and licensees,
provide female workers with appropriate information in this regard.
4.146.

Paragraph 3.114 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes the requirement that:
“The employer of a female worker, who has been notified of her
suspected pregnancy or that she is breast-feeding, shall adapt the
working conditions in respect of occupational exposure so as to ensure
that the embryo or fetus or the breastfed infant is afforded the same
broad level of protection as is required for members of the public.”

The limitation of the dose to the embryo or fetus does not mean that pregnant
women should avoid work with radiation, but it does mean that the employer
should carefully review the exposure conditions with regard to both normal
exposure and potential exposure. For example, a pregnant worker might be
restricted from spending a lot of time in the radiopharmacy or working with
solutions of radioiodine [124]. The main risk with radioiodine is that it crosses
the placental barrier and concentrates in the fetal thyroid.
4.147. Other possible solutions include reassignment of a pregnant worker to
duties where the likelihood of an accident is lower or to a location that has a lower
ambient dose equivalent. Such reassignments should be accompanied by adequate
training. A further consideration is the need to avoid having pregnant workers
respond to an accident such as a radioactive spill (see also paras 4.294–4.298).
4.148. The dose to the fetus should be monitored using an additional dosimeter
appropriately positioned (see also GSG-7 [23]). Personal electronic dosimeters
are valuable in assessing radiation doses to pregnant workers and subsequently
the embryo or fetus (see also para. 4.130).
159

4.149. With regard to the dose limit of 1 mSv for the embryo or fetus, the dose
to the embryo or fetus is not likely to exceed 25% of the personal dosimeter
measurement of external exposure. This value depends on the penetration of the
radiation (i.e. on the photon energy of the radionuclides in use). Information,
advice and, if indicated, counselling for pregnant workers should be made
available (see also para. 4.140).
Persons under 18
4.150. In many States, there is the possibility of students aged 16 or more,
but under 18, commencing their studies and training to become a medical
radiation technologist or other health professional that can involve occupational
exposure to ionizing radiation. Paragraph 3.116 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes
the requirements for access to controlled areas and the dose limits for such
persons are more restrictive (see Box 1 of this Safety Guide and Schedule III of
GSR Part 3 [3]).
Protection of workers responding to incidents in a nuclear medicine facility
4.151. The practice of nuclear medicine is a planned exposure situation, and
when circumstances result in incidents that lead to, or could lead to, unintended
or accidental exposures of patients or staff, they are still within the framework
of a planned exposure situation. The potential occurrence of such incidents
should be considered in advance in the safety assessment for the facility and
mitigatory procedures should be developed accordingly (see the guidance in
paras 4.283–4.301 on prevention and mitigation of accidents).
4.152. Occupational exposure of staff responding to such incidents is still
subject to the occupational dose limits, and the mitigatory procedures for
incidents should include considerations for the optimization of protection
and safety for the responding workers. The mitigatory procedures should also
include allocation of responsibilities and should provide for the education and
training of the relevant staff in executing the mitigatory measures, which should
be periodically exercised. Most of these situations, for example the response to
spillage of radioactive materials on work surfaces, can be executed in a planned
manner so that doses can be kept low. There may be situations with high doses,
for example in medical emergencies involving immediate care of patients in the
case of a stroke or cardiac arrest, when large amounts of radioactive material
have been incorporated (e.g. 2 GBq of 131I), but in these events the dose is
justified because the procedure is lifesaving. However, even in the case of urgent
surgery, rotation of personnel may be utilized if the surgical procedure is lengthy
160

to help to maintain optimized occupational radiation protection for this situation.
The advice of the facility’s RPO should be sought for these situations (see the
guidance in paras 4.299 and 4.300 for more details).
RADIATION PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUALS UNDERGOING MEDICAL
EXPOSURE
4.153. This section covers radiation protection of patients, carers and
comforters, and volunteers in biomedical research. The term ‘patient’, when used
in the context of medical exposure, means the person undergoing the radiological
procedure. Other patients in the nuclear medicine facility, including those who
may be waiting for their own radiological procedure, are considered members of
the public and their radiation protection is covered in paras 4.263–4.272.
4.154. As described in para. 2.8, there are no dose limits for medical exposure,
so it is very important that there is effective application of the requirements for
justification and optimization.
Justification of medical exposure
4.155. The requirements for justification of medical exposure
(paras 3.155–3.161 of GSR Part 3 [3]) incorporate the three-level approach to
justification (see para. 2.11) [4, 125, 126].
4.156. The roles of the health authority and professional bodies with respect
to a level 2 or generic justification of radiological procedures, justification of
health screening programmes, and justification of screening intended for the
early detection of disease, but not as part of a health screening programme, are
described in paras 2.55–2.60.
Justification of medical exposure for the individual patient
4.157. GSR Part 3 [3] requires a joint approach to justification at the level of
an individual patient, with a shared decision involving both the referring medical
practitioner (who initiates the request for a radiological procedure) and the
radiological medical practitioner. A referral for a nuclear medicine procedure
should be regarded as a request for a professional consultation or opinion rather
than an instruction or order to perform. The referring medical practitioner brings
the knowledge of the medical context and the patient’s history to the decision
process, while the radiological medical practitioner has the specialist expertise
161

in performing the radiological procedure. The efficacy, benefits and risks of
alternative methods (both methods involving ionizing radiation and methods not
involving ionizing radiation) should be considered. The ultimate responsibility
for justification will be specified in the individual State’s regulations.
4.158. In the case of radiopharmaceutical therapy, the requirements for
justification are applied more effectively as part of the medical process of
determining the best approach to treatment. When a patient is referred by a
referring medical practitioner for treatment, careful consideration should be made
by a multidisciplinary team, including such specialists as radiation oncologists
or endocrinologists, on whether to treat the patient with radiopharmaceutical
therapy or some other form of radiation therapy, another modality, a combined
treatment approach (sequential or concomitant) or not to be treated at all. Ideally,
every treatment decision should be discussed within the team and documented at
a ‘tumour board’ or equivalent multidisciplinary meeting.
4.159. The patient should also be informed about the expected benefits,
risks and limitations of the proposed radiological procedure, as well as the
consequences of not undergoing the procedure.
4.160. In nuclear medicine imaging, requirements for justification are
applied more effectively as part of the medical process of determining the
‘appropriateness’ of a radiological procedure. The process of determining
appropriateness is an evidence based approach to choosing the best test for a
given clinical scenario, with account taken of diagnostic efficacy and justification
as well as alternative procedures that do not use ionizing radiation, for example,
ultrasound or MRI. Useful tools to support this decision making process include
national or international imaging referral guidelines developed by professional
societies [127–133, 233]. Imaging referral guidelines can be disseminated or
utilized through electronic requesting systems25 and clinical decision support
tools or systems.
4.161. In determining the appropriateness of the nuclear medicine imaging
procedure for an individual patient, the following questions should be asked by
the referring medical practitioner [132]:
(a)

Has it already been done? A radiological procedure that has already been
performed within a reasonable time period (depending on the procedure
25

Such electronic requesting systems include the CPOE system; such a system is
expected to generate a request for imaging rather than an order.

162

(b)
(c)
(d)

(e)

and clinical question) should not be repeated (unless the clinical scenario
indicates the appropriateness of repeating the procedure). In some cases, an
alternative procedure may have already been performed in another facility,
making the proposed radiological procedure unnecessary, for example
a patient who has recently undergone a CT pulmonary angiography in
one facility might be referred for a ventilation/perfusion scan at another
facility. The results (images and reports) of previous examinations should
be made available, not only at a given nuclear medicine facility but also
for consideration at different facilities. Digital imaging modalities and
electronic networks should be used to facilitate this process.
Is it needed? The anticipated outcome of the proposed radiological
procedure (positive or negative) should influence the patient’s management.
Is it needed now? The timing of the proposed radiological procedure in
relation to the progression of the suspected disease and the possibilities for
treatment should all be considered as a whole.
Is this the best investigation to answer the clinical question? Advances in
imaging techniques are taking place continually, and the referring medical
practitioner may need to discuss with the radiological medical practitioner
what is currently available for a given problem.
Has the clinical problem been explained to the radiological medical
practitioner? The medical context for the requested radiological procedure
is crucial for ensuring the correct technique is performed with the correct
focus.

4.162. The three particular groups of patients identified in para. 3.157 of
GSR Part 3 [3] for special consideration with respect to justification in nuclear
medicine are patients who are pregnant or breast-feeding or are paediatric.
(a)

Owing to the higher radiosensitivity of the embryo or fetus, it should be
ascertained whether a female patient is pregnant before a nuclear medicine
procedure is performed. Paragraph 3.176 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that
procedures be “in place for ascertaining the pregnancy status of a female
patient of reproductive capacity before the performance of any radiological
procedure that could result in a significant dose to the embryo or fetus”.
Pregnancy would then be a factor in the justification process and might
influence the timing of the proposed radiological procedure or a decision as
to whether another approach to treatment is more appropriate. Care should
be taken to ascertain that the examination or treatment selected is indeed
indicated for a medical condition that requires prompt medical treatment.
Confirmation of pregnancy could occur after the initial justification and
before the radiological procedure is performed. Repeat justification is then
163

(b)

(c)

necessary, with account taken of the additional sensitivity of the pregnant
patient and embryo or fetus.
(i) Most diagnostic procedures with 99mTc do not cause high fetal doses.
For radionuclides that do not cross the placenta, the fetal dose is derived
from the radioactivity in maternal tissues. Some radiopharmaceuticals,
or their breakdown components, that do cross the placenta and
concentrate in a specific organ or tissue can pose a significant risk to
the fetus. Particular attention should be given to radiopharmaceuticals
labelled with iodine isotopes. Radiopharmaceuticals labelled with
other radionuclides, in particular positron emitters, need special
consideration. In all these instances, the medical physicist should
estimate the fetal dose. Detailed information on doses to the embryo
or fetus from intakes of radionuclides by the mother is given by the
ICRP [234].
(ii) As a rule, a pregnant patient should not be subject to radioiodine
therapy unless the application is lifesaving. Otherwise, the therapeutic
application should be deferred until after the pregnancy and after any
period of breast-feeding [124, 235, 236]. In particular, radioiodine will
easily cross the placenta, and the fetal thyroid begins to accumulate
iodine at about ten weeks of gestation.
In breast-feeding patients, excretion through the milk and possibly enhanced
dose to the breast should be considered in the justification process. Detailed
information on doses to infants from the ingestion of radionuclides in breast
milk is given by the ICRP [237].
As children are at greater risk of incurring radiation induced stochastic
effects, paediatric examinations necessitate special consideration in the
justification process [233].

4.163. A ‘self-referral’ occurs when a health professional undertakes a
radiological procedure for patients as a result of justification on the basis of his or
her own clinical assessment. Most examples of acceptable self-referral practice
occur with X ray imaging, such as in dentistry, and relevant professional bodies
in many States develop appropriate guidance for their specialty (para. 3.149).
Self-referral in nuclear medicine, if it occurs, would need to be guided by such
professional guidelines.
4.164. ‘Self-presentation’, including ‘individual health assessment’, occurs
when a member of the public asks for a radiological procedure without a referral
from a health professional. This may have been prompted by media reports or
advertising. Self-presentation for nuclear medicine procedures is not widely
prevalent, but for any such case justification is required, as for all radiological
164

procedures. Relevant professional bodies have an important role in considering
evidence for developing guidance when new practices are proposed. States may
choose to incorporate such guidance into legislation [136].
4.165. Means to improve awareness, appropriateness and auditing should be
developed to support the application of the requirement for justification of medical
exposure. Awareness of the need for justification underpins the whole process of
justification. Means for promoting awareness include traditional education and
training, such as at medical school or during specialty training, Internet based
learning or learning ‘on the job’ (e.g. junior doctors in an emergency department),
and the use of feedback in the reporting process. Appropriateness is described in
paras 4.160 and 4.161, and the audit process is used for monitoring and feedback
to improve both awareness and appropriateness.
Justification of medical exposure for biomedical research volunteers
4.166. The role of the ethics committee in the justification of medical exposure
of volunteers exposed as part of a programme of biomedical research is described
in para. 2.99.
Justification of medical exposure for carers and comforters
4.167. The three-level approach to justification is not applicable for carers and
comforters. Instead, para. 3.155 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes the requirement
to ensure that there be some net benefit arising from the exposure, for example
the successful performance of a diagnostic procedure on a child. The crucial
component in the justification of medical exposure of carers and comforters is
their knowledge and understanding about radiation protection and the radiation
risks for the procedure being considered. To this end, the radiological medical
practitioner or medical radiation technologist involved in the radiological
procedure, prior to the performance of the procedure, has the responsibility to
ensure that the carer or comforter is correctly informed about radiation protection
and the radiation risks involved, and that the carer or comforter understands this
information and consequently agrees to take on the role of carer or comforter.
Optimization of protection and safety
4.168. In medical exposure, optimization of protection and safety has several
components, some applicable directly to the radiological procedure about to
be performed and others providing the support or framework for the other
components. These components of optimization of protection and safety are
165

described in paras 4.169–4.240. Key personnel in the optimization process are
the radiological medical practitioner, the medical radiation technologist and the
medical physicist.
Design considerations
4.169. The use of appropriate and well designed medical radiological
equipment and associated software underpins any nuclear medicine procedure.
Gamma cameras, SPECT–CT and PET–CT scanners and their accessories should
be designed and manufactured so as to facilitate the keeping of doses from
medical exposure as low as reasonably achievable consistent with obtaining
adequate diagnostic information. Guidance on design considerations is given in
the subsection on medical radiological equipment in paras 4.45–4.51. Guidance
on design considerations applicable for X ray imaging systems as part of hybrid
systems is given in paras 3.32–3.41. Ultimately, as established in para. 3.162 of
GSR Part 3 [3], it is the responsibility of the licensee of the nuclear medicine
facility to ensure that the facility uses only medical radiological equipment and
software that meets applicable international or national standards.
Operational considerations: General
4.170. Following justification, the nuclear medicine procedure is required to
be performed in such a way as to optimize patient protection (para. 3.163 of
GSR Part 3 [3] for diagnostic procedures and para. 3.165 of GSR Part 3 [3] for
radiopharmaceutical therapy procedures). The level of image quality sufficient
for diagnosis is determined by the radiological medical practitioner and is based
on the clinical question posed.
4.171. The following points apply to all nuclear medicine patients, whether
undergoing diagnostic or therapeutic procedures:
(a)
(b)
(c)

166

There should be an effective system for correct identification of patients,
with at least two, preferably three, forms of verification, for example name,
date of birth, address and medical record number.
Patient details should be correctly recorded, such as age, sex, body mass,
height, pregnancy and breast-feeding status, current medications and
allergies.
The clinical history of the patient should be reviewed.

Operational considerations: Diagnostic imaging
4.172. A written protocol should be drawn up for each diagnostic procedure
performed in the facility, designed to maximize the clinical information to be
obtained from the study, with consideration given to the appropriate DRL for
the procedure (see paras 2.34 and 2.45). Such protocols are best developed using
guidelines from national or international professional bodies, and hence will
reflect current best practices, as for example in Refs [62, 137, 142–147, 204,
205, 238–240]. For modern digital equipment, many of the factors are automated
through menu driven selections on the equipment console. Nevertheless, in
setting up these options, significant scope exists for the optimization of protection
and safety through the appropriate selection of values for the various technical
parameters, thereby effectively creating an electronic protocol. Protocols should
be periodically reviewed in line with the requirements for quality assurance and
radiological reviews (see paras 4.234 and 4.259–4.261).
4.173. Deviations from such protocols may be necessary owing to the special
needs of a particular patient or because of the local unavailability of components
for a test. In such cases, the radiological medical practitioner should record a
valid reason for the decision.
4.174. Equipment should be operated within the conditions established in the
technical specifications, and in accordance with any licence conditions, to ensure
that it will operate satisfactorily at all times, in terms of both the tasks to be
accomplished and radiation protection and safety, so that optimal acquisition and
processing of images can be achieved with the minimum patient exposure.
4.175. Many factors influence the relationship between image quality and
patient dose in diagnostic nuclear medicine procedures. Detailed guidance
on appropriate choices for these factors is widely available and should be
followed [62, 204, 205, 209, 238–240]. Such factors include the following:
(a)
(b)

Appropriate selection of the best available radiopharmaceutical and its
activity, with account taken of special requirements for children and for
patients with impaired organ function.
Adherence to patient preparation requirements specific to the study to be
performed. Examples include:
——Use of methods for blocking the uptake in organs not under study and
for accelerated excretion, when applicable.
——Withdrawal of medications, food or substances that might interfere with
the outcome of the procedure.
167

(c)

(d)
(e)

(f)

(g)

——Correct hydration.
The storage or retention of radiopharmaceuticals within specific organs
can be influenced by drugs such as diuretics or gall bladder stimulants,
whenever they do not adversely interfere with the procedure. This method
is sometimes used to increase the specificity of the examination, but has
also a positive influence on radiation protection, for example the use of a
‘diuretic challenge’ in renography.
For children undergoing diagnostic procedures, the amount of activity
administered should be chosen by utilizing methodologies described in
international or national guidelines [62, 204, 205, 209, 238, 241–243].
Use of appropriate image acquisition parameters:
——In nuclear medicine and with a gamma camera (planar and SPECT
systems), this may include selection of the collimator, acquisition
matrix, energy windows, acquisition zoom, time per frame and imaging
distance.
——For PET systems, this may include 2-D and 3-D acquisitions, matrix
size, field of view, time of flight, attenuation correction, slice overlap,
scatter correction and coincidence timing.
Use of appropriate reconstruction parameters (e.g. algorithm, matrix,
filters, scatter correction and zoom factor), and application of appropriate
image corrections (e.g. attenuation and scatter correction, and, in the case
of PET systems, random correction).
Utilization of quantitative and qualitative capabilities, such as the
generation of region of interest analysis, time–activity curve generation,
image reformatting, or tissue uptake ratios, specific to the clinical need.

4.176. Many radionuclides are excreted by the kidneys. Bladder doses can
be minimized by drinking plenty of fluid and frequently emptying the bladder.
Patients, particularly children, should be encouraged to empty the bladder
frequently, especially in the immediate time following the examination.
4.177. While most adults can maintain the required position without restraint
or sedation during nuclear medicine examinations, it may be necessary to
immobilize or sedate children so that the examination can be completed
successfully. Increasing the administered activity to reduce the examination time
is an alternative that can be used for elderly patients who are in pain.
4.178. In some cases, if the patient is healthy and cooperative, activity can be
reduced and scan times can be increased, for example for lung scans for pregnant
patients. In all cases, however, the diagnostic information produced should not be
compromised by a reduction in activity.
168

4.179. Care should be taken to ensure that there is no contamination on the
collimator surface, patient table or elsewhere, as this might impair the quality of
the images.
Operational considerations: Radiopharmaceutical therapy
4.180. Protocols should be established in writing for each type of
radiopharmaceutical therapy performed in the facility, designed to meet the
requirements of para. 3.165 of GSR Part 3 [3]. Such protocols are best developed
using guidelines from national or international professional bodies, and hence
should reflect current best practices, as for example in Refs [204, 205, 244, 245].
Protocols should be periodically reviewed in line with the requirements for
quality assurance and radiological reviews (see paras 4.234 and 4.259–4.261).
4.181. In addition to the guidance in paras 4.170–4.180 (for both diagnostic
nuclear medicine procedures and therapeutic nuclear medicine procedures), the
following provisions should be put in place:
(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)

Verbal and written information and instructions should be provided to
patients about their radiopharmaceutical therapy and about how to minimize
exposure of family members and the public, and advice should be provided
on pregnancy and contraception after therapy (for detailed guidance,
including sample information sheets, see Refs [21, 204, 246–249]).
Special attention should be given to preventing the spread of contamination
due to patient vomit and excreta.
A protocol should be drawn up for the release of patients after the
administration of therapeutic doses of radiopharmaceuticals (see the
guidance in paras 4.246–4.248).
A protocol should be drawn up for the actions to be taken when the dose
incurred is above or below the value prescribed by the radiological medical
practitioner as required by para. 3.180 of GSR Part 3 [3].

4.182. Paragraph 3.165 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes the requirement that the
type and activity of the therapeutic radiopharmaceuticals that are administered
to each patient are appropriate. Although algorithms for determining appropriate
activities for a given patient on the basis of radiation doses to critical organs
exist, there is no standardized algorithm. Methodologies are described in
Refs [250–256]. Ideally, the administered activity should be based on the results
of a pre-therapeutic dosimetry. Typically, therapeutic radiopharmaceuticals are
administered at standard fixed activities (GBq), standard fixed activities per
unit body mass (MBq/kg) or standard fixed activities per unit body surface area
169

(MBq/m2), based on the results of toxicity studies and evaluation of side effects
in clinical trials.
4.183. For female patients, their pregnancy and breast-feeding status
should be evaluated before administration of a therapeutic dose (see also
paras 4.241–4.245).
4.184. Immediately prior to administration of a therapeutic radiopharmaceutical,
the following information, as applicable, should be verified, preferably by two
individuals:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

The dose on the radiopharmaceutical label matches the prescription;
The identity of the patient by two independent means;
The identity of the radionuclide;
The identity of the radiopharmaceutical;
The total activity;
The date and time of calibration.

4.185. The administered activity should be verified by means of an activity
meter (dose calibrator) or other suitable device to ensure that the total activity
does not deviate significantly from the prescribed administered activity (e.g.
<5% deviation), and the measured value should be recorded. Corrections should
be calculated for residual activity in the syringe, cups, tubing, inline filter or other
materials used in the administration.
4.186. Patients undergoing radiopharmaceutical therapy should be informed
in advance that it will be necessary for medical personnel to minimize close or
direct contact, so that this precaution will not be interpreted as a lack of concern.
4.187. Both female and male patients should be advised about avoidance of
pregnancy after therapeutic administrations. Data on the periods during which
conception should be avoided after administration of a radiopharmaceutical to
a female patient for therapeutic purposes are given in Appendix II, with further
guidance provided in Ref. [238].
4.188. The administration of therapeutic doses of relatively long lived
radionuclides in ionic chemical forms to male patients is a possible source of
concern because of the presence of larger quantities of these radionuclides in
ejaculate and in sperm. It may be prudent to advise sexually active men who have
been treated with, for example, 32P (phosphate), 89Sr (chloride), 131I (iodide),
223
Ra (chloride) to avoid fathering children for a period of four months after
170

treatment, and to have protected intercourse for a period of time to be defined by
the medical practitioner. The period of four months is suggested, as this is longer
than the sperm regeneration cycle [238, 249, 257].
Operational considerations: Pregnant patients
4.189. Administration of radiopharmaceuticals for therapy to patients who are
or might be pregnant should be generally avoided. There may be exceptions when
the treatment is lifesaving (see also paras 4.162 on justification and 4.241–4.243
on the need to ascertain pregnancy status).
4.190. Diagnostic nuclear medicine procedures with 99mTc and
radiopharmaceuticals that do not cross the placenta do not cause high fetal doses.
Protection of the fetus can be optimized by using smaller administered activities
and longer imaging times. This is feasible if the patient is able to remain still.
4.191. Specific assessment of individual fetal doses is not usually necessary
after diagnostic nuclear medicine studies involving 99mTc radiopharmaceuticals.
In the case of other radiopharmaceuticals (such as iodine or gallium), calculation
of the dose to the fetus and estimation of risk might be necessary.
4.192. In the case of radiopharmaceuticals that are rapidly eliminated by
the maternal kidneys, the bladder is the major source of fetal irradiation.
After the administration of such radiopharmaceuticals, drinking plenty of
fluid and frequently emptying the bladder should be encouraged. Some
radiopharmaceuticals, for example radioactive iodides, including those
administered for diagnostic purposes, cross the placenta freely and are taken up
by fetal tissue, for example the thyroid. Failure to ascertain whether a patient is
pregnant when administering 131I for a scan, for example, may lead to a severe
accidental exposure of the fetus.
4.193. Of special concern is also the use of CT in PET–CT or SPECT–CT
examinations. Routine diagnostic CT examinations of the pelvic region with and
without contrast injection can lead to a dose of 50 mSv to the uterus, which is
assumed to be equivalent to the fetal dose in early pregnancy. When PET–CT or
SPECT–CT scanning is indicated for a pregnant patient, low dose CT protocols
should be used and the scanning area should be reduced to a minimum (see also
paras 3.176–3.185).
4.194. In the use of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) or other radiopharmaceuticals
in PET imaging with patients who are or might be pregnant, a lower activity of
171

FDG should be considered. Protection of the fetus can be optimized by using
smaller administered activities and longer imaging times. Further guidance is
given in Refs [62, 258].
Operational considerations: Breast-feeding
4.195. Female patients should be advised that breast-feeding is generally
contraindicated after administration of some radiopharmaceuticals, due to
both the external irradiation of the suckling baby and the potential excretion of
radioactivity through the breast milk (see also paras 4.162 on justification and
4.244 and 4.245 on the need to ascertain breast-feeding status).
4.196. Depending on the radiopharmaceutical, breast-feeding may need to be
interrupted for a period or even stopped following its administration. The milk
expressed during the interruption period should be discarded. More specific
advice is given in Appendix III and Refs [235, 236, 238, 259].
Calibration
4.197. Requirements for the calibration of sources and instruments used for
dosimetry of patients are given in para. 3.167 of GSR Part 3 [3]. In nuclear
medicine, responsibility for calibration is assigned to the nuclear medicine
facility’s medical physicist. Unsealed sources for nuclear medicine procedures
should be calibrated in terms of the activity of the radiopharmaceutical to be
administered, with the activity being determined and recorded at the time of
administration. Detailed guidance on acceptable protocols for making activity
measurements can be found in Refs [230, 260].
4.198. Radionuclides should be checked for radioactive impurities when
these are liable to be present. This particularly applies to examining short lived
radionuclides for the presence of longer lived impurities that could deliver a
significant fraction of the absorbed dose.
4.199. The calibration of X ray based imaging devices that are part of hybrid
imaging systems, such as CT in PET–CT or SPECT–CT, should follow the
guidance for such modalities in paras 3.201, 3.203 and 3.205.
4.200. In the nuclear medicine facility, instruments used for dosimetry of
patients, such as activity meters (dose calibrators), should also be calibrated at
appropriate intervals using calibrated reference sources that cover the energy
range used in clinical practice. After the initial calibration, the intervals for
172

periodic calibrations might differ, depending on the availability at the facility
of radioactive sources for calibration. A period of not more than two years is
recommended.
4.201. Paragraph 3.167(d) of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that the calibration of
dosimetry instrumentation be traceable to a standards dosimetry laboratory.
Ideally, this would be the national standards dosimetry laboratory (primary
or secondary) in the State concerned, with access either directly or through a
duly accredited calibration facility. However, it may be necessary for dosimetry
instruments to be sent to another State or region if there is no national standards
dosimetry laboratory in the State or region where the instruments are used.
4.202. Records of calibration measurements and associated calculations,
including uncertainty determinations (uncertainty budgets), should be maintained
as described in para. 4.262.
Dosimetry of patients: Diagnostic procedures
4.203. Paragraph 3.168 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that registrants and licensees
of nuclear medicine facilities ensure that patient dosimetry be performed and that
typical doses to patients for diagnostic radiological procedures be determined.
Knowledge of the typical doses at a facility forms the basis for applying methods
of dose reduction as part of optimization of protection and safety. It also enables
the nuclear medicine facility to use DRLs (see paras 4.213–4.220) as another tool
for the optimization of protection and safety. Administered activity (in MBq) is
the most widely used surrogate for dose in diagnostic nuclear medicine; however,
organ doses and effective doses can be calculated from activity using established
methodologies (see para. 4.210).
4.204. Clearly, the more radiological procedures at the nuclear medicine
facility for which typical doses are known, the better the basis for optimization of
protection and safety. GSR Part 3 [3] requires determination of typical doses for
common diagnostic radiological procedures. The procedures that are considered
to fall into this category will vary from facility to facility, and State to State, but
common examinations generally include thyroid scans, bone scans, myocardial
perfusion imaging, FDG–PET/CT in oncology, renal scans and lung scans.
4.205. The term ‘typical dose’, as used in para. 3.168 of GSR Part 3 [3], refers
to the median or average dose or activity for a particular size of patients. In
nuclear medicine, DRLs are set in activity administered to the patient (MBq) or
in activity per unit of body mass (MBq/kg). Patient size has a large influence
173

on dose, so some selection or grouping of patients is required. Such groupings
include ‘standard adult’, often based on an average mass of 70 kg with a range
of ±20 kg. Groupings for children have sometimes been based on age, such
as newborn (0 years), infant (1 year), small child (5 years), child (10 years)
and teenager (15 years), but more recently size specific groupings are being
recommended and used, for example by using body mass intervals. Patient
size groupings should be adopted that correspond to the groupings used for the
DRLs in the State or region. The sample size used for each patient grouping and
radiological procedure should be of sufficient size to assure confidence in the
determination of the typical dose. Such sample sizes are typically in the range of
10–20 patients: the larger sample size the lower the statistical uncertainties (see
also paras 2.39–2.41 and Refs [14, 242]).
4.206. The dose in the term ‘typical dose’, as used in para. 3.168 of
GSR Part 3 [3], means, for the given diagnostic nuclear medicine procedure,
the activity administered to the patient (MBq) or the activity per unit of body
mass (MBq/kg), or, in the case of X ray imaging, an accepted dosimetric
quantity as described in paras 3.202 and 3.203. For combined doses from
radiopharmaceuticals and X rays, the dose to the organ concerned should be used.
4.207. Patient dosimetry to determine typical doses in diagnostic nuclear
medicine should be carried out in conjunction with an assessment of the diagnostic
image quality. Exposure alone is not meaningful if it does not correspond to
images that are adequate for an accurate diagnosis. Therefore, patients included
in the sample used for determining typical doses should only be those whose
radiological procedure resulted in acceptable image quality.
4.208. The results of the surveys used to determine typical doses at the nuclear
medicine facility should be used as part of the ongoing review of the optimization
of protection and safety at the facility, and should be used for comparison with
established DRLs (see paras 4.213–4.220). The results should also be submitted
to the organization in the State or region that is responsible for establishing
and reviewing national or regional DRLs. With these considerations in mind,
the patient surveys of administered activities from which patient doses can be
calculated, as required by GSR Part 3 [3], should take place at intervals of no
more than five years and preferably no more than three years. Another trigger for
a survey would be the introduction of new radiopharmaceuticals, equipment or
technology into the nuclear medicine facility or when significant changes have
been made to the protocols or the equipment.

174

4.209. Sometimes, patient dosimetry in diagnostic nuclear medicine procedures
may be required for specific individual patients. Reasons might include an
unintended or accidental medical exposure where an estimation of patient doses
is required as part of the investigation and report (see para. 4.255), or there may
be the need to estimate the dose to an embryo or fetus (see para. 4.191).
4.210. There are several indirect and direct methods to estimate patient dose
in diagnostic nuclear medicine procedures. In the case of hybrid systems,
the contribution from each of X rays and radionuclides should be calculated
and combined. Methodologies and data for the determination of doses from
radiopharmaceuticals are given in Refs [238, 259, 261–265] and methodologies
for X ray imaging in para. 3.218.
Dosimetry of patients: Radiopharmaceutical therapy procedures
4.211. Paragraph 3.168 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that nuclear medicine
facilities determine typical absorbed doses to patients for their therapeutic
radiological procedures. Methodologies for the determination of doses from
therapy radiopharmaceuticals are explained in detail in Refs [238, 252, 254–256,
266–272].
4.212. Radiopharmaceutical toxicity in therapeutic nuclear medicine depends
on the absorbed dose to critical organs (e.g. to the haematopoietic system), and
the efficacy of the treatment depends on the absorbed dose received by target
tissues. In current clinical practice, the nuclear medicine therapeutic treatment
is usually delivered on the basis of an administered activity prescription, in
some cases with adjustments made for body mass or surface area. Ideally, a
pre-treatment calculation of the absorbed doses received by organs at risk and
target tissues would allow for an accurate prediction of toxicity and efficacy of
the treatment. The dosimetry calculations performed in this context should take
into account individual patient pharmacokinetics and anatomy.
Diagnostic reference levels
4.213. Paragraphs 3.168 and 3.169 of GSR Part 3 [3] require that patient
dosimetry surveys be performed for the diagnostic procedures at a nuclear
medicine facility, as described in paras 4.203–4.210, and that these results be
compared with the established DRLs for the State or region. The purpose is to
ascertain whether or not the typical dose or activity for the facility for a given
diagnostic nuclear medicine procedure compares favourably with the value of the

175

DRL for that nuclear medicine procedure. Guidance on establishing national or
regional DRLs is given in paras 2.34–2.45.
4.214. A review of optimization of protection and safety for that particular
nuclear medicine procedure is triggered if the comparison shows that the
typical dose or activity for the facility exceeds the DRL, or that the typical
dose or activity for the facility is substantially below the DRL and it is evident
that the exposures are not producing images of diagnostic usefulness or are not
yielding the expected medical benefit to the patient. However, future advances
in technology might result in typical doses or activities substantially below the
DRLs, and still produce images of diagnostic usefulness.
4.215. Given the uncertainties in determining the typical dose or activity for a
facility, questions can arise over whether or not a DRL has really been exceeded.
Some States adopt an algorithmic approach, for example where the typical dose
or activity for the facility, minus two times its standard error, should be greater
than the value of the DRL [16]. A simpler approach, based purely on the typical
value for the facility, may be sufficient, as the purpose is to identify the need for
a review [14–16].
4.216. No individual patient’s dose or activity should be compared with a DRL.
It is the typical dose or activity for the facility, as determined by the representative
patient sample, which should be compared.
4.217. Furthermore, the comparison should not simply determine if the nuclear
medicine facility complies with the DRL. DRLs are not dose limits. DRLs should
be used for the comparison exercise in the review process of optimization of
protection and safety to identify practices that warrant further investigation.
4.218. The review of how the given nuclear medicine procedure is being
performed and of the optimization of protection and safety, triggered by the
DRL comparison, might conclude that there are valid reasons supported by
sound clinical judgement why the nuclear medicine facility has a typical dose or
activity that exceeds the DRL. These reasons should be documented as part of the
facility’s programme of quality assurance. On the other hand, the review might
identify areas for improvement resulting in revised protocols for that nuclear
medicine procedure. The results of the DRL comparison and any ensuing review
and actions should be documented as part of the facility’s programme of quality
assurance.

176

4.219. The fact that the typical dose or activity for a nuclear medicine
procedure at a nuclear medicine facility is less than the DRL for that procedure
does not necessarily mean that optimization of protection and safety for that
nuclear medicine procedure has been fully achieved. DRLs are only one of the
tools for optimization, and are aimed specifically at identifying the outliers in
performance.
4.220. The regulatory body in a given State may specify frequencies for
performing DRL comparisons. Otherwise, the general guidance for patient
dosimetry, described in para. 4.208, would be applicable.
Quality assurance for medical exposures
4.221. Paragraph 3.170 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that nuclear medicine
facilities have in place a comprehensive programme of quality assurance for
medical exposures. General guidance on the management system is given
in paras 2.138–2.149, and it is reiterated here that the programme of quality
assurance for medical exposures should fit in with, and be part of, the wider
management system at the facility.
4.222. The purpose of the programme of quality assurance for medical
exposures is to help to ensure successful optimization of protection and safety in
the nuclear medicine facility and to minimize the occurrence of unintended and
accidental medical exposures.
4.223. The complexity of the programme of quality assurance for medical
exposures will depend on the type of nuclear medicine facility. A facility with
only limited diagnostic procedures will have a simpler programme compared
with a facility that offers a comprehensive diagnostic service, including
PET–CT imaging, radiopharmaceutical therapy, and that has a radiopharmacy.
Nonetheless, most of the elements of the programme are common, and it is
more in the degree of application that there are differences. Paragraph 3.171 of
GSR Part 3 [3] establishes the common elements of the programme.
4.224. Measurements on medical radiological equipment are one of the
components of the programme of quality assurance. Acceptance tests are
required for new or significantly refurbished or repaired equipment, or after
the installation of new software or modification of existing software that could
affect protection and safety. The acceptance test should be followed immediately
by commissioning, and then ongoing periodic quality control tests, including
constancy tests. The purpose is to ensure that, at all times, all medical radiological
177

equipment performs correctly, accurately, reproducibly and predictably.
Acceptance and commissioning tests should be performed in the same way for
equipment and software that has been donated.
4.225. Depending on the equipment purchase agreement, acceptance tests can
be performed by the manufacturer in the presence of the local medical physicist
and the radiological medical practitioner representing the user, or, if acceptable
to the manufacturer and the purchaser, by a medical physicist jointly with the
manufacturer. The process should involve verification of all specifications and
features of the equipment, in particular, protection and safety features including
displayed and reported dose metrics.
4.226. After acceptance and before clinical use on patients, commissioning
should be carried out by, or under the supervision of, the medical physicist.
Commissioning should include measurements of all parameters and conditions
of use that are expected in clinical use. For most situations, the medical physicist
should be directly involved in the measurements, calculations and interpretation
of data to characterize the equipment’s performance. In some simple situations, it
may be sufficient for the medical physicist to provide documented advice on how
the commissioning should be performed. During commissioning, the baseline for
subsequent constancy tests is established.
4.227. In addition to the acceptance testing and commissioning, para. 3.171
of GSR Part 3 [3] requires, periodically and after any major maintenance
procedure or upgrade, the measurement of physical parameters of medical
radiological equipment. There are many published reports from international
and national organizations and national and regional professional bodies giving
detailed guidance on the quality control tests that should be performed in nuclear
medicine, including recommended frequencies [183, 184, 187, 200, 201, 204,
205, 215–228, 230, 260, 266, 273–275]. In addition, many of these organizations
and professional bodies publish on their web sites new or updated publications
on the topic. The regulatory body may have its own specific requirements for
the tests that should be performed, their frequencies and the competence of
the specialists involved. Such specific requirements should be established with
consultation between the regulatory body and the relevant professional bodies.
4.228. Guidance on the quality control tests for X ray imaging devices used in
nuclear medicine is provided in the references listed in para. 3.238.
4.229. In nuclear medicine, there is an additional factor of the
radiopharmaceuticals themselves. The programme of quality assurance for
178

medical exposures should ensure that radiopharmaceuticals intended for
administration to patients are prepared in a manner that meets clinical needs
and that satisfies both radiation protection and safety and pharmaceutical
quality requirements [204, 207, 208]. Therefore, in complex nuclear medicine
facilities, radiopharmacists and radiochemists, in conjunction with other health
professionals as appropriate, should be involved.
4.230. Paragraph 3.171(e) of GSR Part 3 [3] specifically requires that periodic
checks of the calibration and conditions of operation of dosimetry equipment and
monitoring equipment be part of the programme of quality assurance. This is to
ensure that such instrumentation has a current calibration, typically conducted
within the last two years (see para. 4.200), and that it is functioning correctly.
The programme of quality assurance for medical exposures should establish a
frequency for calibration for each instrument and a set of quality control checks
on the operation of each instrument to be performed at set intervals. This applies
to stand alone dosimetry equipment and to software relating to dosimetry
(e.g. software used for calculating specific uptake values from which doses can
be estimated).
4.231. The results of the quality control tests should be compared with
established tolerance limits. These limits may have been established to ensure
compliance with a regulatory requirement for the performance of particular
physical parameters or they may be set on the basis of recommended values given
in published reports, such as those referenced in para. 4.227. Paragraph 3.171(b)
of GSR Part 3 [3] requires the implementation of corrective actions if the
measured values fall outside established tolerance limits. Such corrective actions
are likely to include maintenance or servicing of the equipment, and hence a
maintenance programme should be put in place at the nuclear medicine facility. In
some cases, the equipment might be outside the tolerance limits by a significant
amount and the equipment should be immediately taken out of clinical use and
not returned until servicing has taken place and it has been ascertained that the
equipment now meets the performance requirements.
4.232. The programme of quality assurance for medical exposures in nuclear
medicine should include the use of checks to ensure that the facility’s protocols
and procedures for imaging and therapy, including radiation protection
and safety, are being followed. The periodic review of the protocols and
procedures themselves is part of the radiological review at the facility (see
paras 4.259–4.261). In addition, a review of imaging procedures may have been
triggered by a comparison with DRLs (see paras 4.213–4.220).

179

4.233. Maintaining records is a crucial aspect of the programme of quality
assurance for medical exposures. This includes the procedures used in the
programme, the results of the quality control tests including trend analysis,
the dosimetry surveys, the DRL comparisons, the corrective actions, and the
investigations of unintended and accidental medical exposures. When planning
and developing an effective programme of quality assurance, the licensee should
recognize that it demands strong managerial commitment and support in the
form of training and allocation of time, personnel and equipment resources. The
regulatory body, in its inspections of a nuclear medicine facility, should review
the records of the programme of quality assurance for medical exposures.
4.234. In line with standard practices for quality management, para. 3.172 of
GSR Part 3 [3] requires that “regular and independent audits are made of the
programme of quality assurance for medical exposures, and that their frequency is
in accordance with the complexity of the radiological procedures being performed
and the associated risks.” Such audits may be external audits or internal audits.
Internal audits are usually logistically simpler to conduct, while an external audit
generally has the advantage of bringing in an outside perspective. The audit of the
programme of quality assurance for medical exposures can be incorporated into
more comprehensive audits of the management system performed by the licensee.
Furthermore, the results of the audit of the programme of quality assurance for
medical exposures will be a major input into the radiological review performed at
the facility (see paras 4.259–4.261).
Dose constraints: Carers and comforters
4.235. Some diagnostic nuclear medicine procedures, particularly of children,
can be better performed with the assistance of a carer or comforter, for example
a relative in the case of a paediatric patient, or a relative or friend for a disabled
patient or very elderly or very ill patient. In these circumstances, the carer or
comforter will be exposed. This is usually to a low dose, such as when caring
for a child undergoing a renal examination, but in some cases the dose is not
insignificant, for example in the case of staying with a child during a PET
examination. Furthermore, in nuclear medicine there is also the additional
consideration of exposure of carers and comforters after the diagnostic procedure,
or in the case of radiopharmaceutical therapy with radioiodine, their exposure
during the course of the treatment. This exposure is defined as medical exposure
and as such is not subject to dose limits. However, paras 3.153 and 3.173 of
GSR Part 3 [3] require that such carers and comforters be afforded radiation
protection through the application of the requirements for the optimization
of protection and safety and, in particular, the use of dose constraints in this
180

process. These are the dose constraints established by government, as a result
of consultation with the health authority, relevant professional bodies and the
regulatory body, as required by para. 3.149(a)(i) of GSR Part 3 [3]. Guidance
on setting dose constraints, including considerations for children and pregnant
women, is given in paras 2.48 and 2.49.
4.236. Written protocols should be drawn up for implementing measures for
the optimization of protection and safety for carers and comforters of patients
during or after nuclear medicine procedures. The measures should utilize the
basic methods for radiation protection (i.e. time, distance and shielding, and
measures to minimize spread of contamination). The protocols should include the
following:
(a)
(b)
(c)

Criteria specifying who would be acceptable for acting as a carer or
comforter;
Methods for ensuring that the carer or comforter receives a dose that is as
low as reasonably achievable;
The values of the dose constraints to be applied (see para. 2.49).

4.237. The licensee should be able to demonstrate that the effective dose to
the carer or comforter, by applying the protocols, is unlikely to exceed the dose
constraint. It is relatively straightforward to estimate effective doses to carers
and comforters from measurements of the ambient dose equivalent rates at the
positions where they will be situated. These determinations should be made in
advance to ensure that dose constraint is not exceeded. Therefore, individual dose
monitoring is normally not necessary. For carers and comforters in a therapy
ward, consideration may be given to the use of electronic dosimeters.
4.238.

Paragraph 3.153 of GSR Part 3 [3] states that:
“Registrants and licensees shall ensure that no individual incurs a
medical exposure as a carer or comforter unless he or she has received,
and has indicated an understanding of, relevant information on radiation
protection and information on the radiation risks prior to providing care
and comfort to an individual undergoing a radiological procedure.”

The carer or comforter should indicate that he or she is still willing to provide
support, care and comfort to the patient that is undergoing or has undergone a
nuclear medicine procedure. In the case of radiopharmaceutical therapy with
iodine, both for patients still in the hospital and for those that have been released
(see also para. 4.248), appropriate written instructions should be provided to the
181

carer or comforter of the patient (including for example, instructions on time
spent with the patient and proximity to the patient, minimizing of physical contact
and not sharing food or drinks). Further guidance is given in Refs [21, 246].
4.239. Guidance applicable to carers and comforters supporting patients
undergoing X ray imaging radiological procedures as part of the nuclear medicine
procedure in the nuclear medicine facility is given in paras 3.247–3.251.
Dose constraints: Volunteers in biomedical research
4.240. Some individuals will undergo diagnostic nuclear medicine procedures
as part of their voluntary participation in an approved programme of biomedical
research (see para. 2.99). Part of the approval process for the biomedical research
will have been the setting of dose constraints for the nuclear medicine procedures
(see para. 2.100). When the volunteer presents himself or herself at the nuclear
medicine facility, he or she is to be afforded the same radiation protection as if he
or she were a patient ready to undergo a nuclear medicine procedure, but with the
additional restriction that his or her exposure will be subject to a dose constraint,
either a nationally established dose constraint or a dose constraint specified by
the ethics committee that approved the biomedical research programme (see
paras 2.50, 2.99 and 2.100).
Pregnant patients
4.241. Patients who are pregnant form a special subgroup of patients that
should be given particular consideration with respect to radiation protection.
These considerations are described in para. 4.162(a) with respect to justification
and paras 4.189–4.194 with respect to optimization. None of these considerations
can take place if it is not known whether the patient is pregnant. Therefore, it is
crucial, as is required in paras 3.175 and 3.176 of GSR Part 3 [3], for the nuclear
medicine facility to have in place means for ensuring that the pregnancy status of
patients is known.
4.242. The first approach is through the posting of clear signs (possibly
including a pictorial representation of pregnancy) in languages easily understood
by the people using the nuclear medicine facility, posing the question ‘Are you
pregnant or possibly pregnant?’ and ‘If so, please tell the staff’. Such signs should
be posted widely in the facility, including in waiting rooms and cubicles. The
second approach is to ask patients directly whether they are or might be pregnant.
This might not always be so easy given social and cultural sensitivities, but it
should be done when necessary.
182

4.243. Neither of the approaches described in para. 4.242 will work if the
patient does not know whether she is pregnant. For this reason, para. 3.176 of
GSR Part 3 [3] has an additional requirement on facilities to “ensure that there
are procedures in place for ascertaining the pregnancy status of a female patient
of reproductive capacity before the performance of any radiological procedure
that could result in a significant dose to the embryo or fetus”. In nuclear
medicine, pregnancy status should be ascertained for all radiopharmaceutical
therapy, and it is advisable for all diagnostic procedures, in particular for those
radiopharmaceuticals that are known to cross the placental barrier. Cooperation
with the referring medical practitioner, through standard requests for pregnancy
status for specified procedures, is one approach. The referral form should
include a ‘tick box’ for pregnancy status. In case of doubt, a pregnancy test or a
determination of hormone levels to assess menopausal status can be carried out.
Breast-feeding patients
4.244. Breast-feeding patients form a special subgroup of patients that should
be given particular consideration with respect to radiation protection in nuclear
medicine. These considerations have been described in para. 4.162(b) with
respect to justification and paras 4.195 and 4.196 with respect to optimization.
None of these considerations can take place if it is not known whether the patient
is breast-feeding. Therefore, it is crucial, as is required in paras 3.175 and 3.176
of GSR Part 3 [3], for the nuclear medicine facility to have in place means for
ensuring that the breast-feeding status of patients is known.
4.245. The first approach is through the posting of clear signs, in languages
able to be understood by the people using the nuclear medicine facility, posing
the question ‘Are you breast-feeding?’ and ‘If so, please tell the staff’. Such signs
should be posted widely in the facility, including in waiting rooms and cubicles.
The second approach is to directly ask patients directly whether they are breastfeeding. This might not always be so easy given social and cultural sensitivities,
but it should be done when necessary.
Release of patients after radiopharmaceutical therapy
4.246. Paragraph 3.178 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that a nuclear medicine
facility have arrangements in place to manage the release of patients who have
undergone radiopharmaceutical therapy. Once the patient is released, two groups
of persons should be afforded appropriate radiation protection: the general public
whom the patient may encounter or with whom the patient may interact, and
members of the patient’s family and close friends, who may be viewed simply
183

as also being members of the public or as carers and comforters. Exposure of
members of the public is subject to the public dose limits (see Box 1), while
exposure of carers and comforters is not subject to dose limits but is instead
controlled through dose constraints (see paras 4.235–4.239). Furthermore, as
stated in para. 2.46, public exposure arising from a single ‘source’, such as a
patient who has undergone radiopharmaceutical therapy, should be subject to
dose constraints set at some fraction of the dose limits.
4.247. The medical physicist or RPO at the nuclear medicine facility should
establish prior to the release of a patient that the retained radioactivity in the
patient is such that the doses that could be received by members of the public
would not exceed public dose limits, and would be unlikely to exceed the relevant
dose constraints for both members of the public and carers and comforters. An
acceptable method of estimating the acceptable retained activity for patients
being discharged from hospitals is to calculate the time integral of the ambient
dose equivalent rate, considering the activity, energy and effective half-life of
the radionuclides. When deciding on the discharge for a particular patient, the
living conditions of the patient, such as the extent to which he or she can be
isolated from other family members, in particular children and pregnant women,
should also be considered. Safe management of the patient’s contaminated
excreta should be addressed. Special consideration should be given to incontinent
patients. In the case of carers and comforters, the assumptions made for the
calculations should be consistent with the written instructions that will be given
at the time the patient is discharged from the facility. Published data suggest that
systematic dose monitoring is not necessary (for detailed guidance on all aspects
pertaining to the release of patients, see Refs [21, 246, 247]).
4.248. As indicated in para. 4.247, the patient or the legal guardian of the patient
should be provided with written instructions on how to keep doses to members of
the public and carers and comforters as low as reasonably achievable. Individuals
of particular concern are children and pregnant partners of patients (for detailed
guidance, including sample information sheets, see Refs [21, 246, 247]).
Unintended and accidental medical exposures
Prevention of unintended and accidental medical exposures
4.249.

Paragraph 3.179 of GSR Part 3 [3] states that:
“Registrants and licensees…shall ensure that all practicable measures
are taken to minimize the likelihood of unintended or accidental medical

184

exposures arising from flaws in design and operational failures of
medical radiological equipment, from failures of and errors in software,
or as a result of human error.”
Paragraph 3.180 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that the registrants and licensees
promptly investigate if such exposures occur. General strategies for addressing
those problems include the regular maintenance of medical radiological
equipment and software, a comprehensive programme of quality assurance,
continuing education and training of staff, and the promotion of a safety culture.
Lessons identified from events that have occurred should be used for preventing
or minimizing unintended and accidental medical exposures, as described in
para. 4.251.
4.250. Minimization of the likelihood of unintended or accidental medical
exposures in nuclear medicine can be brought about by:
(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

The introduction of safety barriers at identified critical points in the process,
with specific quality control checks at these points. Quality control should
not be confined to physical tests or checks but can include actions such as
double checks of the radiopharmaceutical and activity to be administered,
and the correct identification of the patient.
Actively encouraging a culture of always working with awareness and
alertness.
Providing detailed protocols and procedures for each process.
Providing sufficient staff who are educated and trained to the appropriate
level, and an effective organization, ensuring reasonable patient throughput.
Continuous professional development and practical training and training in
applications for all staff involved in providing nuclear medicine services.
Clear definitions of the roles, responsibilities and functions of staff in the
nuclear medicine facility that are understood by all staff.

4.251. Preventive measures should include reporting of incidents and
near incidents, analysis and feedback, including lessons from international
experience [276]. Preventive measures should also include checking of the
robustness of the safety system of the facility against reported incidents (see
Ref. [276] for a review of case histories from an extensive collection of accidental
medical exposures, including examples relevant to nuclear medicine).
4.252. In addition to the guidance in paras 4.249–4.251, the following three-step
strategy (commonly called ‘prospective risk management’) can help to prevent
unintended and accidental medical exposures in nuclear medicine:
185

(a)
(b)
(c)

Allocation of responsibilities to appropriately qualified health professionals
only and ensuring that a management system is in place that includes
radiation protection and safety;
Use of the lessons from unintended and accidental medical exposures to
test whether the management system, including for radiation protection and
safety, is robust enough against these types of event;
Identification of other latent risks by posing the questions ‘What else
could go wrong?’ or ‘What other potential hazards might be present?’ in
a systematic, anticipative manner for all steps in the nuclear medicine
process.

Investigation of unintended and accidental medical exposures
4.253. The events that constitute unintended or accidental medical exposures
are detailed in para. 3.180 of GSR Part 3 [3], and for a nuclear medicine facility
such events include those associated with diagnostic procedures and with
radiopharmaceutical therapy. For diagnostic procedures, reference should also be
made to paras 3.260–3.264 for aspects relating to X ray imaging. Unintended
and accidental medical exposures can occur at any stage in the nuclear medicine
process. For radiopharmaceutical therapy, unintended or accidental medical
exposures can be either underexposures or overexposures. The events identified
in para. 3.180 of GSR Part 3 [3] also include near misses, and these should be
considered in the same way as actual events.
4.254. One of the events identified in para. 3.180 of GSR Part 3 [3] is a dose
administered in radiopharmaceutical therapy differing substantially from (over
or under) the prescribed dose. Consensus recommendations on the level of
activity difference that would be considered as substantially different appear to
be lacking, but a pragmatic approach for use within the nuclear medicine facility
might be the specification of deviations greater than 10% as being substantially
different. A system with clear procedures should be put in place for identifying
when this type of event occurs.
4.255. Paragraph 3.181 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes what is required during
the course of the investigation. This includes calculation or estimation of patient
doses, which should be performed by a medical physicist. A record of the
calculation method and results should also be placed in the patient’s file. When
required, counselling of the patient should be undertaken by an individual with
appropriate experience and clinical knowledge.

186

4.256. The investigation of unintended and accidental medical exposures, as
required by paras 3.180 and 3.181 of GSR Part 3 [3], has three main purposes.
The first is to assess the consequences for the patients affected and to provide
remedial and health care actions if necessary. The second is to establish what
went wrong and how to prevent or minimize the likelihood of a recurrence in the
nuclear medicine facility (i.e. the investigation is for the facility’s benefit and the
patients’ benefit). The third purpose is to provide information to other persons or
other nuclear medicine facilities. Dissemination of information about unintended
and accidental medical exposures and radiation injuries has greatly contributed
to improving methods for minimizing their occurrence. The regulatory body
and/or the health authorities could disseminate information on significant events
reported to them and on the corrective actions taken, so that other facilities might
learn from these events. Independently from any legal requirement for reporting
to the regulatory body, the implementation of voluntary and anonymous safety
reporting and learning systems can significantly contribute to improving safety
and safety culture in health care. This includes participation in voluntary
international or national databases designed as educative tools, as is the case for
image guided interventional procedures and radiation therapy (see paras 3.266
and 5.274, respectively).
4.257. Paragraph 3.181 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes requirements for
the reporting (in writing) of significant events to the regulatory body and, if
appropriate, to the relevant health authority. The regulatory body may also specify
its own requirements for the reporting of events by registrants and licensees. It
is difficult to quantify the term ‘significant’: specification of a numerical trigger
value immediately creates an artificial distinction between values immediately
below that value (and hence would not be reported) and those just above the
value (which would be reported). However, the attributes of significant events
can be elaborated, and events with one or more of these attributes should be
reported to the regulatory body. Such attributes would include the occurrence
of, or the potential for, serious unintended or unexpected health effects due to
radiation exposure (in this case the health authority should also be informed), the
likelihood of a similar event occurring in other nuclear medicine facilities, a large
number of patients having been affected, and gross misconduct or negligence by
the responsible health professionals. As stated in para. 4.256, one of the roles of
the regulatory body for such a reported event is to disseminate information on the
event and any lessons identified to all potentially affected parties, typically other
nuclear medicine facilities and relevant professional bodies, but also in some
cases manufacturers, suppliers and maintenance companies.

187

4.258. Irrespective of whether the event is also reported to the regulatory
body, feedback to staff should be provided in a timely fashion and, where
changes are recommended, all staff should be involved in bringing about their
implementation.
Records and review
Radiological review
4.259. Paragraph 3.182 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that radiological reviews
be performed periodically at the nuclear medicine facility. This involves
considering both justification and optimization aspects of radiation protection.
For the latter, the results of the programme of quality assurance for medical
exposures, including the periodic independent audit, will be a significant input to
the process. As described in paras 2.148 and 2.149, the wider clinical audit could
include the radiological review with its assessment of the effective application of
the requirements for justification and optimization in the facility for the nuclear
medicine procedures being performed [49].
4.260. To facilitate compliance with para. 3.182 of GSR Part 3 [3] and to learn
from periodic radiological reviews, the methodology used, the original physical,
technical and clinical parameters considered and the conclusions reached should
be documented and taken into account prior to any new review that may result in
an update of institutional policies and procedures.
4.261. Radiological reviews should consider changes in patient management
that result from the diagnostic nuclear medicine procedures, and the effect of
introducing new technologies or radiopharmaceuticals on efficiency and cost.
In radiopharmaceutical therapy, radiological reviews should consider patient
outcome (survival, acute side effects or late side effects), and the effect of
introducing new radiopharmaceuticals on efficiency and cost. A system for the
ongoing collection of relevant data to support such reviews should be in place at
the facility.
Records
4.262. Records should be in place to demonstrate ongoing compliance with
radiation protection requirements. Paragraphs 3.183–3.185 of GSR Part 3 [3]
establish the requirements for maintaining personnel records, records of
calibration, dosimetry and quality assurance, and records of medical exposure.
These records are required to be kept for the period specified by the regulatory
188

body. In the absence of such a requirement, a suggested period for keeping
records is ten years. In the case of children, records should be kept for a longer
time.
RADIATION PROTECTION OF THE PUBLIC
4.263. Public exposure can arise from the performance of nuclear medicine for
persons in and around the nuclear medicine facility and also in the wider public
domain. The latter can occur as a result of the release from the nuclear medicine
facility of patients with some remaining radioactivity. Radiation exposure of
carers and comforters while performing that role is considered medical exposure
and not public exposure and is not covered here (see paras 4.235–4.239 for
guidance on carers and comforters). In addition, there is the possibility, albeit
low, of public exposure from exposure pathways associated with the management
of radioactive waste.
4.264. The requirements for public protection established in paras 3.117–3.137
of GSR Part 3 [3] apply to nuclear medicine facilities. This subsection
contains guidance that is specific to nuclear medicine facilities. More general
and comprehensive guidance on radiation protection of the public is given in
GSG-8 [24].
Members of the public in the medical facility
4.265. Persons who will be undergoing a nuclear medicine procedure are
also considered members of the public during the time when the treatment or
diagnostic procedure is not taking place, for example, while they are sitting in
the waiting room before being administered radiopharmaceuticals. Similarly for
carers and comforters, any exposure incurred other than that arising from the
nuclear medicine procedure in which they are involved will be public exposure.
4.266. Members of the public also include visitors, such as persons delivering
goods or supplies, sales personnel, accompanying persons and other patients in
the facility.
External exposure and contamination
4.267. The primary means for protecting the public from external exposure
is the shielding in place at the nuclear medicine facility (see paras 4.32–4.36),
which should be sufficient so that public exposure resulting from being in any
189

immediately adjacent areas, including accessible rooms above and below, is
in compliance with the public dose limits, and preferably less than any dose
constraint that the regulatory body may have applied (see paras 2.16 and 2.46).
4.268. Patients that have been administered radiopharmaceuticals could expose
members of the public in the nuclear medicine facility and upon release (see
paras 4.246–4.248). In the nuclear medicine facility, the RPO should establish
rules to ensure that the exposure of any member of the public will be less than the
public dose limit and, preferably, lower than any applicable dose constraint. At
the design stage of the nuclear medicine facility, consideration should be given to
the respective flow of patients and visitors in the facility so that their contact or
proximity is minimized, thereby reducing the potential for both external exposure
and spread of contamination.
Control of access
4.269. Access to areas where radiation is being used should be controlled
to ensure doses to visitors are below the dose limits and constraints for the
public. This is effective against both external exposure and contamination.
Paragraph 3.128 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that access of visitors to controlled
areas or supervised areas be restricted. In exceptional cases, a visitor may be
permitted to enter a controlled area, but he or she should be accompanied at all
times by a staff member who knows the protection and safety measures for the
area. Written procedures should be drawn up specifying when such exceptions
can take place and who may accompany the visitor. Particular consideration, in
all cases, should be given with respect to women who are or may be pregnant or
breast-feeding.
4.270. Controlled areas and supervised areas should be clearly identified to
help to prevent inadvertent entry. This includes areas such as toilets designated
for nuclear medicine patients. Further control can be afforded by the use of keys
(or passwords) to restrict access to the control panels of medical radiological
equipment to authorized persons only.
Members of the public in the wider public domain
4.271. There are usually no restrictions with respect to public exposure for the
release of patients that have undergone diagnostic nuclear medicine procedures.
Patients should be advised on measures to enhance elimination of the residual

190

radioactivity (such as drinking plenty of fluid and frequently emptying the
bladder) and to avoid prolonged contact with sensitive members of the public
(young children and pregnant women), if appropriate.
4.272. The exposure of other persons, in the wider public domain, by patients
who have received radiopharmaceutical therapy can occur through external
irradiation of persons close to the patient, such as on public transport, and
through internal contamination of persons as a result of excreted or exhaled
radionuclides. The RPO of the nuclear medicine facility should establish rules to
ensure that the exposure of any member of the public, following the release of a
radiopharmaceutical therapy patient, will be less than the public dose limit and,
preferably, lower than any applicable dose constraint. As stated in para. 4.248,
the patient should be given written instructions that include means for avoiding
external and internal exposure of the public. An acceptable method to estimate
the acceptable retained activity for patients being discharged is described in
para. 4.247. Results of the calculations should be recorded. When deciding on the
appropriate discharge activity for a particular patient, the licensee and the RPO
should take into account the transport and the living conditions of the patient,
such as the extent to which the patient can be isolated from other family members
and the safe management of the patient’s excreta and body fluids (for detailed
guidance on the release of radiopharmaceutical therapy patients and radiation
protection of the public, see Refs [21, 246, 247]).
Death of a patient who has undergone a nuclear medicine procedure
4.273. Precautions may be required after the death of a patient to whom
radiopharmaceuticals have been administered, particularly in the case of
radiopharmaceutical therapy. This applies to the immediate handling of the
body, both in the hospital and in the home or other place, but also with respect
to autopsy, embalming, burial or cremation. The radiation protection precautions
should be determined by the RPO, on the basis of a generic safety assessment of
the need for monitoring personnel who carry out these procedures, the need for
monitoring the premises and the need for minimizing external radiation exposure
and the potential for contamination. In addition to whole body monitoring, finger
monitoring may be required for individuals carrying out autopsies or embalming,
as contamination and radioactive waste are likely to be generated. The situation
for patients injected with bone seeking radiopharmaceuticals such as 89Sr for pain
management of skeletal metastases is more of a problem because of the relatively
long half-life of this radionuclide (50 days). Storage of the body is impractical. In
the case of cremation, depending on the family’s intention for the ashes, storage
may be needed in order to comply with local regulations (for detailed guidance,
191

see Refs [21, 246]). Other considerations, such as cultural or ethical concerns,
should be taken into account. Regulatory bodies should provide guidance in such
situations.
Radioactive waste
4.274. Another potential pathway for public exposure is from radioactive
waste; and hence, Requirement 31 and paras 3.131–3.134 of GSR Part 3 [3]
require that systems and procedures be put in place to manage radioactive waste
and discharges of radioactive material. Detailed guidance on the management
of radioactive waste applicable to nuclear medicine facilities is given in IAEA
Safety Standards Series No. SSG-45, Predisposal Management of Radioactive
Waste from the Use of Radioactive Material in Medicine, Industry, Agriculture,
Research and Education [277].
4.275. Most radioactive waste from nuclear medicine is waste containing short
lived radionuclides, and it is feasible to consider such waste as non-radioactive
waste, either immediately or after some time to allow for decay. A formal
mechanism should be put in place, including rigorous control measures, to
demonstrate compliance with regulatory requirements in respect of the release
from regulatory control of radioactive material that is no longer are considered
radioactive waste. Further guidance is given in SSG-45 [277].
4.276. Since waiting for decay until the radioactive material meets the
regulatory criteria for clearance or authorized discharge is an essential method
in nuclear medicine, a room for the interim storage of radioactive waste should
be made available. The room should be locked, properly marked and ventilated.
Records should be kept from which the origin of the waste can be identified.
The process requires the grouping (segregation) of the waste in accordance to
the expected time for the decay of the radionuclides (initial activity and physical
half-life) and the physical form of the waste. Examples of different physical
forms include the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
192

Vials that might contain residual radioactivity;
Biological waste that will undergo decomposition;
Infectious waste requiring sterilization;
Broken glassware, syringes and needles requiring collection in separate
containers to prevent personnel being injured;
Radionuclide generators, bed linen and clothing from hospital wards
(therapeutic applications);
Liquid scintillation solutions.

Containers to allow segregation of different types of radioactive waste should be
provided in areas where the waste is generated. The containers should be suitable
for their purpose (e.g. in terms of volume, shielding and leaktightness).
4.277. In practice, it is mainly 131I and the waste from radiopharmaceutical
therapy patients that require special precautions. Appropriate storage of
radioactive material to allow for decay will minimize the environmental impact of
the release. The majority of diagnostic studies are performed using 99mTc, which
has a physical half-life of 6 hours. Following storage of 2.5 days (10 half-lives,
i.e. a decay of a factor of more than 1000), most of this waste can be treated
as conventional waste. Technetium generators contain 99Mo with a half-life of
2.75 days; depending on the initial activity of such generators, the time allowed
for decay at the nuclear medicine facility should be 1.5–2 months.
4.278. The most commonly used radionuclide in PET is 18F. The short physical
half-life of 110 minutes generally allows for discharge of the radioactive material
after 24 hours.
4.279. Management of radioactive waste containing longer lived radionuclides
should take into account the initial activity and the half-life. The nuclear medicine
facility’s RPO should give advice in these situations.
4.280. Following the considerations in paras 4.274–4.279, a summary of
practical advice for specific situations in nuclear medicine can be given as
follows:
(a)

(b)

Technetium generators: The two options are (i) returning to the supplier
after use, ensuring compliance with regulations for the transport of
radioactive material (see paras 4.302–4.304) or (ii) waiting for decay. After
1.5–2 months, the generator can be dismantled and the elution column can
be removed, as the material is considered non-radioactive. The generator
column should be check for long half-life radionuclide contaminants before
disposal. Labels should then be removed.
Used syringes and needles: These can be collected in a shielded container
in the rooms used for the preparation and injection of radiopharmaceuticals.
When the container is full, it should be sealed and the expected date of
release from regulatory control should be marked on it. After this time, the
external dose rate can be monitored. The container can be released from
regulatory control when the external ambient dose equivalent rate is the
same as the background or in line with national or local regulations.

193

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

194

Vials containing residues of 99mTc, 67Ga, 111In, 123I, 131I, 32P, 89Sr and
201
Tl: A similar procedure should be established as for the syringes, but
segregation should be based on the physical half-life of the radionuclide.
Caution should be exercised in storing waste containing very low levels
of longer lived residues such as 68Ge (half-life 271 days), as such residues
could accumulate over time to activities at which they need to be considered
as radioactive waste and could require prolonged storage before release
from regulatory control.
Gloves and cover paper: These should be collected in plastic bags in the
rooms used for the preparation and injection of radiopharmaceuticals.
When a bag is filled, it should be sealed. After waiting for decay or with
appropriate monitoring, these can be released from regulatory control and
treated as ordinary, non-radioactive waste.
Sealed sources for calibration: These sources used for calibrating activity
meters, for the quality control of gamma cameras and counters, and for the
anatomical marking of images should be released from regulatory control
as determined by the RPO and in accordance with national regulations and
authorization by the regulatory body (clearance).
Carbon and hydrogen isotopes: Small activities of 14C and 3H in organic
solutions can usually be treated as non-radioactive waste. In certain
instances, because of their potential toxicity, special precautions may apply,
and appropriate biohazard precautions need to be taken.
Patients’ excreta, such as urine containing 131I: For diagnostic patients,
there is no need for the collection of excreta and ordinary toilets can be
used. For therapy patients, policies vary for different States, but in principle
the approaches used follow the dilution or decay methodologies (e.g. either
by collecting and storing excreta or by designing facilities with drainpipes
terminating in a delay tank). In most situations, it is better to dilute and
disperse the waste activity in a continuous sewerage system, rather than to
concentrate and store excreta for decay. Some precautions may be required
where sewerage systems allow rapid processing of effluent with subsequent
mixing with river water or usage for irrigation of land used for growing
vegetables (see also Refs [21, 246, 278]).
Waste management at home following the release of patient after
radionuclide therapy: Patient should be advised to flush the toilet after
use, avoid splashing and clean the toilet after use. The shower and bathtub
should be rinsed well after use. Contaminated fabrics such as, clothing and
bedding, should be laundered separately (see also Refs [21, 246, 247]).

Monitoring and reporting
4.281. Requirement 32 and para. 3.137 of GSR Part 3 [3] establish the
requirements to be met by the nuclear medicine facility with respect to monitoring
and reporting. At the nuclear medicine facility, procedures are to be in place to
ensure that:
(a)
(b)
(c)

The requirements for public exposure are satisfied and such exposure is
assessed;
The requirements for discharge of radioactive materials to the environment
are satisfied;
Appropriate records of the results of the monitoring programmes are kept.

4.282. The programme for monitoring public exposure arising from nuclear
medicine should include dose assessment in the areas in and surrounding the
nuclear medicine facility that are accessible to the public. Doses can be derived
from the shielding calculations in the planning stage, combined with the results
from area monitoring and contamination monitoring at the initial operation of the
facility and periodically thereafter. Records of dose assessments should be kept
for a period that meets any relevant regulatory requirements. In the absence of
such requirements, a suggested period for keeping records is seven to ten years.
PREVENTION AND MITIGATION OF ACCIDENTS
Safety assessments of potential exposure
4.283. To comply with the requirements for safety assessments established
in paras 3.29–3.36 of GSR Part 3 [3], the registrant or licensee is required to
conduct a safety assessment applied to all stages of the design and operation of
the nuclear medicine facility. Furthermore, para. 3.29 of GSR Part 3 [3] states
that: “the responsible person or organization shall be required to submit a safety
assessment, which shall be reviewed and assessed by the regulatory body.”
Paragraphs 2.150–2.154 describe general considerations for facilities using
ionizing radiation for medical purposes.
4.284. The safety assessment of potential exposure should be systematic,
should identify unintended events that can lead to potential exposure, and should
consider their likelihood and potential consequences (see Appendix I for a
summary of typical causes and contributing factors to accidental exposures in

195

nuclear medicine). The safety assessment should not only cover these events,
but should also aim at anticipating other events that have not previously been
reported. Clearly, the safety assessment should be documented.
4.285.
(a)
(b)
(c)

The safety assessment should be revised when:

New or modified radiopharmaceuticals, equipment or their accessories are
introduced;
Operational changes occur, including changes in workload;
Operational experience or information on accidents or errors indicates that
the safety assessment is to be reviewed.

4.286. Safety assessments in nuclear medicine should include consideration of
all the steps in the use of radiopharmaceuticals for diagnosis and treatment in the
nuclear medicine facility. The steps include the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Ordering, transport and receipt of radiopharmaceuticals, including
unpacking and storage;
Preparation and administration of radiopharmaceuticals to patients;
Examination, treatment and care of therapy patients receiving large amounts
of radioactive material;
Storage and handling of radioactive waste.

Prevention of accidents
4.287. Accident prevention is clearly the best means for avoiding potential
exposure, and paras 3.39–3.42 of GSR Part 3 [3] establish the requirements for
good engineering practice, defence in depth and facility based arrangements to
achieve this. Design considerations for the nuclear medicine facility, medical
radiological equipment and ancillary equipment are described in paras 4.8–4.55.
4.288.
(a)

196

Registrants and licensees should incorporate:

Defence in depth measures to cope with events identified in the safety
assessment, and evaluation of the reliability of the safety systems (including
administrative and operational procedures, equipment and facility design).
For example, theft of sources can be minimized through multiple layers
of security including having sources locked up in a safe within a locked
room, in an area that has restricted access with camera surveillance and is
routinely patrolled.

(b)

Operational experience and lessons from accidents and errors. This
information should be incorporated into the training, maintenance and
quality assurance programmes.

4.289. Means for preventing or minimizing unintended and accidental medical
exposures in nuclear medicine are described in paras 4.249–4.252, and the
ensuing investigation and corrective actions are described in paras 4.253–4.258.
Mitigation of the consequences of accidents
4.290.

Paragraph 1.20 of GSR Part 3 [3] states that:
“If an event or a sequence of events that has been considered in the
assessment of potential exposure does actually occur, it may be treated
either as a planned exposure situation or, if an emergency has been
declared, as an emergency exposure situation.”

On the basis of events identified in the safety assessment for the nuclear medicine
facility, mitigatory procedures should be prepared for events associated with
potential exposure, including the allocation of responsibilities and resources, the
development and implementation of procedures, and the provision of training
and periodic retraining of the relevant staff in executing the mitigatory measures.
4.291.

Paragraph 3.43 of GSR Part 3 [3] states that:
“If the safety assessment indicates that there is a reasonable likelihood
of an emergency affecting either workers or members of the public, the
registrant or licensee shall prepare an emergency plan for the protection
of people and the environment.”

Emergency arrangements and procedures commensurate with the hazard and
the potential consequences are required to be established, as appropriate, in
accordance with GSR Part 7 [7], GSG-2 [8] and GS-G-2.1 [9].
4.292. Mitigatory procedures in a nuclear medicine facility should cover, but
not be limited to, the following:
(a)
(b)

Accidents, including those of low probability, and actions to deal with
them;
Persons responsible for taking actions in the event of an accident, with full
contact details;
197

(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)

Responsibilities of individual personnel in implementing mitigatory
procedures and emergency procedures (e.g. nuclear medicine physicians,
medical physicists, nuclear medicine technologists and the RPO);
Equipment and tools necessary for carrying out the mitigatory procedures
and emergency procedures;
Training and periodic exercises;
Recording and reporting systems;
Immediate measures to avoid unnecessary radiation doses to patients, staff
and the public;
Measures to prevent access of persons to the affected area;
Measures to prevent the spread of contamination, including leakage from
fume hoods and room ventilation systems.

4.293. Kits should be kept readily available for implementing mitigatory
procedures and emergency procedures. These should include the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

Protective clothing, for example overshoes and gloves;
Decontamination materials for the affected areas, including absorbent
materials for wiping up spills;
Decontamination materials for persons;
Warning notices and barrier tape;
Portable monitoring equipment;
Bags for waste, together with tape, labels and pencils.

4.294. The exposure of workers involved in such nuclear medicine events or
in emergency response should be kept below the dose limits for occupational
exposure in planned exposure situations. However, if it is justified that these dose
limits are exceeded, emergency workers should be protected in accordance with
the requirements and guidance for emergency exposure situations contained in
section 4 of GSR Part 3 [3], and GSR Part 7 [7] and GSG-7 [23].
Lost sources
4.295. An up to date inventory should be maintained (see para. 4.56) so that
it can be determined immediately when a source is missing, what its type and
activity are, when and where it was last known to be, and who last took possession
of it. A proactive attitude is recommended in the case that sources are ordered
and not received at the expected time. Confirming that a source has arrived at

198

the expected time should be part of the procedures. The actions to be part of the
emergency plans and procedures in this case should include the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Obtain assistance from the RPO when necessary;
Conduct a local search;
Check and ensure security and control of the other sources if a theft in the
facility is suspected;
If the source is not found, call the supplier and inform them of the loss so
that they can trace the shipment;
If the source is not found, notify the relevant authorities of the loss,
consistently with GSR Part 7 [7] and GS-G-2.1 [9].

Damage to radionuclide generators
4.296. Radionuclide generators, such as generators for 68Ga, 82Rb and 99mTc,
contain a relatively large amount of activity. In the event of a radionuclide
generator being damaged, the measures to be taken should include the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)

Evacuate the area immediately and implement measures to prevent entry to
the area;
Inform the RPO, who should confirm the spillage, define the safety
boundaries and supervise the decontamination and monitoring procedures,
including when restrictions to enter the area can be lifted;
Record the event and report to the relevant authorities.

Spillage of small amounts of radioactive material
4.297. After a spillage of a small amount of radioactive material, for example
low volumes of non-toxic radiopharmaceuticals that can easily be removed, such
as up to 10 MBq of 18F or 99mTc, the following actions should be taken:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

Use protective clothing and disposable gloves.
Quickly blot the spill with an absorbent pad to prevent it spreading.
Remove the pad from the spill and dispose of it.
Wipe with a tissue or paper towel from the edge of the contaminated area
towards the centre.
Monitor the paper towel for residual activity, for example using a
contamination monitor or performing a wipe test.
Continue the cycle of cleaning and monitoring until the measurements
indicate that the spill has been removed, and try to keep the volume of
contaminated waste as small as possible. In some cases, such as with short
199

(g)
(h)
(i)

lived radionuclides, it can be simpler to quarantine the area for a sufficient
time to allow for decay, for example cover the spill site, such as with a
laboratory coat, and prevent access to the area.
Use a plastic bag to hold contaminated items. Suitable bags and paper
towels should be readily available.
If the decontamination process is not successful, contact the RPO.
Monitor all people involved in the spill for contamination when leaving the
room; in particular, monitor shoes if the spill is on the floor.

Spillage of large amounts of radioactive material
4.298. After a spillage of a large amount of radioactive material, for example
if a patient undergoing 131I therapy vomits shortly after administration, the
following actions should be taken:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)

Throw absorbent pads over the spill to prevent further spread of
contamination.
Evacuate people not involved in the spill from the area immediately.
Inform the RPO immediately and conduct clean-up under his or her direct
supervision.
Monitor all people involved in the spill for contamination when leaving the
room.
If necessary, perform a thyroid bioassay of all people involved.
If clothing is contaminated, remove it and place it in a plastic bag labelled
‘RADIOACTIVE’.
If contamination of the skin occurs, wash the area immediately.
If contamination of the eye occurs, flush with large quantities of water.
When the contamination is contained, the procedures outlined for cleaning
small spills may be followed, with particular care that the contaminated
waste bags are appropriately labelled and stored.
Restrict the entry to the contaminated area until decontamination has been
completed and the area has been released by the RPO.

Medical emergencies involving patients who have received therapeutic
radiopharmaceuticals
4.299. There may be medical emergencies, such as in the case of a stroke or
cardiac arrest, involving immediate care of patients who have been administered
large amounts of radioactive material (e.g. of the order of several GBq of 131I) for
radiopharmaceutical therapy. In these cases, dose rates near the patient are high,
and attendant medical personnel may receive significant doses. However, the dose
200

will be acceptable because the procedure is lifesaving (see GSR Part 3 [3] and
GSR Part 7 [7]). Measures should be used to minimize such doses. All members
of the medical team should wear impermeable protective gloves. Medical staff
should be informed and trained on how to deal with such patients. Exercises of
the procedures should be held periodically.
Need for urgent patient attention, including surgery
4.300. Radiation protection considerations should not prevent or delay
lifesaving operations in the event that surgery is required on a patient who has
been administered radiopharmaceuticals. The following precautions should be
observed:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Notify the operating room staff;
Modify operating procedures under the supervision of the RPO to minimize
exposure and spread of contamination;
Use protective equipment as long as efficiency and speed are not affected;
Rotate personnel as necessary if the surgical procedure is lengthy;
Determine the doses of the people involved in the procedure.

Fires, earthquakes and other disasters affecting the nuclear medicine facility
4.301. The normal facility drill should be observed, providing for safe
evacuation of patients, visitors and staff. When first responders (e.g. fire brigade)
attend, they should be informed of the presence of radioactive material. No one
other than emergency responders should re-enter the building until it has been
checked for contamination by the RPO or by the radiation safety staff of the
agency in charge of emergency response (see para. 2.154). Requirements and
guidance for the arrangements to deal with such emergencies can be found in
GSR Part 7 [7] and GS-G-2.1 [9].
SAFETY IN THE TRANSPORT OF RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL
4.302. Paragraph 2.25 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes the requirements for the
transport of radioactive material, invoking in particular IAEA Safety Standards
Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 1), Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive
Material, 2018 Edition [279]. SSR-6 (Rev. 1) [279] uses the defined terms
‘consignor’ to mean any person, organization or government that prepares a
consignment for transport, and ‘consignee’ to mean any person, organization or
government that is entitled to take delivery of a consignment. ‘Consignment’ is
201

also a defined term, meaning any package or packages, or load of radioactive
material, presented by a consignor for transport.
4.303. The licensee of a nuclear medicine facility may be both a consignee
and a consignor, and hence may have responsibilities for both the receipt and
the shipment of radioactive material. Receipt of radioactive material will be a
regular occurrence for all nuclear medicine facilities. Shipments may take place
if the facility has a cyclotron or laboratory that sends radiopharmaceuticals to
other sites, or when expired radiation generators, old sealed calibration sources
or radioactive liquids (e.g. 14C solutions) need to be returned to the supplier or
disposed of off the site, as applicable.
4.304. The detailed requirements for the safe transport of radioactive material,
including general provisions, activity limits and classification, requirements and
controls for transport, requirements for radioactive material and for packagings
and packages, test procedures, and approval and administrative requirements, are
established in SSR-6 (Rev. 1) [279]. Emergency arrangements for the transport
of radioactive material should be put in place, in line with the requirements of
GSR Part 7 [7] and the guidelines of the regulatory body. The licensee and the
RPO of the nuclear medicine facility should be familiar with these regulations to
ensure that the transport of radioactive material for which they are responsible
complies with the regulations.

5. SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS FOR RADIATION
PROTECTION AND SAFETY IN RADIATION THERAPY
GENERAL
5.1. This section covers radiation therapy, the branch of clinical medicine
that uses ionizing radiation (teletherapy and brachytherapy), either alone or in
combination with other modalities, for the treatment of patients with cancer or
other diseases. It includes responsibility for the treatment decision, treatment
preparation and planning, treatment delivery, follow-up and supportive care of
the patient as an integral part of the multidisciplinary management of patients.
Treatment using unsealed sources is covered in Section 4. Imaging studies used
in treatment preparation, planning, verification and delivery are covered in
Section 3, with appropriate cross-references.

202

5.2. External beam radiation therapy, also known as teletherapy, is performed
with photon, electron and hadron beams. Photon beams (gamma rays) are
produced by radioactive sources such as 60Co. High energy (megavoltage,
MV) photon and electron beams are produced by linear accelerators (linacs).
Low and medium energy X rays are produced by kilovoltage (kV) units. For
protons and ion beams, cyclotrons or synchrotons are used. External beam
radiation therapy can be delivered using a wide range of techniques, including:
2-D conventional radiotherapy, 3-D conformal radiotherapy, 4-D radiotherapy
(motion management), intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT),
stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS), stereotactic radiotherapy (SRT), stereotactic
body radiotherapy (SBRT), volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT), robotic
radiotherapy and intraoperative radiotherapy (IORT).
5.3. Verification of patient positioning and target localization can be performed
with film–screen cassettes or CR cassettes, and with treatment beam (MV) portal
images using an electronic portal imaging device (EPID). EPIDs can also monitor
doses on-line [280]. Other in-room IGRT devices that use ionizing radiation are
low energy X ray sources (kV) that can produce DR, MVCT, MV-CBCT and
kV-CBCT. Non-ionizing devices used for IGRT are MRI units, radiofrequency
transponders, ultrasound or hybrid systems and optical surface tracking devices.
All these IGRT devices are either gantry mounted or room mounted.
5.4. Brachytherapy can be performed by placing radioactive sources or
electronic brachytherapy devices directly into or on the patient. A brachytherapy
implant can be temporary or permanent. Afterloading devices allow the sources
to be placed into catheters that have been already inserted in the body. In some
instances, the sources may be introduced manually. Techniques can be interstitial,
intracavitary, surface or intraluminal, and a range of sources are used. Low dose
rate (LDR), medium dose rate (MDR), high dose rate (HDR) and pulsed dose
rate (PDR) brachytherapy techniques are used.
5.5. The generic term ‘medical radiation facility’ is used widely in Section 2
to mean any medical facility where radiological procedures are performed. In
Section 5, the narrower term ‘radiation therapy facility’ is used to cover any
medical radiation facility where radiation therapy is performed. A radiation
therapy facility may be a radiation therapy department inside a larger hospital or
medical centre, or it may be a stand alone facility.
5.6. The defined term radiological procedure is used in GSR Part 3 [3] to cover
all imaging and therapeutic procedures using ionizing radiation. In a radiation
therapy facility, both imaging and therapeutic radiological procedures occur, and
203

this needs to be borne in mind when reading the guidance in Section 5. In cases
where the guidance is specific to one of either imaging or treatment, additional
qualifiers, such as ‘imaging’ or ‘treatment’, are used.
5.7. Different health professionals can take on the role of the radiological
medical practitioner (see para. 2.90) in radiation therapy, depending, inter alia, on
national laws and regulations. Typically, this will be a radiation oncologist, but it
may also include other specialists, for example neurosurgeons in the case of SRS.
5.8. As stated in para. 2.92, the term ‘medical radiation technologist’ is used in
GSR Part 3 [3] and this Safety Guide as a generic term for the health professional
known by several different terms in different States; such terms include
radiographer, radiological technologist and others. Clearly, each State will use its
own term in its own jurisdiction.
5.9. Section 2 of this Safety Guide provides general guidance on the framework
for radiation protection and safety in medical uses of radiation, including roles
and responsibilities, education, training, qualification and competence, and
the management system for protection and safety. This guidance is relevant to
radiation therapy, and reference to Section 2 should be made as necessary.
SAFETY OF MEDICAL RADIATION FACILITIES AND MEDICAL
RADIOLOGICAL EQUIPMENT
Radiation therapy facilities
Location and site
5.10. A radiation therapy facility should be located on a site that gives ready access
for inpatients and outpatients, and that at the same time makes fulfilling radiation
protection requirements as simple as possible. Operational efficiency, initial cost,
as well as provision for future expansion, the need for replacement of units with
higher energy units and future increases in workload should be considered when
locating a new radiation therapy facility. Radiation therapy facilities are often
located on the periphery of the hospital complex to minimize radiation exposure
arising from treatment rooms being adjacent to high occupancy areas. The option
of being able to construct rooms below ground level, with the potential for a
reduced need for substantial shielding, may also influence the choice of site.
Further guidance on the location and site of radiation therapy facilities is given in
Refs [281–284].
204

5.11. In addition to considerations of the site, the surrounding environment
should also be considered. This includes the presence of, and implications for,
adjacent residential or industrial areas, and the level of general public access to,
and use of, the area. This relates to ensuring that protection of the public outside
the radiation therapy facility, and above and below the radiation therapy facility
if these areas are occupied, is consistent with radiation protection requirements.
5.12. When considering expansion of an existing radiation therapy facility,
consideration should be given to the areas beside, above and below the proposed
expansion site.
5.13. For physical security purposes, radiation therapy facilities using sealed
radioactive sources should be located in areas where access by members of the
public to the rooms where sources are used and stored can be restricted.
Design of rooms within the radiation therapy facility: General considerations
5.14. A typical radiation therapy facility consists of six main functional areas:
reception area, clinical consulting areas, and areas for external beam radiation
therapy, brachytherapy, imaging and treatment planning. Within these areas
there are several types of room and, depending on the treatment modalities being
provided, the facility may include rooms or areas for patient imaging, treatment
simulation, treatment planning, treatment control, treatment delivery, mould
preparation and patient examination, as well as patient changing cubicles, public
waiting rooms, operating theatres, and source storage and preparation rooms.
Provision for the incorporation of radiation protection and safety features into
these areas and rooms should be made at the facility design stage. Because
the structural shielding of radiotherapy facilities is very heavy, care should be
taken that the weight of the shielding can be supported by the building structure,
especially in cases when machines are replaced by higher energy ones, such as
is the case of a 60Co unit being replaced by a linac. The layout should take into
account workload and staff and patient flow, both within the radiation therapy
facility and, in cases where the radiation therapy facility is part of a larger hospital
or medical centre, within other departments of the facility. Wherever possible,
treatment rooms should be surrounded with rooms that have low or controlled
occupancy. Physical signage should give information on where different areas are
located and should designate hazardous areas; such signs should be preferably
in both word and picture format. Colour coding of different areas is also very
helpful. General guidance on the design of a radiation therapy facility is given in
Refs [281–284].

205

5.15. The three factors relevant to dose reduction for workers and the public
(time, distance and shielding) should be combined in the design to optimize
occupational exposure and public exposure.
5.16. Access to the radiation therapy facility and its treatment, imaging,
consultation and patient preparation rooms should be considered. This includes
provision for the delivery of equipment and for ease of access for patients
undergoing clinical assessment and daily treatment. Patients may arrive in
wheelchairs or on trolleys or beds.
5.17. As a general rule, the design of the radiation therapy facility should make
provision for safety systems or devices associated with the equipment and rooms.
This includes ventilation systems, electrical wiring relating to emergency off
switches, and standby lighting, safety interlocks and warning signs and signals.
5.18. A reliable and stable power supply should be available for all modern
equipment and IT systems. An emergency diesel power generator alone is
generally not sufficiently stable to power a linac or orthovoltage unit and should
not be used in this way. An uninterruptible power supply or battery backup
systems should be installed to capture the active information at the time of the
outage and to shut down all software in a controlled manner. Servers should be
programmed to shut down automatically when the power supply is interrupted.
Diesel power generators could be used to run systems that are controlled only by
timers, such as in the case of 60Co teletherapy units.
5.19. The design of the facility should include an air conditioning system
sufficient to maintain the temperature and humidity in the treatment room within
the parameters defined by the equipment manufacturers. In addition, a ventilation
system with four to six air changes per hour is recommended to remove any
ozone generated [285].
5.20. For external beam radiation therapy, lights in the treatment room should be
dimmable so that the alignment lasers and the field defining lights can be seen
easily to facilitate patient set-up. It is useful to be able to control the treatment
and imaging room lights and lasers from the control pendant in the respective
room. When the field light is switched on, the room lights should dim to a
pre-set (but adjustable) level, and the alignment lasers should also be switched
on. Since fluorescent lights do not dim very satisfactorily, it is recommended
that incandescent lights are used for the dim level. Four alignment lasers are
recommended. Three lasers projecting across: two aligned with the gantry
positions of 90° and 270°, and one mounted in the ceiling directly above the
206

isocentre. A fourth laser should project a sagittal line along the gantry axis. This
laser is usually mounted on an angled bracket on the wall opposite the gantry.
The laser switching should be controlled from the hand pendant, but it is also
useful to be able to switch the lasers off independently for quality control tests.
5.21. In addition to interlocks, as described in para. 5.31, signs and warning
lights should be placed at the entrances of controlled areas to prevent inadvertent
entry (see also paras 5.290 and 5.291 on control of access). For controlled areas,
para. 3.90(c) of GSR Part 3 [3] requires the use of the basic ionizing radiation
symbol recommended by ISO [56]. An illuminated warning sign should be
displayed at the entrance to the maze or treatment room, and several signs
should be displayed inside the treatment room. It should be possible to see a
warning sign from any position within the treatment room. These signs should
be interlocked with the treatment unit control. The illuminated signs may have
two or three stages. For a two stage sign, the first stage will be illuminated when
there is power to the treatment unit, and the second stage will illuminate when
the beam or the source is on. For a three stage sign, stage one will be illuminated
when there is power to the treatment unit, stage two will light when the treatment
unit is programmed to deliver a radiation beam and stage three will illuminate
when the beam or the source is on. Another possibility is that the warning lights
flash when the beam is on. Other rooms that are also controlled areas, such as
imaging, simulator and source storage rooms, should also have appropriate signs
and warning lights.
5.22. Radiation therapy facilities that use radioactive sources should implement
technical measures so that unauthorized access to sources can be detected in a
timely fashion, including after working hours. These technical measures should
be independent of any interlocks that terminate the radiation beam during normal
operation. Such measures could include a video camera that provides continuous
remote surveillance of the device, a photoelectric beam or motion detector system
installed in the entrance maze (see para. 5.30) and/or the treatment room, or a
door interlock. If these devices indicate the possible presence of an unauthorized
person, an alarm should indicate this locally and remotely so that personnel
can respond in a timely fashion. Further guidance on security provisions for
teletherapy sources and HDR, PDR, MDR and LDR brachytherapy sources is
given in Ref. [282] (see also para. 5.88).
5.23. Firefighting equipment should be available in all areas. For example, in
brachytherapy this is in order to preserve the integrity of radioactive sources in
the event of a fire. Further guidance is given in Ref. [283].

207

Design of rooms within the radiation therapy facility: Treatment rooms for high
energy external beam radiation therapy and HDR afterloading brachytherapy
5.24. External beam radiation therapy and HDR/PDR brachytherapy should be
carried out within the radiation therapy facility in treatment rooms designed for
that purpose.
5.25. A shielded treatment room should not be shared between HDR/PDR
brachytherapy and external beam radiation therapy, as this can negatively
influence procedure flow and efficiency. Further guidance is given in Ref. [281].
5.26. The size of the treatment room will depend on many factors, including
the treatment equipment and the in-room imaging equipment and the intended
techniques of the various treatments to be carried out. The room should be large
enough to allow full extension of the couch in any direction, with sufficient space
for staff to walk around it. The design should also take account of the need for
larger treatment rooms to allow for specific procedures. For example, total body
irradiation may require a larger treatment distance to one wall; IORT procedures
require additional support staff and equipment, and the room may need to be
larger. Imaging systems for IGRT, especially CT-on-rails, also need extra
space. Easy access for patients on a bed or trolley, correct storage of accessory
equipment such as electron applicators or patient positioning and immobilization
devices, and ease of patient positioning and staff movement during the set-up
procedures may be better facilitated in a larger room. Careful placement of
accessory equipment within the room can help to minimize the walking distance
for each patient set-up. Further guidance is given in Refs [281–283].
5.27. Care should be taken when a new machine or unit is to be introduced into
an existing treatment room or bunker. The room size and shielding specification
should be consistent with the new equipment and practices. This can be
particularly relevant in the case of introducing IMRT, changing from 60Co to
linac or installing a non-isocentric unit, for instance.
5.28. Some current or future equipment integrations, such as MRI/cobalt/MRI
or MRI/linac/MRI, may have particular requirements that should be considered
in the room design to ensure both efficient and effective operation and radiation
protection and safety.
5.29. The treatment and imaging room designs should include an open access
conduit for the control panel, and monitoring and dosimetry equipment cables.
No duct should run orthogonally through a radiation barrier; it could either run
208

at an angle through the barrier or have one or more bends in it so that the total
length of the duct is greater than the thickness of the radiation barrier [282].
5.30. Entrance to the treatment room may be through a shielded door or a
maze or a combination of both. A maze reduces the need for a heavy shielded
door and provides a route for ventilation ducts and electrical conduits without
compromising the shielding. However, a maze requires more space. More
guidance on mazes and entrances is given in Refs [282, 283, 285].
5.31. Access to the treatment room should be furnished with a visible signal
indicating whether the radiation source is on or off. An interlock barrier to
prevent unauthorized access should be provided. This could include a light beam
or a physical barrier such as a gate or door. Preferably two such interlock barriers
should be in place. The interruption of irradiation should be maintained until the
interlock is reset after it has been verified that no person other than the patient is
inside the room and that the patient set-up has not changed. After an interruption,
provided no operating parameters are changed or reselected, it should be possible
to resume irradiation, but only from the equipment’s control panel (see also
para. 5.71).
5.32. The design should be such that access to the treatment (and imaging) rooms
should be visible to the operators at all times. Furthermore, the controls should
be installed in such a way that access to the treatment room can be monitored at
all times.
5.33. A safety system, such as a ‘last person out button’, should be in place to
ensure that all staff have left the room prior to the commencement of treatment.
5.34. Emergency off switches should be conveniently placed inside the treatment
room, in addition to those on the control panel and the equipment itself, to allow
interruption of the irradiation from inside the treatment room. These switches
should be positioned to avoid having to cross the primary beam when activating
them and to avoid any accidental actuation.
5.35. Adequate systems, audiovisual devices or other means should be provided
to allow staff to have communication with, and a clear and full view of, the
patient. Oral communication from the control panel should be possible with
the patient in the treatment (and imaging) room using an intercom or other
communication system.

209

5.36. When using sealed sources, a powered fail-safe area radiation monitor
(audiovisual) should be visible upon entering the room.
5.37. Provision should be made in each treatment room to enable the safe removal
of the patient in the event of a power outage (e.g. availability of flashlights
or torches). This also means that manual operation of heavy doors should be
possible.
5.38. Enclosed patient changing cubicles should not be located within the
treatment room.
Design of rooms within the radiation therapy facility: Storage and preparation
rooms for manual and LDR brachytherapy
5.39. Typical radiation protection and safety features for rooms used for the
storage and preparation of sealed radioactive sources for manual and LDR
brachytherapy include the following:
(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

(e)
(f)
(g)

210

The room should be provided with a lockable door to control access and to
maintain source security (see also paras 5.13 and 5.88).
There should be shielded storage (e.g. a safe) for all sources, the outer
surface of which should be made of fireproof materials. The safe should
be located near the preparation workbench to reduce any exposure of
personnel during the handling and transfer of sources.
The safe should have compartments for sources of different activities.
Each compartment should be marked so as to permit immediate and easy
identification of its contents from the outside with a minimum of exposure.
Sources should be readily identifiable by sight. When radioactive sources
of the same appearance but of different activities or activity distribution are
used, they should be distinguishable (e.g. by different coloured threads or
beads).
The workbench should be provided with L-block shielding, and with a lead
glass viewing window and a magnifying glass.
The work surface for source preparation should be smooth and seamless to
avoid losing small sources such as 192Ir wire fragments or small 125I seeds.
The source handling area should be well illuminated and a magnifying
glass in a fixed mounting should be available for viewing in order to handle
sources efficiently and with a minimum of radiation exposure.

(h)

(i)
(j)

(k)

(l)

Devices for handling sources, typically forceps, should be available. They
should be as long as practicable, compatible with efficient source handling.
A device should be provided for threading sources expeditiously with the
fingers protected by distance.
The source storage and preparation laboratory should have a sink with a
filter or trap to prevent sources being lost into the sewerage system.
There should be a clear indication of the radiation level in terms of ambient
dose equivalent. This should be provided either by an area radiation
monitor that is visible on entering the room and during any handling of the
unshielded sources, or by a survey meter that is available and in use during
source handling.
Hand carried transport containers should be provided with long handles.
The lid of the container should be securely fastened to prevent tipping and
dropping of sources during transport. Containers should bear the radiation
symbol as well as a warning sign.
Space should be available for trolleys for transporting sources.

Design of rooms within the radiation therapy facility: Patient rooms for manual
and LDR brachytherapy
5.40. It is preferable that patients’ rooms be single and adjacent to one another.
Where this is not possible, appropriate shielding between patients is necessary
to minimize to the external exposure from other patients in the room. Within
patients’ rooms, movable shielding for the nurses and potential visitors should be
provided whenever possible (see also para. 5.150).
5.41. The treatment room should contain a shielded storage container, large
enough to accept the applicators if necessary, and a remote handling tool (forceps)
for use in the event of a dislodged source.
5.42. An area radiation monitor should be placed at the entrance so as to detect
when a source or a patient with a source is leaving the room or the controlled
area. In order to ensure that after the treatment no source remains within the
patient, clothes or bed linen, or anywhere in the area, a portable monitor should
be available for monitoring these items.
5.43. For remote afterloading LDR units, the door to the room where the
treatment is given should be interlocked with the LDR system whenever possible.

211

Design of rooms within the radiation therapy facility: Imaging and other
non-treatment rooms
5.44. Patient preparation and imaging areas where radiation is used, such as
simulator rooms (CT, PET–CT and conventional simulators), together with their
console areas and patient changing areas, should be designed to ensure that the
requirements for occupational protection and protection of the public are met.
Details are given in paras 3.9–3.16 and 4.8–4.28, and further guidance is given in
Refs [281, 283].
Design of rooms within the radiation therapy facility: Shielding considerations
5.45. Radiation therapy facilities typically require significant shielding, especially
for the treatment rooms, to ensure that the requirements for occupational radiation
protection and radiation protection of the public are met. The nominal design
dose in occupied areas is derived by the process of constrained optimization
(i.e. selection of a source related dose constraint), with the condition that the
individual doses from all relevant sources be well below the dose limits for the
persons occupying the area to be shielded. Paragraphs 5.46–5.53 highlight some
considerations with respect to shielding design. Methodologies and data for
shielding calculations for treatment rooms are presented in Refs [282, 286, 287].
5.46. Care should be taken to avoid multiplication of conservative assumptions,
which can lead to unrealistic overestimates of the shielding required. Typical
conservative assumptions are: workload, use and occupancy factors are
overestimated; and the persons to be protected are considered as remaining
permanently in the most exposed place of the adjacent room. Therefore, a
balanced decision should be achieved and accumulation of overly conservative
measures that may go beyond optimization should be avoided.
5.47. However, from the other perspective, since corrections or additions after
radiation therapy facilities are completed can be difficult and expensive, it is also
advisable that the design includes consideration of possible future needs for new
equipment and changes in practice or use, increased workloads, and changes in
the occupancy of adjacent, above and below spaces.
5.48. The design and specification for the radiation shielding should be performed
by a medical physicist or a qualified expert in radiation protection to ensure that
the required level of occupational and public radiation protection is achieved.
The medical physicist or qualified expert in radiation protection should be
involved from the very beginning because shielding requirements may influence
212

decisions on where to site treatment and imaging rooms, and the type of building
construction. The medical physicist or qualified expert in radiation protection
should be provided with all relevant information with regard to the proposed
medical radiological equipment and its use, the type of building construction,
and the occupancy of nearby areas. The shielding assumptions and specifications
should be documented, and signed off by the medical physicist or qualified expert
in radiation protection and all documentation, including calculations, should
be archived for the lifetime of the facility. Depending on the State’s regulatory
requirements, it may also be necessary to submit the final shielding specifications
to the radiation protection regulatory body for review prior to construction.
5.49. The shielding of the radiation treatment room should be constructed so
that its integrity is not compromised by joints, by openings for ducts, pipes or
other objects passing through the barriers, or by conduits, service boxes, or other
structural elements embedded in the barriers.
5.50. The door to the treatment room and the design of the maze for high energy
machines requires special consideration to ensure adequate radiation protection
without sacrificing operational efficiency.
5.51. The medical physicist or qualified expert in radiation protection should
undertake site visits during construction to ensure that there has been, from the
radiation protection and safety perspective, the correct positioning of the joins
in the structure and to ensure that the concrete has been poured to avoid gaps or
cracks in the shielding and either that the ducting does not go through the primary
shielding or that it is not aligned with the primary beam. It is also advisable to
check that the concrete density is adequate.
5.52. A final assessment of the adequacy of the shielding should be performed by
the medical physicist or qualified expert in radiation protection after construction
and installation of the equipment has been completed prior to clinical use. This
may be achieved through a comprehensive radiation survey.
5.53. Shielding considerations for imaging and simulator rooms, depending on
the modalities used, are given in paras 3.18–3.24 and 4.32–4.36.
Medical radiological equipment, software and ancillary equipment
5.54. This subsection considers medical radiological equipment, software
and ancillary equipment used in a radiation therapy facility, including for
diagnosis, simulation, treatment planning, treatment delivery, verification and
213

follow-up. For treatment pre-planning and simulation, the equipment used may
include C-arms, conventional simulators, CT scanners, PET–CT, SPECT–CT,
MRI and ultrasound units. Medical radiological equipment used for external
beam radiotherapy includes superficial units (including units using Grenz rays
or Bucky rays), orthovoltage units, gamma ray teletherapy units, linacs, and
proton or heavy ion accelerators. While the radiological equipment used for
external beam radiotherapy falls into two main categories — linac based and
60
Co based equipment — the techniques used and therefore how the equipment
is constructed, its features and configurations vary enormously depending on
whether treatment is via conventional external beam radiotherapy, SRS, SBRT,
3-D conformal radiation therapy, IMRT, VMAT or other techniques. There are
generally three linac configurations: C-arm units (gantry based), ring based or
robotic arm based. Some external beam radiotherapy units incorporate imaging
systems, such as radiography, fluoroscopy, CT, kV-CBCT, MV-CBCT or MRI,
and can perform IGRT. Brachytherapy may be manual or remote and is classified
into contact, intracavitary or interstitial applications, which may be temporary
or permanent. Almost all brachytherapy is performed with sealed radioactive
sources but electronic brachytherapy systems with miniature X ray tubes are
available [288, 289]. Radiation therapy with unsealed sources is covered in
Section 4.
5.55. The requirements for medical radiological equipment and its software are
established in paras 3.49 and 3.162 of GSR Part 3 [3]. The IEC has published
international standards applicable to medical radiological equipment used in
radiation therapy. Current IEC standards relevant to radiation therapy include
Refs [285, 290–306] (for those relevant to the X ray based imaging systems used
in radiation therapy, see para. 3.28; and for those relevant to radiopharmaceutical
based imaging used in radiation therapy, see para. 4.41). It is recommended that
the IEC web site be visited to view the most up to date list of standards. ISO
publishes international standards applicable to medical radiological equipment
used in radiation therapy. Current ISO standards relevant to radiation therapy
include Refs [307–309]. It is recommended that the ISO web site be visited to
view the most up to date list of standards.
5.56. Guidance on X ray based medical radiological equipment used for imaging
as part of pre-treatment simulation, IGRT or for follow-up assessment, as
described in paras 5.3 and 5.54, is given in paras 3.27–3.41.
5.57. As licensees take responsibility for the radiation safety of medical
radiological equipment they use, they should impose purchasing specifications

214

that include conditions to meet relevant international standards of the IEC and
ISO or equivalent national standards. In some States, there may be an agency
with responsibilities for medical devices or a similar organization that gives type
approval to particular makes and models of medical radiological equipment.
Radiation sources, including radioactive material, equipment and accessories,
should be purchased only from suppliers who meet national requirements for
such dealings.
5.58. Displays, gauges and instructions on operating consoles of medical
radiological equipment, and accompanying instruction and safety manuals, might
be used by staff who do not understand, or who have a poor understanding of, the
manufacturer’s original language. In such cases, the accompanying documents
should comply with IEC and ISO standards and should be translated into the local
language or into a language acceptable to the local staff. The software, either
used in conjunction with medical radiological equipment or as part of treatment
planning (see also para. 5.78), should be designed so that it can be easily
converted into the local language, resulting in displays, symbols and instructions
that will be understood by the staff. The translations should be subject to a quality
assurance process to ensure proper understanding and to avoid operating errors.
The same should apply to maintenance and service manuals and instructions for
maintenance and service engineers and technicians who do not have an adequate
understanding of the original language (see also paras 2.104 and 2.137).
5.59. Procedures for the purchase, installation, acceptance, commissioning,
use, maintenance and quality control of all equipment (hardware and software)
should be developed with the involvement of a medical physicist, together with
other radiation therapy professionals as appropriate (e.g. medical radiological
practitioner, medical radiation technologist, biomedical engineer and
IT specialist) and the radiation therapy facility’s radiation protection committee
and quality assurance committee.
5.60. For medical radiological equipment in use, specific criteria of acceptability
should be defined in order to indicate when remedial action should be taken,
including, if appropriate, taking the equipment out of service. Examples of
criteria for remedial action and suspension from service are given in Ref. [184].
A strategy or transition period for replacement based on social and economic
factors is helpful (see also paras 5.228–5.247 on programmes of quality assurance
for medical exposure).

215

Design features for medical radiological equipment: General considerations
5.61. The design of medical radiological equipment should be such that its
performance is always reproducible, accurate and predictable, and that it has
features that facilitate the appropriate personnel in meeting the requirements
of paras 3.163 and 3.164 of GSR Part 3 [3] for operational optimization of
patient protection. Many design features contribute to the performance of
medical radiological equipment and should be considered when purchasing
such equipment (see paras 5.62–5.81). Further details on design features and
performance standards of medical radiological equipment used in radiation
therapy are given in Refs [290–296, 298–305] (see also paras 5.228–5.247 on
quality assurance and acceptance testing, in particular para. 5.240).
5.62. Medical radiological equipment should include provisions for selection,
reliable indication and confirmation (when appropriate and to the extent feasible)
of operating parameters such as type of radiation, indication of energy, beam
modifiers (such as filters and wedges), treatment distance, field size, beam
orientation and either treatment time or pre-set dose.
5.63. As noted in para. 5.55, radioactive sources for teletherapy and brachytherapy
should meet relevant international standards [307–309].
5.64. Units under software control that are designed to operate within certain
tolerances should have interruption mechanisms that stop the radiation when
the tolerances are exceeded. The equipment design should include the ability to
override the software control, but only by appropriate persons who have been
authorized by the radiation therapy facility’s licensee. When dynamic treatments
are interrupted owing to their being outside defined tolerances, there should be a
system or method available to resume and complete the treatment.
5.65. Medical radiological equipment using radioactive sources should be
fail-safe in the sense that the source will be automatically retracted to its shielded
position in the event of an interruption of power and will remain shielded until
the beam control mechanism is reactivated from the control panel.
5.66. Medical radiological equipment used in radiation therapy should be
provided with safety systems capable of preventing its use by unauthorized
personnel. A key should be required to energize the system, access to which
should be restricted to authorized staff.

216

5.67. External beam radiotherapy equipment containing radioactive sources and
remotely controlled afterloading brachytherapy (HDR/PDR/LDR) equipment
should be provided with a device to return sources manually to the shielded
position in the case of a failure of the source to retract. For SRS and SBRT units
using radioactive sources, it should be possible to close the shielding door on the
unit manually.
5.68. The design of safety interlocks should be such that operation of the
medical radiological equipment during maintenance procedures, if interlocks
are bypassed, can be performed only under direct control of the maintenance
personnel using appropriate devices, codes or keys.
5.69. Record and verify systems (RVSs) and their related interfaces with imaging
systems, treatment planning systems (TPSs), treatment delivery systems, and
image and administrative data storage systems (e.g. operational information
systems, PACS and RIS) should be systematically verified for all their
functionalities and data integrity. The RVSs should be able to store complete sets
of information, including the patient’s identification, prescription, treatment plan
and field parameters, and should allow this information to be entered and called
upon accurately for each treatment. The details about the treatment equipment,
including coordinates, scales and angles conventions used, beam energies,
available field sizes, and other parameters and limitations, should be entered, or
their entry should be supervised, by the medical physicist. The system should be
subject to periodic quality control because, if these parameters are incorrectly
introduced into the RVS, systematic treatment errors will occur. Detailed
guidance on RVSs is given in Refs [305, 310].
5.70. The transfer and integrity of data, including patient information, should
be maintained throughout the radiation therapy facility’s network. Thus, the IT
specialist should be familiar with the radiation therapy process and should work
in close cooperation with the radiological oncology team (radiological medical
practitioner, medical radiation technologist and medical physicist).
Design features for medical radiological equipment: External beam radiotherapy
5.71. Medical radiological equipment used for external beam radiotherapy
should meet the specifications given in relevant IEC standards [290–293, 298,
299, 302, 304] and should follow the guidance on design specifications and

217

performance provided in Refs [281, 311–313], as appropriate. In addition to the
recommendations given in paras 5.61–5.70, the following considerations should
also be included:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

(e)
(f)

Safety interlocks or other means designed to prevent the clinical use of the
machine in conditions other than those selected at the control panel should
be provided.
The design of equipment should permit interruption of the treatment from
the control panel; after the interruption, resumption of treatment should be
possible only from the control panel.
Radiation beam control mechanisms should be provided, including devices
that indicate clearly and in a fail-safe manner whether the beam is on or off
(see also para. 5.21).
The radiation field within the treatment area in the absence of any radiation
beam modifiers (such as wedges or multileaf collimators) should be as
uniform as practicable and the non-uniformity should be stated by the
supplier. The non-uniformity of flattening filter free beams should also be
specified by the supplier.
The design of the unit should be such that dose rates outside the treatment
area due to radiation leakage or scattering are kept as low as reasonably
achievable.
If primary shielding is incorporated into the equipment, electrical or
mechanical interlocks should be provided to avoid the beam being directed
towards secondary barriers if the primary shielding is not intercepting the
beam.

5.72. When designing accelerators producing high energy X ray beams
(>10 MV), manufacturers should minimize potential hazards from neutron
activation of patients and materials in the treatment room (induced radioactivity
secondary to radiotherapy) [314].
Design features for medical radiological equipment: Brachytherapy
5.73. Medical radiological equipment used for brachytherapy should meet
the specifications given in Ref. [294] and should follow the guidance in
Refs [281, 315], as appropriate.

218

5.74. LDR, PDR and HDR sources should be accompanied by a source certificate
specifying:
(a)
(b)

The source strength in terms of reference air kerma rate in air or equivalent
quantity as recommended by the ICRU [316], at a specified distance, for a
specified date (see also para. 5.208(b));
The quality control tests applied to the source including leakage and
contamination tests.

5.75. Applicators for brachytherapy should be manufactured specifically for
the source to be used or should be compatible with it. Use of reusable LDR
radioactive sources after the working lifetime recommended by the manufacturer
should be continued only after leak testing by the medical physicist or RPO and
approval by the regulatory body.
5.76. Where manual brachytherapy sources incorporating 226Ra or encapsulated
137
Cs are still in use, efforts should be made to replace them as soon as practicable
with modern afterloading systems. In no case should sources be left in applicators
(pre-loaded applicators) in between clinical procedures, to avoid encapsulation or
applicator rupture due to radiation damage. When not in use, all brachytherapy
sources should be stored safely and securely.
5.77. Sources using beta emitters, such as 90Sr and 106Ru in ophthalmic
applicators, should be provided with low atomic number shielding to minimize
bremsstrahlung while they are in storage and in preparation for use.
Design features for treatment planning systems
5.78. The capabilities of TPSs have evolved in parallel with advances in computers
and computing. Depending on the TPS, these capabilities may include complex
3-D or 4-D image manipulation and dose calculations. The design features for the
TPS should meet the clinical goals of the radiation therapy facility. TPSs should
meet the standards given in Ref. [304], and should follow the guidance on TPSs,
including specifications and performance, given in Refs [281, 317–319].
Design features for simulators and imaging equipment
5.79. The role of radiation therapy simulators, as distinct from imaging
devices, has changed in recent years with wide bore CT scanners becoming
more prevalent and integral to the treatment planning and follow-up. Where
conventional simulators are used, these should meet the specifications given in
219

IEC standards [295, 296, 300, 301] and should follow the recommendations of
Refs [281, 320, 321]. CT scanners used as virtual simulators should be designed
so that patients can be simulated in the treatment position; this should include
the positioning lasers, which should be consistent with those of the treatment
room. As noted in para. 5.56, guidance on medical radiological equipment used
for imaging as part of radiation therapy, either pre-treatment, during treatment
(IGRT) or for follow-up, is given in paras 3.27–3.41 and 4.45–4.51 (see also
paras 5.3, 5.26 and 5.207).
5.80. Guidance applicable to C-arm imaging devices used in brachytherapy is
given in paras 3.38 and 3.39.
5.81. Guidance applicable to PET–CT scanners used for radiotherapy planning
and follow-up, as well as for range assessment in proton facilities, is given in
para. 4.49.
Ancillary equipment
5.82. The radiation therapy facility should have equipment, instruments and
test objects for reference and relative dosimetry appropriate for the type of
measurement necessary for beam characterization and quality control. This may
include ionization chambers (thimble, plane-parallel and well-type ionization
chambers), solid-state detectors, detectors for small field dosimetry, electrometers,
thermometers, barometers, phantoms, and geometry and mechanical test tools.
Further guidance on appropriate equipment, instruments and test objects is given
in Refs [281, 297, 306, 313, 322, 323].
5.83. Immobilization devices are now more commonly prepared in the simulation
area, and multileaf collimators remove the need for shielding blocks in most
cases. For radiation therapy facilities without multileaf collimators, a mould
room (also known as a patient preparation area or workshop) should be available
that is equipped to prepare beam modifiers, positioning aids and immobilization
devices (e.g. blocks, compensators and bolus). Where blocks are still prepared,
electronic transfer of data from the TPS to the automatic cutting and milling
machines would represent an advantage in terms of accuracy.
5.84. In addition to laser positioning beams, the radiation therapy facility may
need to have other positioning devices, including surface optical scanners, radio
frequency systems, body GPS transmitters and ultrasound units.

220

5.85. For manual brachytherapy, the radiation therapy facility should be
equipped with radiation protection and safety equipment, including a radiation
detector such as a Geiger–Müller counter, source handling equipment including
a magnifying glass, source manipulators (such as forceps, tweezers or tongs),
clippers or wire cutters, and several shielded containers.
5.86. For remote afterloading brachytherapy, the radiation therapy facility should
be equipped for source handling in the case of a failure of the afterloading
unit, including a storage container present in the treatment room to serve as an
emergency source container in case of failure of the afterloader in retracting the
source, a remote manipulator, wire cutters and a suitable radiation monitoring
instrument for source localization.
5.87. The radiation therapy facility should be equipped with radiation monitoring
instruments (area monitors and portable survey meters) based on Geiger–Müller
detectors, ionization chambers and/or scintillators. For accelerators producing
high energy X ray beams (>10 MV), access to a neutron monitoring instrument
is recommended.
Security of sources
5.88. The objective of source security is to ensure continuity in the control and
accountability of each source at all times in order to meet the requirement of
para. 3.53 of GSR Part 3 [3]. Further details on the security of sealed sources
can be found in Ref. [232]. In a radiation therapy facility, the sources include
sealed sources used in teletherapy and brachytherapy, and sealed sources used
for calibration or quality control tests. Situations that are particularly critical
with respect to security of sources in a radiation therapy facility include receipt
of sources, storage of sources and movement of sources within the facility. The
licensee of the radiation therapy facility should develop procedures to ensure
the safe receipt and movement of radioactive sources within the institution and
should establish controls to prevent the theft, loss and unauthorized withdrawal
of radioactive materials or the entrance of unauthorized personnel to controlled
areas. An inventory of sources should be maintained, and procedures should be
put in place to check and confirm that the sources are in their assigned locations
and are secure.
Maintenance
5.89. Paragraphs 3.15(i) and 3.41 of GSR Part 3 [3] establish requirements for
maintenance to ensure that sources meet their design requirements for protection
221

and safety throughout their lifetime and to prevent accidents as far as reasonably
practicable. Therefore, the licensee of the radiation therapy facility should
establish the necessary arrangements and coordination with the manufacturer
before initial operation and on an ongoing basis. This can be achieved through
a maintenance contract (preventive maintenance and corrective maintenance)
with the manufacturer, or by in-house staff or third party contractor only if
appropriately trained and authorized (see also para. 2.114).
5.90. Maintenance includes not just maintenance of the medical radiological
equipment and its hardware, but also of software, networks, data bases and other
supporting systems in the radiation therapy facility (e.g. HIS, PACS and RIS).
5.91. In addition to the guidance in paras 2.112 and 2.113, the licensee of the
radiation therapy facility should ensure that the process of removal from, and
return to, clinical service of radiation therapy medical radiological equipment
for maintenance, following breakdown or exchange of sources includes the
following:
(a)

(b)

A record of maintenance carried out should be kept for each item of
equipment. This should include information on any defects found by users
(a fault log), remedial actions taken (both interim repairs and subsequent
repairs) and the results of testing before equipment is reintroduced to
clinical use.
Where maintenance of the therapy and imaging equipment or treatment
planning equipment may affect the accuracy of the physical or clinical
dosimetry or the safe operation of the equipment, para. 3.167(b) of
GSR Part 3 [3] requires that a radiation therapy medical physicist perform
specific tests or measurements to determine that the equipment is operating
satisfactorily before it is used to treat patients.

5.92. The electrical safety and mechanical safety aspects of the medical
radiological equipment are an important part of the maintenance programme,
as these can have direct or indirect effects on radiation protection and safety.
This work should be performed by appropriately authorized persons who
understand the specifications of the medical radiological equipment (see also
paras 2.112–2.114). Electrical and mechanical maintenance should be included in
the programme of quality assurance and should be performed, preferably by the
manufacturer of the medical radiological equipment or an authorized agent, at a
frequency recommended by the manufacturer. Servicing should include a written
report describing the findings. These reports and follow-up corrective actions
should be archived as part of the programme of quality assurance.
222

OCCUPATIONAL RADIATION PROTECTION
5.93. In radiation therapy radiological procedures, as described in paras 5.1–5.8,
occupationally exposed individuals are usually medical radiation technologists,
radiological medical practitioners (typically radiation oncologists) and medical
physicists. In some radiation therapy facilities, other health professionals, such as
nurses, may also be considered occupationally exposed.
5.94. Additional occupationally exposed personnel may include dosimetrists,
biomedical, clinical and service engineers and some contractors, depending on
their role.
5.95. Other radiation therapy facility workers such as social workers, dieticians,
physiotherapists, patient porters, orderlies, assistants, cleaning and other service
support personnel, and workers in the wider medical facility where the nuclear
medicine facility is located, for whom radiation sources are not required by, or
directly related to, their work, are required to have the same level of protection
as members of the public, as established in para. 3.78 of GSR Part 3 [3].
Consequently, the recommendations provided in paras 5.286–5.291 are also
applicable in respect of such workers. Rules should be established for these
workers, especially with regard to access to controlled areas and supervised areas.
5.96. This subsection contains guidance very specific to radiation therapy. More
general and comprehensive guidance on occupational radiation protection is
given in GSG-7 [23], including guidance on radiation protection programmes,
assessment of occupational exposure and providers of dosimetry services,
applicable to all areas of radiation use (including non-medical uses).
Arrangements under the radiation protection programme
Classification of areas
5.97. Various areas and rooms in a radiation therapy facility should be classified
as controlled areas or supervised areas, in line with the requirements established
in paras 3.88–3.92 of GSR Part 3 [3]. All other rooms and areas that are not so
designated are considered as being in the public domain, and levels of radiation
in these areas should be low enough to ensure compliance with the dose limits for
public exposure. Paragraphs 5.98–5.101 give general guidance, and it would be
expected that final decisions by the licensee for a given medical radiation facility
would be based on the expert advice of the medical physicist, a qualified expert
in radiation protection or the RPO.
223

5.98. In a radiation therapy facility, all treatment rooms for external beam
radiotherapy and remote afterloading brachytherapy, operating theatres used
during brachytherapy procedures with radioactive sources, brachytherapy patient
rooms, radioactive source storage and handling areas, and rooms where imaging
or simulation procedures are performed meet the criteria for controlled areas and
should be so designated.
5.99. Supervised areas might include the areas surrounding brachytherapy
patients’ rooms or around radioactive source storage and handling areas.
5.100. The area around the control panel for all medical radiological equipment
used in radiation therapy should be classified as either a controlled area or a
supervised area, even though the radiation levels may be very low owing to the
shielding design. In either case, this area should have restricted access, inter alia,
to avoid distraction of staff, which could lead to accidental medical exposure of
patients.
5.101. In order to avoid uncertainties about the extent of controlled areas and
supervised areas, the boundaries of such areas should, when possible, be walls
and doors, partitions or other physical barriers, clearly marked or identified with
suitable warning signs.
Local rules and procedures
5.102. Paragraph 3.93 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes a hierarchy of preventive
measures for protection and safety with engineered controls, including structured
and ancillary shielding, specific physical barriers, signs and interlocks, being
supported by administrative controls and personal protective equipment. To
this end, and as established in para. 3.94 of GSR Part 3 [3], written local rules
and procedures are required in any radiation therapy facility. Their purpose is to
ensure protection and safety for workers and other persons. Such local rules and
procedures should include measures to minimize occupational radiation exposure
both for normal work and in unusual events. The local rules and procedures
should also cover the wearing, handling and storing of personal dosimeters,
and should specify investigation levels and ensuing follow-up actions (see also
paras 5.159–5.178).
5.103. Since all personnel involved in using radiation in radiation therapy need
to know and follow the local rules and procedures, the development and review
of these local rules and procedures should involve representatives of all health
professionals involved in radiation therapy.
224

5.104. Equipment (both hardware and software) should be operated in a
manner that ensures satisfactory performance at all times with respect to both the
tasks to be accomplished and radiation protection and safety. The manufacturer’s
operating manual is an important resource in this respect, but additional
procedures should also be considered. The final documented set of operational
procedures should be subject to approval by the licensee of the radiation therapy
facility, and should be incorporated into the facility’s management system (see
paras 2.138–2.149).
5.105. Radiation therapy staff should understand the documented procedures
for the operation of the equipment with which they work, including the safety
features, and should be trained, with periodic refresher training, in what to do if
things go wrong. Additional education and training should be conducted when
new devices or techniques are introduced into radiation therapy practice.
5.106. Many local rules and procedures address some or all aspects of
occupational radiation protection, patient radiation protection and public radiation
protection, either directly or indirectly, as well as providing for a successful
application of the treatment. Paragraphs 5.107–5.146 give recommendations
that should be incorporated into the radiation therapy facility’s local rules and
procedures. They are placed in this section on occupational radiation protection
because they are to be followed by workers, but they will often also have
significance for patient and public radiation protection.
5.107. For external beam radiotherapy, HDR and PDR brachytherapy, no one
should be in the treatment room during the delivery of treatment, except the
patient being treated. All attending personnel should be in appropriately shielded
areas.
5.108. Safety features such as interlocks, the presence of accessories such
as the T-bar for manual 60Co source retraction and the functionality of survey
meters should be checked daily prior to patient treatment. More detail is given in
Ref. [281], and see also para. 5.240 on quality control tests in general.
5.109. Sealed sources should be subject to leak tests prior to their first use and
at regular intervals thereafter, in conformity with international standards [308].
These tests should be sufficiently sensitive to be able to detect the presence of
very small amounts of removable contamination, for example 0.2 kBq.

225

5.110. Area surveys should be performed periodically (e.g. every six months)
around all treatment units and check sources, including 60Co units, shielded safes
and source storage facilities for LDR, PDR and HDR sources.
5.111. Local rules for pregnant workers and persons under the age of 18 should
reflect the guidance given in paras 5.182–5.185 and 5.186, respectively.
Specific local rules and procedures for external beam radiotherapy
5.112. The safe operation of external beam radiotherapy units requires
procedures for area surveys, interlock checks, leak tests (for sealed sources)
and procedures for contingencies such as a source becoming stuck in the on
position or partially in the on position. Such procedures require that the necessary
equipment be available, calibrated and in working order, including:
(a)
(b)
(c)

A radiation monitor;
Leak test capabilities (for radioactive sources);
Personal alarm dosimeters, especially for unplanned exposures.

5.113. The procedures for the use of radiation monitoring equipment should
take into account that some instruments can give erroneous readings in a high
radiation field, and that this phenomenon, if it occurs, can be addressed by
starting the monitoring from outside the room in which the source is located
(i.e. monitoring from the lower to the higher dose rate areas).
5.114. The presence of other staff in the area of the control panel should be
kept to the minimum necessary so as to avoid distraction to the medical radiation
technologist, as stated in para. 5.100.
5.115. As described in para. 5.109, regular leak tests should be performed for
sealed sources. For external beam radiotherapy, the method that should be used is
an indirect leak test of the nearest accessible surface.
5.116. Irradiation that involves the extended use of high energy X rays, such
as beam calibration, dosimetry and quality control measurements, should be
scheduled to take place at the end of the day’s clinical roster so that neutron
activated radionuclides (especially the longer lived ones) can decay significantly
overnight.

226

Specific local rules and procedures for brachytherapy
5.117. An inventory of sources should be maintained, giving the radionuclide,
location and activity with reference date of each source at the facility as well as
its serial or batch number, and a unique identifier. The unique identifier may be
either a colour coded identifier or an alphanumeric identifier.
5.118. Sources should never be left on preparation surfaces. They should be
either in storage, in transit or in use.
5.119. As described in para. 5.109, regular leak tests should be performed for
sealed sources. For long lived LDR brachytherapy sources, the typical method
used is a direct moist wipe leak test, while for remote controlled brachytherapy
the method to be used is an indirect wipe test of the nearest accessible surface. For
an HDR/PDR unit, the leak tests should be carried out only on the afterloading
drive assembly and transport containers, since the source itself has too high a
dose rate to allow a direct wipe test.
5.120. As stated in para. 5.110, area surveys should be performed periodically
around the source storage facilities for LDR, HDR, PDR brachytherapy and
sources to be used in permanent implants.
5.121. The source storage facilities should be marked to indicate that they
contain radioactive materials, and instructions should be provided on how
to contact the RPO, medical physicist or other responsible radiation safety
individual in the event of an emergency.
5.122. Source storage rooms should be kept locked at all times, except when
access is required to remove or return a source.
5.123. After every brachytherapy treatment, all brachytherapy sources should
be removed from the patient, except in the case of permanent implants. The
patient should be monitored with a radiation survey meter to ensure that no
radioactive source remains in or on the patient. Bed linen, dressings, clothing,
waste and equipment should be kept within the room where the removal of
sources takes place until all sources are accounted for, and should be monitored
with a radiation detector. Mobile containers and portable equipment containing
radioactive sources should be removed to storage or to a secure place when not
in use.

227

5.124. Sterilization processes in brachytherapy should be appropriate and
should be consistent with manufacturer’s recommendations to prevent damage to
sources and applicators that could affect safety.
5.125. Among other safety checks, the catheters, couplings and transfer tubes
should be checked before and after each treatment, to ensure that there are no
obstacles to prevent motion of the source. Further details on safety checks are
given in Ref. [324].
Specific local rules and procedures for brachytherapy: Additional for LDR
sources
5.126. In the case of temporary LDR brachytherapy applications, both manual
as well as remotely controlled, the following information should be displayed
at the entrance to the treatment room: identification of the patient, sources, date
and time of insertion and removal, nursing required, time/distance allowance for
nurses and visitors and the use of mobile shielding where available, and concise
instructions for the unplanned removal of a source or applicator and for dealing
with an emergency, including contact details. A patient with a removable source
in or on the body should leave the room only in exceptional circumstances and
should be accompanied by an attendant from the radiation therapy facility at all
times.
5.127. Reusable sources should be inspected visually for possible damage after
each use, by means of magnifying viewers and a leaded viewing window in a
shielded work area.
5.128. There should be a diagram at the source storage safe that shows the
exact location of each source within the safe, thus reducing the time taken to
locate and identify a source.
5.129.

Sources should be handled only with long forceps or tongs.

5.130. A mobile shielded container should be available for transporting sources
and the shortest route possible should be used. The container should have a long
handle and/or a long handled trolley should be used.
5.131. Reusable sources that come into direct contact with body tissues will
require cleaning and sterilization after each use. This can subject the sources
to possible damage from heat, abrasion, chemicals and mechanical stresses.
Therefore, such sources should be inspected before and after every use.
228

5.132. Work surfaces should be continuous, easy to clean and brightly lit to
make it easy to find any sources that have been dropped.
5.133. If the source storage and preparation room is also the applicator loading
room, there should be a sink for cleaning the applicators. However, a sink can
also lead to a loss of sources to the sewerage system when a source is left in the
applicator or a patient removes a source and puts it in the sink. Such situations
are preventable by placing a filter in the sink’s drain.
Specific local rules and procedures for brachytherapy: Additional for
HDR/PDR sources
5.134. The HDR/PDR afterloader should undergo routine quality assurance
tests at the beginning of each treatment day [324].
5.135. Emergency safety precautions require the availability of an emergency
container in the treatment room, as well as an emergency kit containing surgical
clamps and long handled forceps for manipulation of the source guide tubes and
applicators if the source fails to return to the safe, or for other source retrieval
actions. The emergency container should be placed close to the patient and should
be sufficiently large that it can accept the entire applicator assembly containing
the source removed from the patient.
5.136. Manufacturers provide suggested emergency procedures to be
implemented if the source fails to return to the safe. These generally consist of
a short single page synopsis, suitable for posting in an appropriate place, of the
necessary sequential steps involved in the emergency procedure. The procedures
assume that the physical integrity of the applicator is maintained. These
procedures are specific to the actual afterloading unit, but, in general, each step
assumes that if the previous action fails to lead to recovery, then the subsequent
actions are required. The general sequence is the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Observation at the console of an error message and emergency indicators
(audible and visible alarms);
Recovery at the console (e.g. pressing an emergency source retract button);
Entry into the room with a portable radiation survey meter (opening the
door activates the interlock that retracts the source);
Observation of radiation levels in the room (by mounted monitors or
portable survey meters);
Recovery at the afterloading unit (pressing an emergency source retract
button on the remote afterloading unit);
229

(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)

Manual retraction of the source (using a hand crank);
Survey of the patient and survey of the afterloader (confirming that the
source is in the safe);
Removal of the applicator and placement in the emergency container;
Survey of the patient and survey of the emergency container (to confirm
that the source is not in the patient and that it is in the emergency container);
Removal of the patient from the vault with subsequent redundant survey
monitoring;
Informing of the personnel responsible for the maintenance of the
afterloader, the RPO and, depending on national rules, the regulatory body.

Specific local rules and procedures for remote control afterloading
brachytherapy
5.137. Remote afterloading equipment requires specific mitigatory procedures,
as these are especially critical for HDR/PDR brachytherapy. These procedures
are dealt with in paras 5.316–5.319. A shielded container large enough to
accommodate the largest applicator set should be kept next to the unit in case the
source gets stuck.
Specific local rules and procedures for manual brachytherapy
5.138. For implants with sources of different activities, after verification of
the source strength, the source or source holder should be marked with a unique
identifier (e.g. a pre-established colour that cannot be compromised by body
fluids), to facilitate visual recognition and to prevent the possibility of confusion
between different sources or batches. Containers utilized for the transport
of radioactive sources should conform with the requirements established in
SSR-6 (Rev. 1) [279] (see also paras 5.324–5.326).
5.139. The movements of the sources from the time they leave the safe until
their return (if applicable) should be recorded, with the signature of the person
responsible for the move (using forms or a log book). A person should be
assigned to be in charge of accountability for the sources. This person should
keep a record of the source request and of its issuance from, and its return to, the
safe, with signatures (see also para. 5.88).
5.140. Reusable sources should be inspected visually for possible damage after
each use by means of magnifying viewers and a leaded viewing window in a
shielded work area.

230

5.141. Sources should be handled only with long forceps or tongs, never
directly with the fingers.
5.142. A mobile shielded container should be available for transporting sources
and the shortest route possible should be used. The container should have a long
handle or a long handled trolley should be used.
5.143. Reusable sources that come into direct contact with body tissues will
require cleaning and sterilization after each use. This can subject the sources to
possible damage from heat, abrasion, chemical attack and mechanical stresses.
Therefore, such sources should be inspected after every use.
5.144.

Available safety features listed in para. 5.39 should be effectively used.

5.145. Precautions to be observed during the cutting and handling of 192Ir wires
should include ensuring that:
(a)

(b)
(c)

Appropriate tools and equipment such as forceps, cutting devices and
magnifying glasses and good illumination of the work surface are available
and used and that, if 192Ir wires are cut off for immediate use, a container to
hold cut lengths is provided and labelled;
Radioactive waste is collected and stored in adequate containers, and
properly transferred to another appropriate licensee or an authorized waste
disposal facility (see also paras 5.292 and 5.293);
Surfaces and tools are properly decontaminated.

Specific local rules and procedures for imaging and simulation
5.146. Local rules and procedures for performing imaging procedures as part
of pre-planning and simulation should follow the guidance, where appropriate,
given in paras 3.60–3.86 and 4.70–4.104. Additional information relevant to local
rules specific to using imaging equipment as part of IGRT is given in Ref. [321].
Personal protective equipment and in-room protective devices
5.147. Paragraphs 3.93 and 3.95 of GSR Part 3 [3] require that personal
protective equipment and in-room protective devices be available and used when
structural shielding and administrative controls alone cannot provide the required
level of occupational radiation protection. The need for this protective equipment
should be established by the RPO or by the medical physicist at the radiation
therapy facility.
231

5.148. For current procedures in external beam radiotherapy, personal protective
equipment is not usually needed. However, during patient preparation, source
implantation or manual afterloading techniques in brachytherapy, and in the
simulation or pre-planning phase when imaging equipment is in use (e.g. C-arm,
CT and PET–CT), the relevant recommendations given in paras 3.89–3.99, 4.110
and 4.111 covering these procedures should be applied.
5.149. In the case of manual handling of sources for brachytherapy, protective
equipment such as shielding blocks on the workbench and a lead glass screen
should be used, as well as appropriate devices for handling sources (see
paras 5.142 and 5.145).
5.150. For nursing of brachytherapy patients with either temporary (137Cs or
192
Ir) or permanent implants (125I seeds), consideration should be given to the use
of movable shielding in the ward. Further advice is given in Ref. [325].
5.151. Protective equipment for emergencies in brachytherapy (e.g. a stuck
source in HDR) should include an emergency container suitable for applicators
and sources (see also paras 5.316–5.319 on procedures for contingencies).
Workplace monitoring
5.152. Paragraphs 3.96–3.98 of GSR Part 3 [3] establish the requirements and
responsibilities for workplace monitoring. Workplace monitoring comprises
measurements made in the working environment and the interpretation of
the results. Workplace monitoring serves several purposes, including routine
monitoring, special monitoring for specific occasions, activities or tasks, and
confirmatory monitoring to check assumptions made about exposure conditions.
Workplace monitoring can be used to verify the occupational doses of personnel
whose work involves exposure to predictable low levels of radiation. It is
particularly important for staff members who are not individually monitored.
Further general guidance on workplace monitoring is given in GSG-7 [23].
5.153. Workplace monitoring in areas around each item of medical radiological
equipment (therapy and imaging) in the radiation therapy facility, when it is
being operated, should be carried out when:
(a)
(b)
232

The room and shielding construction has been completed, regardless of
whether it is a new construction or a renovation, and before the room is first
used clinically;
New or substantially refurbished equipment is commissioned;

(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

Source replacements have taken place in teletherapy or remote controlled
brachytherapy;
New software for the medical radiological equipment is installed or there is
a significant upgrade;
New techniques are introduced;
Servicing of the medical radiological equipment has been performed, which
could have an impact on the radiation delivered.

5.154. Initial workplace monitoring includes measurements of radiation
leakage from the equipment and the radiation levels of the accessible areas
around, above and below irradiation rooms using suitable phantoms. This initial
monitoring should be performed as part of acceptance tests, prior to clinical use
of the equipment.
5.155. In addition, dose rates in teletherapy rooms with radioactive sources
and in HDR brachytherapy treatment rooms should be continuously monitored
through the use of permanently installed area radiation monitors. The source
storage and handling area should be monitored with a survey meter immediately
following the removal from, or return to, storage of brachytherapy sources.
5.156. For treatment rooms where the possibility of induced activity exists,
for example with protons, heavy ions and high energy X ray beams (>10 MV),
consideration should be given to the use of appropriate area monitors to detect
the presence of neutrons and other radiation being from emitted from induced
radionuclides in the treatment room [314, 326].
5.157. Workplace monitoring should be done in association with brachytherapy
procedures. Soon after implantation of the sources, a survey of dose rates in the
vicinity of the patient is necessary.
5.158. Survey meters used for workplace monitoring should normally be
calibrated in terms of ambient dose equivalent. In radiation therapy procedures,
the quantity is the ambient dose equivalent, H*(10), and the unit is the sievert
(Sv) and its submultiples. The calibration should be traceable to a standards
dosimetry laboratory. The meters should be subject to regular quality control
tests (see also para. 5.245).

233

Assessment of occupational exposure and health surveillance for workers
Assessment of occupational exposure
5.159. The purpose of monitoring and dose assessment is, inter alia, to provide
information about the exposure of workers and to confirm good working practices
and regulatory compliance. Paragraph 3.100 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes the
requirement of individual monitoring for “any worker who usually works in a
controlled area, or who occasionally works in a controlled area and may receive
a significant dose from occupational exposure”. Workers who may require
individual monitoring include radiation oncologists, medical physicists, medical
radiation technologists, the RPO, biomedical engineers, maintenance and
servicing personnel, and any nursing or other staff who need to spend time with
patients with implanted radioactive sources.
5.160. Monitoring involves more than just measurement. It includes
interpretation, assessment, investigation and reporting, which may lead to
corrective measures, if necessary. Individual external doses can be assessed
by using individual monitoring devices, which include thermoluminescent
dosimeters, optical stimulated luminescent dosimeters, radiophotoluminiscent
dosimeters, film badges and electronic dosimeters. Individual monitoring devices
should be calibrated and should be traceable to a standards dosimetry laboratory
(for more detailed guidance, see GSG-7 [23]).
5.161. With the exception of electronic dosimeters used sequentially by several
workers with individual doses recorded separately, each personal dosimeter
should be used for monitoring only the person to whom it is issued, for work
performed at that radiation therapy facility, and it should not be taken to other
facilities where that person may also work. For example, if a person is issued with
a dosimeter at hospital A, it should be worn only at hospital A and not at any other
hospitals or medical centres where he or she also works. Monitoring results can
then be interpreted for the person working in a specific radiation therapy facility,
and this will allow appropriate review of the effectiveness of the optimization
of protection and safety for that individual in that facility. However, national
regulatory requirements may differ from this advice, and they would need to be
followed in those jurisdictions in which they apply (see also paras 5.172–5.174).
5.162. The monitoring period (period of dosimeter deployment) specified by
regulatory bodies in most States is typically in the range of one to three months.
A one month monitoring period is usually used for persons performing procedures
associated with higher occupational exposure. A longer monitoring period (two
234

or three months) is more typical for personnel exposed to lower doses, as a one
month cycle would usually mean that the actual occupational dose is less than
the minimum detection level of the dosimeter, resulting in no detectable doses.
With a longer cycle, it is more likely that a reading can be obtained. Unnecessary
delays in the return, reading and reporting of the dose recorded on dosimeters
should be avoided. Dosimeters should be sent from the radiation therapy facility
to the dosimetry service provider, which should then process the dosimeters
and return the dose reports, all in a timely manner. Some regulatory bodies may
specify a performance criterion for timely reporting.
5.163. The operational dosimetric quantity used is the personal dose equivalent
Hp(d ). For weakly penetrating radiation and strongly penetrating radiation,
the recommended depths, d, are 0.07 mm and 10 mm, respectively. Radiation
used in radiation therapy is usually strongly penetrating radiation and therefore
d = 10 mm, except in the use of beta sources for brachytherapy. Hp(10) is used
to provide an estimate of effective dose that avoids both underestimation and
excessive overestimation [23].
5.164. For monitoring the skin and extremities, a depth of 0.07 mm (d = 0.07)
is recommended, and Hp(0.07) is used to provide an estimate of equivalent
dose to the skin and extremities. When the possibility of substantial exposure
of the hands exists, such as in the handling of brachytherapy sources, extremity
dosimeters should be worn (if this is compatible with good clinical practice).
5.165. For monitoring the lens of the eye, a depth of 3 mm (d = 3) is
recommended, and Hp(3) is used to provide an estimate of equivalent dose to
the lens of the eye. In practice, however, the use of Hp(3) has not been widely
implemented for routine individual monitoring. In radiation therapy, it is
generally expected that the dose to the lens of the eye is not significantly higher
than for the rest of the body. A possible exception is in the handling of sources
for preparation and insertion, but the accepted practice of using a workbench
provided with L-block shielding with a lead glass viewing window should
adequately protect the eyes. Nonetheless, monitoring of dose to the lens of the
eye may be considered in these or similar cases.
5.166. There are three dose limits applicable to workers in radiation therapy:
the limit for effective dose, and the limits for equivalent dose to the lens of the eye
and to the skin and extremities. The dosimeter being worn will be used to estimate
one or more of the quantities used for the dose limits. Depending on the work
performed by the person being individually monitored, there may be a preferred
position for wearing the dosimeter, and more than one dosimeter may be used. In
235

radiation therapy, dosimeters are usually worn on the front of the upper torso, as
occupational exposure arising from most radiation therapy procedures results in
the whole body being fairly uniformly exposed. If specialized dosimeters, such
as ring dosimeters for monitoring finger doses, are necessary, the manufacturer’s
specific wearing instructions should be followed.
5.167. When not in use, individual dosimeters should be kept in a dedicated
place and should be protected from damage or from irradiation. If an individual
loses his or her dosimeter, the individual should inform the RPO, who should
perform a dose assessment, record this evaluation of the dose and add it to the
individual’s dose record. Where there is a national dose registry, it should be
updated with the dose estimate in a timely manner. The most reliable method for
estimating an individual’s dose is to use his or her recent dose history. In cases
where the individual performs non-routine types of work, it may be better to use
the doses of co-workers experiencing similar exposure conditions as the basis for
the dose estimate.
5.168. In some cases, occupational doses can be estimated from the results of
workplace monitoring. The effective dose for personnel can be inferred from
the measured ambient dose equivalent H*(10), provided the dose gradient in the
workplace is relatively low. The ICRP [119] provides conversion coefficients
from ambient dose equivalent to effective dose for different types of radiation
and energy. The conversion coefficients for photons are close to unity except for
very low energy, such as the energy of scattered photons from an X ray beam
generated at a low kV.
5.169. Additional direct reading operational dosimeters, such as electronic
dosimeters, should be considered for use in a radiation therapy facility, for
example in a new facility or with the introduction of new modalities or
procedures, as these devices can give the worker an instant indication of both the
cumulative dose and the current dose rate and also allow pre-setting of an alarm
to alert when a given level has been reached [23]. They will also be helpful in
accidents or emergency situations (see paras 5.306–5.323).
Investigation levels for staff exposure
5.170. Investigation levels are different from dose constraints and dose limits;
they are a tool used to provide a warning of the need to review procedures and
performance, to investigate what is not working as expected and to take timely
corrective action. The exceeding of an investigation level should prompt such
actions. In radiation therapy, for example, pro rata monthly values higher
236

than 0.5 mSv (for the dosimeter worn on the torso) should be investigated. If
additional dosimeters are being used, then values higher than 2 mSv per month
for a dosimeter monitoring the lens of the eye may indicate that eye doses may be
of concern. Values higher than 15 mSv per month for hand or finger dosimeters
should also be investigated. Abnormal conditions and events should also trigger
an investigation. In all cases, the investigation should be carried out with a view
to improving the optimization of occupational protection, and the results should
be recorded. Investigation levels should also be set for workplace monitoring,
with account taken of exposure scenarios and the predetermined values adopted
for investigation levels for workers. Details on investigation levels are provided
in GSG-7 [23].
5.171. An investigation should be initiated as soon as possible following a
trigger or event, and a written report should be prepared concerning the cause,
including determination or verification of the dose, corrective or mitigatory
actions, and instructions or recommendations to avoid recurrence. Such reports
should be reviewed by the quality assurance committee and the radiation safety
committee, as appropriate, and the licensee should be informed. It is good practice
to submit the report to an international or national safety reporting system. In
some cases, the regulatory body may also need to be informed.
Persons who work in more than one place
5.172. Some individuals might work in more than one radiation therapy
facility. The facilities may be quite separate entities in terms of ownership and
management, or they may have common ownership but separate management,
or they may even have common ownership and management but be physically
quite separate. Regardless of the ownership and management structure, the
occupational radiation protection requirements for the particular radiation
therapy facility apply when the person is working in that facility. As described
in para. 5.161, a dosimeter issued for individual monitoring should be worn only
in the facility for which it is issued, as this facilitates the effective optimization
of protection and safety in that facility. This approach is logistically more easily
implemented, since each physical site has its own dosimeters, and so there is
no need to transport dosimeters between facilities, with the risk of losing or
forgetting them. In cases where the facilities are under common ownership, it
may be seen as an unnecessary financial burden to provide more than one set
of dosimeters for staff that work in more than one of its facilities. However,
the radiation protection advantages of having the dosimeter results linked to a
person’s work in only one radiation therapy facility remain (see also para. 5.174).

237

5.173. There is, however, an important additional consideration, namely the
need to ensure compliance with the occupational dose limits. Any person who
works in more than one radiation therapy facility should notify the licensee for
each of those facilities. Each licensee, through its RPO, should establish formal
contact with the licensees of the other radiation therapy facilities and their RPOs,
so that each facility has an arrangement to ensure that a personal dosimeter is
available and that there is an ongoing record of the occupational doses for that
person in all the facilities where he or she works.
5.174. Some individuals, such as consultant medical physicists or service
engineers, might perform work in many radiation therapy facilities and, in
addition, in other medical radiation facilities. They can be employed by a
company or be self-employed, providing contracted services to the radiation
therapy facility and the other facilities. In such cases, it is simpler for the company
or the self-employed person to provide the dosimeters for individual monitoring.
Therefore, in these cases, a worker uses the same dosimeter for work performed
in all radiation therapy facilities (and other medical radiation facilities) in the
monitoring period.
Records of occupational exposure
5.175. Paragraphs 3.103–3.107 of GSR Part 3 [3] establish the detailed
requirements for records of occupational exposure and place obligations on
employers, registrants and licensees. In addition to demonstrating compliance
with legal requirements, records of occupational exposure should be used
within the radiation therapy facility for additional purposes, including assessing
the effectiveness of the optimization of protection and safety at the facility
and evaluating trends in exposure. Further general guidance on records of
occupational exposure is given in GSG-7 [23].
Health surveillance for workers
5.176. The primary purpose of health surveillance is to assess the initial and
continuing fitness of employees for their intended tasks, and requirements are
given in paras 3.108 and 3.109 of GSR Part 3 [3].
5.177. No specific health surveillance relating to exposure to ionizing radiation
is necessary for staff involved in radiation therapy. Only in cases of overexposed
workers, at doses much higher than the dose limits (e.g. a few hundred millisieverts
or higher), would special investigations involving biological dosimetry and
further extended diagnosis and medical treatment be necessary [23]. Under
238

normal working conditions, the occupational doses incurred in radiation therapy
are low, and no specific radiation related examinations are normally required
for persons who are occupationally exposed to ionizing radiation, as there are
no diagnostic tests that yield information relevant to such normal exposure. It
is, therefore, rare for considerations of occupational exposure arising from the
working environment of a radiation therapy facility to influence significantly the
decision about the fitness of a worker to undertake work with radiation or to
influence the general conditions of service [23].
5.178. Counselling should be made available to workers who have or may
have been exposed substantially in excess of dose limits, and information, advice
and, if indicated, counselling should be made available to workers who are
concerned about their radiation exposure. In radiation therapy, the latter group
may include women who are or may be pregnant. Counselling should be given by
appropriately experienced and qualified practitioners. Further guidance is given
in Refs [23, 327].
Information, instruction and training
5.179. All staff involved in radiation therapy should meet the respective
training and competence criteria described in paras 2.119–2.137. This will include
general education, training, qualification and competence for occupational
radiation protection in radiation therapy. Radiation oncologists, medical radiation
technologists, medical physicists and nurses may not have been trained with
respect to imaging or pre-planning systems, such as CT, PET–CT, and as such
they should undertake radiation protection and safety training relevant to the
additional imaging modalities in their radiation therapy facility.
5.180. Paragraph 3.110 of GSR Part 3 [3] places responsibilities on the
employer to provide, inter alia, adequate information, instruction and training for
protection and safety as it pertains to the radiation therapy facility. This is not
only for new staff but also for all staff as part of their continuing professional
development. Specific instruction and training should be provided when new
medical radiological equipment, software and technologies are introduced.
Conditions of service and special arrangements
5.181. Paragraph 3.111 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that no special benefits be
offered to staff because they are occupationally exposed. It is not acceptable to
offer benefits as substitutes for measures for protection and safety.

239

Pregnant workers
5.182. There is no requirement in GSR Part 3 [3] for a worker to notify the
licensee that she is pregnant, but it is necessary that female workers understand
the importance of making such notifications so that their working conditions
can be modified accordingly. Paragraph 3.113(b) of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes
the requirement that employers, in cooperation with registrants and licensees,
provide female workers with appropriate information in this regard.
5.183.

Paragraph 3.114 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes the requirement that:
“The employer of a female worker, who has been notified of her
suspected pregnancy…shall adapt the working conditions in respect
of occupational exposure so as to ensure that the embryo or fetus…is
afforded the same broad level of protection as is required for members
of the public.”

The limitation of the dose to the embryo or fetus does not mean that pregnant
women should avoid work with radiation, but it does mean that the employer
should carefully review the exposure conditions with regard to both normal
exposure and potential exposure. For example, the dose to the fetus for workers
involved in source handling in manual brachytherapy, under normal conditions,
might reach the dose limit for members of the public (see Box 1). To prevent
this from happening, rigorous time, shielding and distance restrictions should be
implemented.
5.184. Other possible solutions include reassignment of a pregnant worker to
duties where the likelihood of an accident is lower or to a location that has a
lower ambient dose equivalent. Such reassignments should be accompanied by
adequate training. A further consideration is the need to avoid having pregnant
workers respond to an accident such as those described in paras 5.310–5.320, for
example, with a 60Co unit or an HDR brachytherapy unit.
5.185. With regard to the dose limit of 1 mSv for the embryo or fetus, the
reading of a dosimeter can overestimate the dose to the embryo or fetus by a
factor that depends on the energy and type of the incident radiation (by a factor
of 10 for low energy X rays and by a factor of about 2 for 60Co and high energy
X rays). The dose to the embryo fetus should be assessed using an appropriately
positioned additional dosimeter (see also GSG-7 [23]). Information, advice and,
if indicated, counselling for pregnant workers should be made available (see also
para. 5.178).
240

Persons under 18
5.186. In many States, there is the possibility of students aged 16 or more,
but under 18, commencing their studies and training to become a medical
radiation technologist or other health professional that can involve occupational
exposure to ionizing radiation. Paragraph 3.116 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes
the requirements for access to controlled areas and the dose limits for such
persons are more restrictive (see Box 1 of this Safety Guide and Schedule III of
GSR Part 3 [3]).
Protection of workers responding to incidents in a radiation therapy facility
5.187. The practice of radiation therapy is a planned exposure situation, and
when circumstances result in incidents that lead to, or could lead to, unintended
or accidental exposures of patients or staff, they are still within the framework
of a planned exposure situation. The potential occurrence of such incidents
should be considered in advance in the safety assessment for the facility and
mitigatory procedures should be developed accordingly (see the guidance in
paras 5.297–5.323 on prevention and mitigation of accidents).
5.188. Occupational exposure of staff responding to such incidents is still
subject to the occupational dose limits, and the mitigatory procedures for
incidents should include considerations for the optimization of protection and
safety for the responding workers. The mitigatory procedures should also include
allocation of responsibilities and should provide for the education and training
of the relevant staff in executing the mitigatory measures, which should be
periodically exercised. Most of these situations, for example the retraction of a
stuck 60Co source, can be executed in a planned manner so that doses received
can be kept low.
RADIATION PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUALS UNDERGOING MEDICAL
EXPOSURE
5.189. This section covers radiation protection of patients, carers and
comforters, and volunteers in biomedical research. The term ‘patient’, when
used in the context of medical exposure, means the person undergoing the
radiological procedure. Other patients in the radiation therapy facility or wider
medical facility, including those who may be waiting for their own radiological
procedure, are considered members of the public and their radiation protection is
covered in paras 5.282–5.296.
241

5.190. As described in para. 2.8, there are no dose limits for medical exposure,
so it is very important that there is effective application of the requirements for
justification and optimization.
Justification of medical exposure
5.191. The requirements for justification of medical exposure
(paras 3.155–3.161 of GSR Part 3 [3]) incorporate the three-level approach to
justification (see para. 2.11) [4, 125, 126].
5.192. The roles of the health authority and professional bodies with respect to
a level 2 or generic justification of radiological procedures in radiation therapy
are described in paras 2.55–2.60.
Justification of medical exposure for the individual patient
5.193. GSR Part 3 [3] requires a joint approach to justification at the level
of an individual patient, with a shared decision involving both the referring
medical practitioner (who initiates the request for a radiological procedure)
and the radiological medical practitioner. In the case of radiation therapy, the
requirements for justification are applied more effectively as part of the medical
process of determining the best approach to treatment. When a patient is referred
by a referring medical practitioner for treatment, careful consideration should
be made by the multidisciplinary oncology team on whether to treat the patient
either by radiation therapy, another modality, a combined treatment approach
(sequential or concomitant) or not to be treated at all. Ideally, every treatment
decision should be discussed within the team and documented at a ‘tumour board’
or equivalent multidisciplinary meeting.
5.194. From a radiation protection perspective, not only the radiation therapy
treatment should be justified, but all the imaging radiological procedures prior to,
during and after the treatment should also be justified. This includes consideration
of the expected benefits that the imaging brings to improving the treatment
outcome, such as PET–CT for improved target delineation or daily IGRT.
5.195. Two particular groups of patients identified in para. 3.157 of
GSR Part 3 [3] for special consideration with respect to justification are patients
who are pregnant or are paediatric.
(a)

242

Owing to the higher radiosensitivity of the embryo or fetus, it should
be ascertained whether a female patient is pregnant. Paragraph 3.176

(b)

of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that procedures be “in place for ascertaining
the pregnancy status of a female patient of reproductive capacity before
the performance of any radiological procedure that could result in a
significant dose to the embryo or fetus”. Pregnancy would then be a factor
in the justification process and might influence the timing of the proposed
treatment or a decision as to whether another approach to treatment is
more appropriate. Confirmation of pregnancy could occur after the initial
justification and before the treatment commences or during treatment, in
which case repeat justification is then necessary, with account taken of the
additional sensitivity of the pregnant patient and embryo or fetus.
As children are at greater risk of incurring radiation induced stochastic
effects, paediatric treatments necessitate special consideration in the
justification process.

5.196. The decision of the multidisciplinary oncology team should be conveyed
to the patient or the legal guardian of the patient. The patient, or the legal
guardian of the patient, also should be informed about the expected benefits, risks
and limitations of the proposed treatment, as well as the consequences of not
undergoing the treatment. Female patients of reproductive capacity should also
be made aware of the risks associated with becoming pregnant during treatment.
The patient’s consent for treatment should be obtained before any further patient
management action is initiated.
Justification of medical exposure for biomedical research volunteers
5.197. The role of the ethics committee in the justification of medical exposure
of volunteers exposed as part of a programme of biomedical research is described
in para. 2.99. Healthy individuals should not take part in a programme of
biomedical research involving radiation therapy procedures.
Justification of medical exposure for carers and comforters
5.198. The three-level approach to justification is not applicable for carers and
comforters. Instead, para. 3.155 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes the requirement
to ensure that there be some net benefit arising from the exposure, for example
the successful performance of a diagnostic procedure on a child. The crucial
component in the justification of medical exposure of carers and comforters is
their knowledge and understanding about radiation protection and the radiation
risks for the procedure being considered. To this end, the radiological medical
practitioner or medical radiation technologist involved in the radiological
procedure, prior to the performance of the procedure, has the responsibility to
243

ensure that the carer or comforter is correctly informed about radiation protection
and the radiation risks involved, and that the carer or comforter understands this
information and consequently agrees to take on the role of carer or comforter.
Optimization of protection and safety
5.199. In medical exposure, optimization of protection and safety has several
components, some applicable directly to the radiological procedure about to
be performed and others providing the support or framework for the other
components. These components of optimization of protection and safety are
described in paras 5.200–5.253. Key personnel in the optimization process are
the radiological medical practitioner, the medical radiation technologist and the
medical physicist.
Design considerations
5.200. The use of appropriate and well designed medical radiological
equipment and associated software underpins any treatment in radiation therapy.
Linacs, X ray generators, radioactive source based equipment (teletherapy and
brachytherapy) and their associated technologies and accessories (including TPS)
should be designed and manufactured so as to facilitate the aim of ensuring that
for each patient the exposure of volumes other than the planning target volume is
kept as low as reasonably achievable, consistent with delivery of the prescribed
dose to the planning target volume within the required tolerances. Guidance
on design considerations is given in the subsection on medical radiological
equipment in radiation therapy in paras 5.61–5.81. Guidance on design
considerations for imaging systems, such as those used in radiation therapy for
simulation, patient preparation, image guidance and follow-up procedures, is
given in paras 3.32–3.41 and 4.45–4.51. Ultimately, as established in para. 3.162
of GSR Part 3 [3], it is the responsibility of the licensee of the radiation therapy
facility to ensure that the facility uses only medical radiological equipment and
software that meets applicable international or national standards.
Operational considerations
5.201. Following justification, the planning and delivery of treatment are
required to be performed in such a way as to optimize patient protection
(para. 3.164 of GSR Part 3 [3]). The treatment goal is to deliver the correct
absorbed dose to the correct volume within the overall prescribed time while
keeping the dose to normal tissue and organs at risk within the established

244

tolerances and as low as reasonably achievable. Accurate treatment planning is a
crucial precursor to achieving this treatment goal.
5.202. Written procedures and protocols for the delivery of radiation therapy,
consistent with the above goal, should be drawn up. Protocols should be
consistent with current best radiation therapy practice, published by the relevant
professional bodies, national, regional or international (see Refs [328–333]).
5.203. Advanced radiation therapy techniques (e.g. IMRT, SRS, HDR
brachytherapy and ion beam therapy) have resulted in the possibility of high
conformity to target volumes or subvolumes and therefore dose delivery has
very small margins for error. When delivering radiation therapy in this way, high
quality imaging and delivery equipment and immobilization devices should be
utilized.
5.204. The use of advanced technology has led to the delivery of higher doses to
the target volume, and complex and unconventional field or source arrangements
are frequently used. When moving to more complex modes of delivery, there is a
greater risk of error and the radiation therapy facility should have all the necessary
expertise and resources available before implementing such techniques.
5.205. Calculation of the dose to the embryo or fetus before the treatment
of a pregnant patient should be part of the treatment plan. The distance from
the field edge to the embryo or fetus is the most important factor in embryo
or fetal dose, together with other factors such as field size, angle and radiation
energy [124, 334].
5.206. Specific protocols for the use of imaging equipment (e.g. CT and
PET–CT) in the pre-planning stage (simulation) of external beam radiotherapy
should be used to ensure appropriate optimization of protection and safety. In
addition to the relevant guidance given in paras 3.176–3.185, the following
should be considered:
(a)
(b)
(c)

A medical radiation technologist specialized in radiation therapy should
always be present when images for the planning of external beam
radiotherapy are acquired in a diagnostic imaging facility.
Patients should be in the treatment position for all images acquired for the
planning of external beam radiotherapy.
The geometry of the imaging modality should be sufficiently accurate to
minimize errors in dose calculation and target delineation.

245

(d)
(e)
(f)

(g)
(h)

When used as a virtual simulator, a CT scanner should have a sufficiently
large bore that images can be acquired with the patient in the treatment
position.
A comparable table top should be used for image acquisition for treatment
planning and for treatment delivery, for example using a flat table top or a
flat insert.
A reference system consistent with those in the treatment room should be
used when acquiring images for the planning of external beam radiotherapy.
The TPS reference point and the patient treatment reference point should be
correlated.
When a respiratory or motion management and monitoring system is used
for CT imaging for 4-D radiotherapy, it should be consistent with that used
in the treatment room.
Imaging protocols in radiation therapy should include the specific technical
parameters required for the simulation. For example, for CT this would
include the CT number for dose computation accuracy, the slice thickness
for optimum planning, the scan length necessary to encompass the potential
volume and other parameters that may influence the image quality for
radiation therapy planning.

5.207. Specific protocols for the use of imaging equipment in IGRT should
be used to ensure appropriate optimization of protection and safety. In addition
to the relevant guidance given in paras 3.176–3.186, more specific guidance is
given in Refs [321, 335].
Calibration: Medical radiological equipment
5.208. Paragraph 3.167(a) of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes the requirements for
the calibration of sources giving rise to medical exposure. For radiation therapy,
all external beam medical radiological equipment and brachytherapy sources
used in the radiation therapy facility should be calibrated, as follows:
(a)

(b)

246

Medical radiological equipment for external beam radiotherapy should be
calibrated in terms of radiation quality or energy and either absorbed dose
or absorbed dose rate at a predefined distance under specified conditions;
the recommended quantity is absorbed dose to water [316, 336]. The
calibrations should be performed for at least the clinically used energies
and qualities.
Sealed sources used for brachytherapy should be calibrated in terms of
reference air kerma rate in air or an equivalent quantity as recommended by
the ICRU, at a specified distance, for a specified date [316].

(c)
(d)

(e)

(f)

Internationally or nationally accepted calibration protocols should be used.
Examples of such protocols include Refs [324, 336–342].
For brachytherapy, a distinction can be made between removable and
permanent implants. For removable implants, each source should be
calibrated individually. For permanent implants when a large number
of sources are being used, a representative sample may be assessed, for
example 10% of the sources [339–342].
Particular attention should be given to the calibration of sources used
for special radiation therapy procedures (e.g. radiosurgery, IORT, SRT,
tomotherapy and total body irradiation) which may necessitate adaptation
of the existing international codes of practice and may introduce additional
uncertainties associated with making measurements in non-reference
conditions. A particular consideration is small field dosimetry, and guidance
is given in Refs [343, 344].
Imaging devices used in the radiation therapy process, such as conventional
simulators, CT scanners, CBCT, fluoroscopy, radiography and hybrid
imaging systems (PET–CT and SPECT–CT) should be calibrated following
the relevant recommendations in paras 3.201–3.205 and 4.197–4.202.
Guidance for MV imaging devices is given in Refs [345, 346].

5.209. Paragraphs 3.154(d) and 3.167 of GSR Part 3 [3] require that the
responsibility for calibration in radiation therapy be placed on the medical
physicist, with either direct fulfilment or by supervision. Correct calibration in
radiation therapy is fundamental and, with increasing complexity in technology
and software, the direct presence and involvement of the medical physicist is
essential. For the imaging devices used in the radiation therapy process, a
medical physicist with competence in diagnostic radiology and image guided
interventional procedures, or in nuclear medicine, should be involved as
appropriate (see also paras 5.219–5.227 on patient dosimetry and 5.228–5.247 on
the programme of quality assurance for medical exposures).
5.210. Paragraph 3.167(b) of GSR Part 3 [3] specifies when such calibrations
are required to be carried out. In addition to the initial calibration prior to clinical
use and calibration after major maintenance or upgrade, periodic calibrations
are required to be carried out. The intervals for these calibrations may differ,
depending on the type of source and unit. For example, linacs should be calibrated
at least yearly. These intervals will be specified by the regulatory body in each
State, under advice from the professional bodies when appropriate. Constancy
tests are addressed in paras 5.228–5.247.

247

5.211. Paragraph 3.167(c) of GSR Part 3 [3] requires independent verification
of the calibration of radiation therapy equipment prior to clinical use, because
miscalibration of a radiation therapy source can result in inappropriate
treatment involving many patients and can lead to very serious consequences.
Independent verification ideally means verification by a different, independent
medical physicist using different dosimetry equipment. However, other options,
such as verification by a second medical physicist or only verification using a
second set of equipment, or use of a remote dosimetry audit (e.g. IAEA/WHO
thermoluminescent dosimetry postal dose audit service), could be acceptable. In
checking for compliance, the regulatory body should be aware of the limitations
of local resources, but nevertheless some form of independent verification should
take place.
5.212. The licensee of the radiation therapy facility should ensure that
independent verification of the calibration of all radiation therapy equipment
is performed through participation in a national, regional or international
programme. A period of two years is recommended for the intervals between
independent verifications of calibration. One of the simplest mechanisms for
independent verifications of external beam calibration or physical dosimetry is
participation in an IAEA/WHO thermoluminescent dosimetry postal dose quality
audit. The regulatory body should encourage licensees to participate in this or
similar programmes.
5.213. Sealed sources used for external beam radiotherapy and brachytherapy
will also have a calibration certificate provided by the manufacturer, in
accordance with Ref. [307] or its national equivalent standards. While important,
this does not replace the calibrations required by para. 3.167 of GSR Part 3 [3]
and described in paras 5.208–5.212.
5.214. New brachytherapy sources should be calibrated and differences of
more than 5% from the manufacturer’s certified reference air kerma rate should
be investigated. The source should not be used for patient treatment until such
differences have been investigated and resolved. Further guidance on resolving
differences in calibrations is given in Ref. [341].
Calibration: Dosimetry instrumentation
5.215. Dosimetry instrumentation used at a radiation therapy facility should
be calibrated at appropriate intervals. Detailed guidance is given in Ref. [36].
A period of not more than two years is recommended for the reference
instruments.
248

5.216. Paragraph 3.167(d) of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that the calibration of
dosimetry instrumentation be traceable to a standards dosimetry laboratory.
Ideally, this would be the national standards dosimetry laboratory (primary
or secondary) in the State concerned, with access either directly or through a
duly accredited calibration facility. However, it may be necessary for dosimetry
instruments to be sent to another State or region if there is no national standards
dosimetry laboratory in the State or region where the instruments are used. To
ensure the calibration is maintained, the calibrated dosimeter should be checked
for consistency periodically in the facility against a reference check source.
5.217. Given the expense involved in calibrating dosimeters, it is helpful if the
radiation therapy facility keeps the calibrated dosimeter as its ‘local standard’ and
uses it only for primary calibrations. Relative calibrations can be carried out with
instruments intercompared with the local standard on a periodic basis.
5.218. Records of calibration measurements and associated calculations,
including uncertainty determinations (uncertainty budgets), should be maintained
as described in para. 5.280.
Dosimetry of patients
5.219. Paragraph 3.168 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes the requirements for
dosimetry of patients in radiation therapy. Dosimetry is required for each patient
undergoing external beam radiotherapy or brachytherapy. There are two aspects
to the patient dosimetry: absorbed doses to the planning target volume(s) and
absorbed doses to specific organs and tissues that have been identified as being at
risk by the radiological medical practitioner (radiation oncologist).
5.220. For external beam radiotherapy, the final doses delivered to a patient
are the result of a multi-stage process, commencing with the treatment
prescription, dated and signed by the medical radiological practitioner (radiation
oncologist), which should contain the following information: the location of
the treatment site(s); the total dose; the dose per fraction; the fractionation; and
the overall treatment period of each course of treatment per site. The treatment
prescription should indicate whether the radiation therapy will be given alone
or in combination, either concomitantly or sequentially, with chemotherapy and
should specify the timing of other local treatments such as surgery. The normal
tissues or organs that may receive significant radiation should be identified and
the maximum doses to, and, if possible and necessary, the volumetric distribution
of doses in, these organs or tissues at risk should be stated. Such tissues or organs
may be in the irradiated volume or they may receive doses as a consequence of
249

leakage or scatter radiation. The treatment prescription is then used as the basis
for treatment planning, followed by delivery of the treatment and verification
of the dose. The requirements of GSR Part 3 [3] can be met by determining
the absorbed doses to the planning target volume(s) and the absorbed doses to
specific tissues and organs that have been identified as being at risk.
5.221. There are many different terms, concepts and approaches in use for
different aspects of prescribing, recording and reporting of doses in external
beam radiotherapy. For example, there are many specifications of volumes,
including gross tumour volume, clinical target volume, planning target volume,
organ at risk and planning organ at risk volume. Radiation therapy facilities
should use the international recommendations of the ICRU for the specification
of volumes and the prescribing, recording and reporting of doses in external
beam radiotherapy [347–352]. Further guidance on dosimetry in external beam
radiotherapy is given in Refs [33, 335–339, 353–359].
5.222. For brachytherapy, the process also begins with the treatment
prescription, dated and signed by the radiological medical practitioner (radiation
oncologist). The treatment prescription should contain the following information:
the total dose to a reference point and to organs at risk; the size of the reference
dose volume; the radionuclide; and the type of brachytherapy (manual, HDR,
PDR or LDR). The specification of volumes and the prescribing, recording and
reporting of doses should be in accordance with the recommendations of the
ICRU [360–362]. Further guidance on dosimetry in brachytherapy is given in
Refs [358, 363–370].
5.223. Absorbed doses to organs as a result of imaging procedures carried
out as part of the radiation therapy process should be considered both for the
irradiated volume and for the critical organs. While this estimation does not
need to have the accuracy required in the determination of the doses to the target
volumes and normal tissues or organs at risk, such absorbed doses as a result of
imaging procedures can be considerable and they should then be accounted for
and added as appropriate. Guidance specific to imaging doses during IGRT is
given in Ref. [371].
5.224. Absorbed doses arising from neutrons when using high energy photon
beams should be considered when determining doses to the irradiated volume
and to the critical organs (e.g. see Ref. [372]).
5.225. Whenever appropriate, radiobiological considerations should be
incorporated into treatment decisions, for example by calculation of biologically
250

effective doses [373]. Examples are when doses from external beam radiotherapy
and brachytherapy are added, when hypofractionation is used, or when the patient
has missed some fractions owing to clinical or technical reasons.
5.226. TPSs in radiation therapy continue to become more and more complex,
and at the same time they are used to predict the doses that the patient will
receive. Therefore, means should be established to verify the dose to selected
points, independent from the TPS calculations, for example manual calculations,
independent monitor unit verification software, or case specific quality assurance
measurements in a phantom [318, 374, 375].
5.227. The radiation therapy facility medical physicist should perform phantom
or in vivo measurements as appropriate. An example is the verification of lung
dose distributions for total body irradiation with photons.
Quality assurance for medical exposures
5.228. Paragraph 3.170 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that radiation therapy
facilities have in place a comprehensive programme of quality assurance for
medical exposures. General guidance on the management system is given
in paras 2.138–2.149, and it is reiterated here that the programme of quality
assurance for medical exposures should fit in with, and be part of, the wider
management system at the facility.
5.229. When planning and developing an effective programme of quality
assurance for medical exposures, the licensee should recognize that it demands
strong managerial commitment and support in the form of training and allocation
of time, personnel and equipment resources.
5.230. The purpose of the programme of quality assurance for medical
exposures is to help to ensure successful optimization of protection and safety in
the radiation therapy facility and to minimize the occurrence of unintended and
accidental medical exposures. Paragraph 3.171 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes the
elements of the programme.
5.231. By the very nature of radiation therapy, the facility’s programme of
quality assurance for medical exposures will be complex and should encompass
the entire radiation therapy process, including the treatment decision, tumour
localization, patient positioning and immobilization, image acquisition for
treatment planning, treatment planning, treatment delivery, treatment verification
and follow-up. With respect to equipment, instrumentation and systems, the
251

programme of quality assurance for medical exposures should include the testing
of both the hardware and software.
5.232. Measurements on medical radiological equipment used in radiation
therapy are an important component of the programme of quality assurance.
Acceptance tests are required for new or significantly refurbished or repaired
equipment, or after the installation of new software or modification of existing
software that could affect protection and safety. The acceptance test should be
followed immediately by commissioning, and then ongoing periodic quality
control tests, including constancy tests. The purpose is to ensure that, at all times,
all medical radiological equipment performs correctly, accurately, reproducibly
and predictably. Acceptance and commissioning tests should be performed in the
same way for equipment and software that has been donated.
5.233. Acceptance tests and commissioning should not be restricted to radiation
emitting equipment or sources, but should also be conducted for any system
that has implications for safety, such as TPSs and other software integral to or
supporting any stage of the radiation therapy process. Insufficient understanding
of TPSs at the commissioning stage and thereafter was involved in several
accidental medical exposures [376–378].
5.234. After equipment or software installation has been completed, acceptance
testing should verify conformance with the technical specifications given by
the manufacturer and stated in the purchase agreement, and should verify
compliance with relevant safety requirements from the IEC or other recognized
standards [290–305]. Depending on the equipment purchase agreement,
acceptance tests can be performed by the manufacturer in the presence of the
local medical physicist representing the user, or, if acceptable to the manufacturer
and the purchaser, by a medical physicist jointly with the manufacturer. The
tests to be performed as part of the acceptance testing should be specified in the
purchasing conditions, where the responsibility of the manufacturer or supplier
for resolving issues of non-conformity identified during acceptance testing
should be clearly established.
5.235. Acceptance tests should ensure that equipment and software are
compatible with the other equipment with which it will have an interface. The
accuracy and integrity of data, including during transfer processes, should be
verified.
5.236. After acceptance and before starting clinical use, commissioning of
equipment (hardware and software) should be performed (i.e. radiation sources
252

and radiation beams should be characterized and software should be customized
for clinical use). The commissioning process is also a very important stage for
familiarization of the staff with the equipment (hardware and software) and for
their gaining a full understanding of the equipment’s capabilities and limitations.
The process is critical, and therefore essential, to safety, as shown in reports
on unintended and accidental medical exposures involving a large number of
patients [379, 380]. During commissioning, the medical physicist should identify,
measure and compile all data required for clinical use. This should be followed
by validation of the data [281, 310, 317].
5.237. During commissioning, the quantities and measures including tolerances
and action levels should be defined for the periodic quality control tests to set the
baseline for subsequent constancy tests (see also para. 5.240).
5.238. If there has been a major repair or modification or a source replacement
that may affect the radiation protection and safety of patients, no treatment can
take place until the necessary quality control tests have been completed and
checked by the medical physicist who has confirmed that the equipment is safe
for use. Significant unintended and accidental medical exposure has occurred
because appropriate tests were not performed following a repair [276, 379, 381].
5.239. As noted in para. 5.232, the comprehensive programme of quality
assurance, with acceptance, commissioning and ongoing quality control tests
should include software, including its installation, upgrade or modification.
A particular case is a software upgrade of a TPS where the necessary actions
may range from full commissioning to a partial verification of the relevant
parameters. The medical physicist should be involved in this process. Where
remote software modifications are possible, a protocol should be in place that
ensures the medical physicist is informed prior to any modifications being carried
out so that appropriate quality control tests can take place prior to reintroduction
of treatment.
5.240. In addition to the acceptance testing and commissioning, para. 3.171 of
GSR Part 3 [3] requires, periodically and after any major maintenance procedure
or upgrade, the measurement of physical parameters of medical radiological
equipment. There are many published reports from international and national
organizations and national and regional professional bodies giving detailed
guidance on the range of acceptance, commissioning and quality control tests that
should be performed on the various equipment and software used in the different
modalities in, and in aspects of, radiation therapy, how they should be performed,
tolerances and action levels, and recommended frequencies [184, 281, 310–312,
253

315, 317–319, 321, 322, 324, 325, 328–331, 335, 339, 345, 374, 375, 382–400].
In addition, many of these organizations and professional bodies publish on
their web sites new or updated publications on the topic. The regulatory body
may have its own specific requirements for the tests that should be performed,
their frequencies and the competence of the specialists involved. Such specific
requirements should be established with consultation between the regulatory
body and the relevant professional bodies.
5.241. The programme of quality assurance for medical exposures should
include testing of sealed sources at regular intervals for leakage, as required by
the regulatory body. The programme of quality assurance should also include the
regular update of inventories of all radiation sources, at intervals determined by
the regulatory body.
5.242. For guidance with respect to imaging medical radiological equipment,
see paras 3.238 and 4.227. A diagnostic medical physicist and a radiation therapy
medical physicist should be consulted. Specific parameters for radiotherapy that
should be considered include, for example, CT number calibration for CT and
geometric accuracy.
5.243. The results of the quality control tests should be compared with
established tolerance limits. These limits may have been established to ensure
compliance with a regulatory requirement for the performance of particular
physical parameters or they may be set on the basis of recommended values given
in published reports, such as those referenced in para. 5.240. Paragraph 3.171(b)
of GSR Part 3 [3] requires the implementation of corrective actions if the
measured values fall outside established tolerance limits. Such corrective actions
are likely to include maintenance or servicing of the equipment, and hence a
maintenance programme should be in place at the radiation therapy facility. In
some cases, the equipment might be outside the tolerance limits by a significant
amount and the equipment should be immediately taken out of clinical use and
not returned until servicing has taken place and it has been ascertained by the
medical physicist that the equipment now meets the performance requirements
for clinical use.
5.244. The programme of quality assurance for medical exposures in radiation
therapy should ensure that the facility’s protocols and procedures for treatment,
including radiation protection and safety, are being followed; for example,
geometric and dosimetric verification of the treatment and an independent
check of treatment plans and of patient set-up should be carried out by a second

254

professional. The periodic review of the protocols and procedures themselves is
part of the radiological review at the facility (see paras 5.277–5.279).
5.245. Paragraph 3.171(e) of GSR Part 3 [3] specifically requires that the
periodic checks of the calibration and conditions of operation of dosimetry
equipment and monitoring equipment be part of the programme of quality
assurance. This includes instrumentation used for the purposes of calibration
and clinical dosimetry, such as ion chambers, detectors, electrometers and
beam scanners. The requirement is to ensure that such instrumentation has a
valid calibration (see paras 5.215–5.218), and that it is functioning correctly.
Instrumentation for calibration and clinical dosimetry in radiation therapy
should undergo acceptance testing and regular quality control. The programme
of quality assurance for medical exposures should establish a calibration cycle
for each instrument (see also para. 5.215) and a set of quality control tests on
the operation of each instrument to be performed at regular intervals, based on
recommendations by professional bodies and international organizations (e.g. see
Ref. [336]). Preventive maintenance should be carried out on a regular basis.
5.246. Maintaining records is a crucial aspect of the programme of quality
assurance for medical exposures. This includes the procedures used in the
programme and all ensuing results. In particular, all data relating to acceptance,
commissioning, calibration and dosimetry should be documented, including
independent verification. Records should also be kept for the results of the
periodic quality control tests and corrective actions. The regulatory body, in
its inspections of a radiation therapy facility, should review the records of the
programme of quality assurance for medical exposures.
5.247. In line with standard practices for quality management, para. 3.172
of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that “regular and independent audits are made of
the programme of quality assurance for medical exposures, and that their
frequency is in accordance with the complexity of the radiological procedures
being performed and the associated risks.” Such audits should be performed
relatively frequently, for example every two years for a radiation therapy facility
performing complex radiation therapy treatments, and when new techniques
are implemented. Such audits may be external audits or internal audits. Internal
audits are usually logistically simpler to conduct, while an external audit
generally has the advantage of bringing in an outside perspective. The audit of
the programme of quality assurance for medical exposures can be incorporated
into more comprehensive audits of the management system performed by
the licensee. Furthermore, the results of the audit of the programme of quality
assurance for medical exposures will be a major input into the radiological review
255

performed at the facility (see paras 5.277–5.279). If indicated from the audit,
the programme of quality assurance for medical exposures should be updated or
modified, accordingly. Furthermore, feedback from operational experience and
lessons identified from accidents or near misses (see also para. 5.274) can help to
identify potential problems and correct deficiencies, and therefore should be used
systematically in improving the programme of quality assurance.
Dose constraints: Carers and comforters
5.248. In radiation therapy, the likelihood of a person having the role of
a carer or comforter (as defined in GSR Part 3 [3]) is generally limited, as
accompanying a patient during external beam radiotherapy or access to HDR
or PDR brachytherapy patients during treatment is not allowed. However, since
LDR brachytherapy treatments last two to three days, visits by close relatives
could be allowed, provided dose constraints for these carers or comforters
are established and applied. Similarly, brachytherapy treatments that involve
permanent implants of sealed sources may also lead to the exposure of persons
who, in the role of carers or comforters, provide care, comfort and support
to the patient. This exposure of carers and comforters is defined as medical
exposure (see GSR Part 3 [3]) and as such is not subject to dose limits. However,
paras 3.153 and 3.173 of GSR Part 3 [3] require that such carers and comforters
be afforded radiation protection through the application of the requirements
for the optimization of protection and safety and, in particular, the use of dose
constraints in this process. Such dose constraints are required to be established, as
a result of consultation between the health authority, relevant professional bodies
and the regulatory body (see para. 3.149(a)(i) of GSR Part 3 [3]). Guidance
on setting dose constraints, including considerations for children and pregnant
women, is given in paras 2.48 and 2.49.
5.249. Written protocols should be drawn up for implementing measures for
the optimization of protection and safety for carers and comforters of LDR
brachytherapy patients or patients with permanent implants. The measures
should utilize the basic methods for radiation protection (i.e. time, distance and
shielding). The protocols should include the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)

256

Criteria specifying who would be acceptable for acting as a carer or
comforter;
Methods for ensuring that the carer or comforter receives a dose that is as
low as reasonably achievable;
The values of the dose constraints to be applied (see para. 2.49).

5.250. The licensee should be able to demonstrate that the effective dose to
the carer or comforter, by applying the protocols, is unlikely to exceed the dose
constraint. It is relatively straightforward to estimate effective doses to carers
and comforters from measurements of the ambient dose equivalent rates at the
positions where they will be situated. These determinations should be made in
advance to ensure that dose constraint is not exceeded. Therefore, individual dose
monitoring is normally not necessary.
5.251.

Paragraph 3.153 of GSR Part 3 [3] states that:
“Registrants and licensees shall ensure that no individual incurs a
medical exposure as a carer or comforter unless he or she has received,
and has indicated an understanding of, relevant information on radiation
protection and information on the radiation risks prior to providing care
and comfort to an individual undergoing a radiological procedure.”

The carer or comforter should indicate that he or she is still willing to provide
support, care and comfort to the patient. Appropriate written instructions should
be available and provided to the carer or comforter.
5.252. Guidance applicable to carers and comforters supporting patients
undergoing imaging radiological procedures as part of the treatment process in
the radiation therapy facility is given in paras 3.247–3.251.
Dose constraints: Volunteers in biomedical research
5.253. Participants in a programme of biomedical research may undergo
radiation therapy as part of the research programme. Guidance on the role of the
ethics committee in approving such programmes is given in para. 2.99, and this
normally includes the setting of applicable dose constraints (para. 2.100).
Pregnant patients
5.254. Patients who are pregnant form a special subgroup of patients that
should be given particular consideration with respect to radiation protection. The
decision to treat is one that should be made following consultation between the
pregnant patient and the medical radiological practitioner. These considerations
are described in para. 5.195(a) with respect to justification and para. 5.205 with
respect to optimization. None of these considerations can take place if it is not
known whether the patient is pregnant. Therefore, it is crucial, as is required in

257

paras 3.175 and 3.176 of GSR Part 3 [3], for the radiation therapy facility to have
in place means for ensuring that the pregnancy status of patients is known.
5.255. The first approach is through the posting of clear signs (possibly
including a pictorial representation of pregnancy) in languages easily understood
by the people using the radiation therapy facility, posing the question ‘Are you
pregnant or possibly pregnant?’ and ‘If so, please tell the staff’. Such signs should
be posted widely in the facility, including in waiting rooms and cubicles. The
second approach is to ask patients directly whether they are or might be pregnant.
This might not always be so easy given social and cultural sensitivities, but it
should be done when necessary.
5.256. Neither of the approaches described in para. 5.255 will work if the
patient does not know whether she is pregnant. For this reason, para. 3.176 of
GSR Part 3 [3] has an additional requirement on facilities to “ensure that there
are procedures in place for ascertaining the pregnancy status of a female patient
of reproductive capacity before the performance of any radiological procedure
that could result in a significant dose to the embryo or fetus”. In radiation
therapy, this situation is likely to occur, in particular when it includes treatment
of the abdomen or pelvis area and treatment to volumes near the uterus such that
significant leakage or scatter radiation reaches the embryo or fetus. Cooperation
with the referring medical practitioner, through standard requests for pregnancy
status for specified procedures, is one approach. The referral form should
include a ‘tick box’ for pregnancy status. In case of doubt, a pregnancy test or a
determination of hormone levels to assess menopausal status can be carried out.
Release of patients after permanent brachytherapy implants
5.257. In accordance with para. 3.178 of GSR Part 3 [3], a radiation therapy
facility is required to have arrangements in place to manage the release of
patients who have permanent brachytherapy implants. Once the patient is
released, two groups of persons should be afforded appropriate radiation
protection: the general public whom the patient may encounter or with whom
the patient may interact, and members of the patient’s family and close friends,
who may be viewed simply as also being members of the public or as carers
and comforters. Exposure of members of the public is subject to the public dose
limits (see Box 1), while exposure of carers and comforters is not subject to dose
limits but is instead controlled through dose constraints (see paras 2.46–2.49 and
5.248–5.252). Furthermore, as stated in para. 2.46, public exposure arising from
a single ‘source’, such as the patient with the implants, should be subject to dose
constraints set at some fraction of the dose limits.
258

5.258. The medical physicist or RPO at the radiation therapy facility should
establish prior to the release of a patient that the radioactivity of the implants
is such that the doses that could be received by members of the public would
not exceed the dose limits, and would be unlikely to exceed the relevant dose
constraints for both members of the public and carers and comforters. An
acceptable method of estimating the acceptable activity of permanent implants
for patients being discharged from hospitals is to calculate the time integral of
the ambient dose equivalent rate, considering the activity, energy and half-life
of the radionuclides. In the case of carers and comforters, the assumptions
made for the calculations should be consistent with the written instructions that
will be given at the time the patient is discharged from the facility. Published
data suggest that systematic dose monitoring, at least in the case of permanent
brachytherapy implanted sources for the treatment of prostate cancer, is not
necessary [340, 401].
5.259. As indicated in para. 5.258, the patient or the legal guardian of the patient
should be provided with written instructions on how to keep doses to members of
the public and carers and comforters as low as reasonably achievable. Individuals
of particular concern are children and pregnant partners of patients. The ICRP
provides detailed guidance and a sample information sheet for implanted sources
for prostate cancer in Ref. [401].
5.260. There is a low probability of an implanted seed being expelled, for
example with prostate treatment. The written instructions should cover this
possibility and should provide guidance on what to do and what not to do.
Detailed advice is provided by the ICRP [401].
5.261. The patient with permanent brachytherapy implants should be informed
that, if he or she is to undergo subsequent surgery, the surgeon should be informed
of the presence of the implants; for example, a prostate cancer patient undergoing
subsequent pelvic or abdominal surgery. A wallet card with all relevant
information about the implant is useful [401] (see para. 5.289 on management of
a deceased patient with permanent implants).
5.262. Information should also be provided to the patient on radiation risks,
including guidance with respect to fertility in the case of implants for prostate
cancer [401].

259

Unintended and accidental medical exposures
Prevention of unintended and accidental medical exposures
5.263.

Paragraph 3.179 of GSR Part 3 [3] states that:
“Registrants and licensees…shall ensure that all practicable measures
are taken to minimize the likelihood of unintended or accidental medical
exposures arising from flaws in design and operational failures of
medical radiological equipment, from failures of and errors in software,
or as a result of human error.”

Paragraph 3.180 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that the registrants and licensees
promptly investigate if such exposures occur. General strategies for addressing
those problems include the regular maintenance of medical radiological
equipment and software, a comprehensive programme of quality assurance,
continuing education and training of staff, and the promotion of a safety culture.
Lessons identified from events that have occurred should be used for preventing
or minimizing unintended and accidental medical exposures, as described in
para. 5.273.
5.264. Minimization of the likelihood of unintended or accidental medical
exposures in radiation therapy can be brought about by:
(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

260

The introduction of safety barriers at identified critical points in the process,
with specific quality control checks at these points. Quality control should
not be confined to radiological equipment physical tests or checks, and can
include actions such as checks of the treatment plan or dose prescription by
independent professionals.
Actively encouraging a culture of always working with awareness and
alertness.
Providing detailed protocols and procedures for each process.
Providing sufficient staff who are educated and trained to the appropriate
level, and an effective organization, ensuring reasonable patient throughput.
Continuous professional development and practical training and training
in applications for all staff involved in the preparation and delivery of
radiation therapy.
Clear definitions of the roles, responsibilities and functions of staff in the
radiation therapy facility that are understood by all staff.

5.265. Unusual and complex treatments should always trigger an extra warning,
and each staff member should be aware and alert in these situations. The use
of ‘time-outs’, where staff take time to review what has been planned, prior to
delivering treatment, should be considered.
5.266. As noted in para. 5.264, comprehensive protocols and procedures
covering the various steps in the process should exist for the major part of the
facility’s activities [328–333, 395, 402–408]. Checklists detailing actions, and
signed by the responsible parties at each step, are very helpful [409]. For the
most critical steps, such as commissioning and calibration of equipment, there
should always be a review, either internally or preferably through an external,
independent audit. When new techniques are introduced, they should also be
subject to an audit.
5.267. Preventive measures should include reporting of incidents and
near incidents, analysis and feedback, including lessons from international
experience [276, 377, 379, 380, 410–413]. Preventive measures should also
include checking of the robustness of the safety system of the facility against
reported incidents (see Refs [276, 379, 410] for reviews of case histories from an
extensive collection of accidental medical exposures).
5.268. Proactive risk assessment should also be carried out to try to pre-empt
the occurrence of incidents. The tools used to carry out this type of analysis in
radiation therapy include, for example, process maps or failure trees to facilitate
the identification of possible failure modes, and then the use of prospective
analyses, such as failure mode and effects analysis, and risk matrices to assess
the probability and likely consequences of such unacceptable events. Detailed
guidance on some of these tools and approaches is provided by the ICRP [410]
and the European Commission [404].
5.269. Before the introduction of a new technology into a radiation therapy
facility, general lessons obtained from established technologies may still be
useful, but there will be no specific lessons to share and to apply. In this case,
a proactive assessment is even more necessary. This can be combined with an
early collection and sharing of experience and events by the first users of the new
technology, such as through participation in a reporting system such as SAFRON
and ROSEIS.
5.270. In addition to the guidance in paras 5.263–5.269, the following
three-step strategy (commonly called ‘prospective risk management’) can help to
prevent unintended and accidental exposures in radiation therapy:
261

(a)
(b)
(c)

Allocation of responsibilities to appropriately qualified health professionals
only and ensuring that a management system is in place that includes
radiation protection and safety;
Use of the lessons from unintended and accidental medical exposures to
test whether the management system, including for radiation protection and
safety, is robust enough against these types of event;
Identification of other latent risks by posing the questions ‘What else
could go wrong?’ or ‘What other potential hazards might be present?’in
a systematic, anticipative manner for all steps in the radiation therapy
process, using, for example, the proactive methods briefly described in
para. 5.268.

Investigation of unintended and accidental medical exposures
5.271. The events that constitute unintended or accidental medical exposures
are detailed in para. 3.180 of GSR Part 3 [3], and for a radiation therapy facility
such events include those associated with imaging and with treatment. For
imaging, reference should be made to paras 3.260–3.264 (for X ray) and 4.253
and 4.254 (for nuclear medicine). Unintended and accidental medical exposures
can occur at any stage in the radiation therapy process. For treatment in radiation
therapy, unintended or accidental medical exposures can be either underexposures
or overexposures. The events identified in para. 3.180 of GSR Part 3 [3] also
include near misses, and these should be considered in the same way as actual
events.
5.272. One of the events identified in para. 3.180 of GSR Part 3 [3] is a
dose or dose fractionation being delivered that differs substantially from (over
or under) the prescribed dose. Guidance on the level of dose that would be
considered as substantially different can be found in international and regional
recommendations [379, 403]. A system with clear procedures should be put in
place for identifying when this type of event occurs. For example, unintended
or accidental medical exposures involving a total dose 10% or more over that
prescribed will generally be detectable in most cases by the radiation oncologist
or relevant health professional, on the basis of an unusually high incidence of
adverse patient reactions [379], and the radiation therapy facility’s procedures
should include such patient monitoring to act as a trigger for further investigation.
The clinical identification of situations in which a dose is delivered under the
prescribed dose is more difficult, but may become evident through poor tumour
control; again, monitoring for such situations should be part of the radiation
therapy facility’s procedures. In addition to the clinically based approaches to
identifying doses delivered that are substantially different from those prescribed,
262

other approaches should be used in parallel, including the review processes that
are part of quality assurance.
5.273. The radiation therapy facility should put in place a system to manage
the investigation of unintended and accidental medical exposures, and the
ensuing actions and reporting. Paragraph 3.181 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes
what is required during the course of the investigation. This includes calculation
or estimation of patient doses, which should be performed by a medical
physicist, identification and implementation of corrective actions, records of
the investigation, and for the radiological medical practitioner to inform the
patient and the patient’s referring medical practitioner. A record of the calculation
method and results should also be placed in the patient’s file. When required,
counselling of the patient should be undertaken by an individual with appropriate
experience and clinical knowledge.
5.274. The investigation of unintended and accidental medical exposures, as
required by paras 3.180 and 3.181 of GSR Part 3 [3], has three main purposes.
The first is to assess the consequences for the patients affected and to provide
remedial and health care actions if necessary. The second is to establish what
went wrong and how to prevent or minimize the likelihood of a recurrence in the
radiation therapy facility (i.e. the investigation is for the facility’s benefit and the
patients’ benefit). The third purpose is to provide information to other persons or
other radiation therapy facilities. Dissemination of information about unintended
and accidental medical exposures and radiation injuries has greatly contributed
to improving methods for minimizing their occurrence. The regulatory body
and/or the health authorities could disseminate information on significant events
reported to them and on the corrective actions taken, so that other facilities might
learn from these events (see also para. 5.275). Another approach, independent
from any legal requirement for reporting to the regulatory body, is to participate
in voluntary international or national databases designed as educative tools. Two
international such databases for radiation therapy are the SAFRON and ROSEIS
reporting systems. Facilities performing radiation therapy should be active
participants and users of SAFRON, ROSEIS or similar international databases or
equivalent national ones.
5.275. Paragraph 3.181 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes requirements for
the reporting (in writing) of significant events to the regulatory body and, if
appropriate, to the relevant health authority. The regulatory body may also specify
its own requirements for the reporting of events by registrants and licensees. It
is difficult to quantify the term ‘significant’: specification of a numerical trigger
value immediately creates an artificial distinction between values immediately
263

below that value (and hence would not be reported) and those just above the value
(which would be reported). However, the attributes of significant events can be
elaborated, and events with one or more of these attributes should be reported
to the regulatory body. Such attributes would include the occurrence of, or the
potential for, serious unintended or unexpected health effects due to radiation
exposure, the likelihood of a similar event occurring in other radiation therapy
facilities, a large number of patients having been affected, and gross misconduct
or negligence by the responsible health professionals. As stated in para. 5.274,
one of the roles of the regulatory body for such a reported event is to disseminate
information on the event and any lessons identified to all potentially affected
parties, typically other radiation therapy facilities and relevant professional
bodies, but also in some cases manufacturers, suppliers and maintenance
companies.
5.276. Irrespective of whether the event is also reported to the regulatory
body, feedback to staff should be provided in a timely fashion and, where
changes are recommended, all staff should be involved in bringing about their
implementation.
Records and review
Radiological review
5.277. Paragraph 3.182 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that radiological reviews be
performed periodically at the radiation therapy facility. This involves considering
both justification and optimization aspects of radiation protection. For the
latter, the results of the programme of quality assurance for medical exposures,
including the periodic independent audit, will be a significant input to the
process. As described in paras 2.148 and 2.149, the wider clinical audit could
include the radiological review with its assessment of the effective application of
the requirements for justification and optimization in the facility for the radiation
therapy being performed [50, 414].
5.278. To facilitate compliance with para. 3.182 of GSR Part 3 [3] and to learn
from periodic radiological reviews, the methodology used, the original physical,
technical and clinical parameters considered and the conclusions reached should
be documented and taken into account prior to any new review that may result in
an update of institutional policies and procedures.
5.279. In radiation therapy, radiological reviews should consider patient
outcome (survival, control of disease, acute side effects or late side effects), and
264

the effect of introducing new technologies or new techniques on efficiency and
cost, such as, for example, the effect of the introduction of hypofractionation
either for curative or palliative intent. A system for the ongoing collection of
relevant data to support such reviews should be in place at the facility.
Records
5.280. Records should be in place to demonstrate ongoing compliance with
radiation protection requirements. Paragraphs 3.183–3.185 of GSR Part 3 [3]
establish the requirements for maintaining personnel records, records of
calibration, dosimetry and quality assurance, and records of medical exposure.
These records are required to be kept for the period specified by the regulatory
body. In the absence of such a requirement, a suggested period for keeping
records is ten years. In the case of children, records should be kept for a longer
time.
5.281. In the case of records for a radiation therapy facility, care should also
be taken to retain the records of the imaging radiological procedures (X ray and
nuclear medicine) performed while preparing, planning, treating and verifying
the treatment.
RADIATION PROTECTION OF THE PUBLIC
5.282. Public exposure can arise from the performance of radiation therapy for
persons in and around the radiation therapy facility.
5.283. The requirements for public protection established in paras 3.117–3.137
of GSR Part 3 [3] apply to radiation therapy facilities. This subsection contains
guidance that is specific to radiation therapy facilities. More general and
comprehensive guidance on radiation protection of the public is given in
GSG-8 [24].
5.284. Persons who will be undergoing radiation therapy are also considered
members of the public during the time when the treatment or other radiological
procedure is not taking place, for example, while they are sitting in the waiting
room. Similarly for carers and comforters, any exposure incurred other than
during the radiological procedure in which they are involved will be public
exposure.

265

5.285. Members of the public also include visitors, such as persons delivering
goods or supplies, sales personnel, accompanying persons and other patients in
the facility.
External exposure and contamination
5.286. The primary means for protecting the public from external exposure
is the shielding in place at the radiation therapy facility (see paras 5.45–5.53),
which should be sufficient so that public exposure resulting from being in any
immediately adjacent areas, including accessible rooms above and below, is
in compliance with the public dose limits, and preferably less than any dose
constraint that the regulatory body may have applied (see paras 2.16, 2.17
and 2.46).
5.287. Patients receiving permanent implants might expose members of the
public in the radiation therapy facility and upon discharge. Patients receiving
temporary implants might also expose members of the public in the radiation
therapy facility. In the radiation therapy facility, the RPO should establish rules
to ensure that the exposure of any member of the public will be less than the
public dose limit and, preferably, lower than any applicable dose constraint. An
acceptable method to estimate the acceptable retained activity for patients being
discharged is described in para. 5.258. Assumptions made in these calculations
with regard to time and distance should be consistent with the instructions given
to patients at the time of discharge of the patient from the radiation therapy
facility. Results of the calculations should be recorded. Examples of such
calculations are given in Ref. [415].
5.288. When deciding on the appropriate activity at discharge for a particular
patient, the licensee and the RPO should take into account the transport and the
living conditions of the patient, such as the extent to which the patient can be
isolated from other family members and the need to manage safely the patient’s
excreta and body fluids, which may contain a migrating source. In some cases,
such as for elderly patients or paediatric patients, it may be necessary to discuss
the precautions to be taken with other family members.
5.289. Radiation protection precautions may be required after the death of a
patient with permanent implants, for autopsy, embalming, burial or cremation.
These precautions should be determined by the RPO, on the basis of a generic
safety assessment of the need for monitoring personnel who carry out these
procedures, the need for monitoring the premises and the need for minimizing
external radiation exposure and the potential for contamination. Whole body
266

monitoring and finger monitoring may be required for individuals carrying out
autopsies or embalming, as contamination and radioactive waste are likely to be
generated [401]. Other considerations, such as cultural or ethical concerns, should
be taken into account. A particular example is the cremation of patients with
permanent implants, where strict radiation protection considerations indicate that
the ashes should be stored until adequate decay has been achieved before they are
released to the family, or the cremation should not be carried out, depending on
the time of death and the half-life of the radionuclide [416].
Control of access
5.290. Access to areas where radiation is being used should be controlled to
ensure doses to visitors are below the dose limits and constraints for the public.
Paragraph 3.128 of GSR Part 3 [3] requires that access of visitors to controlled
areas or supervised areas be restricted. In exceptional cases, a visitor may be
permitted to enter a controlled area, but he or she should be accompanied at all
times by a staff member who knows the protection and safety measures for the
area. Written procedures should be drawn up specifying when such exceptions
can take place and who may accompany the visitor. Particular consideration, in
all cases, should be given with respect to women who are or may be pregnant.
5.291. Controlled areas and supervised areas should be clearly identified to
help to prevent inadvertent entry to areas where treatment or other radiological
procedures are being performed (see also para. 5.21). Further control can be
afforded by the use of keys (or passwords) to restrict access to the control panels
of medical radiological equipment to authorized persons only.
Radioactive sources no longer in use
5.292. When a radioactive source in the radiation therapy facility is no longer
needed or is no longer viable for their medical purpose, the licensee should ensure
that the source is either transferred or disposed of appropriately. The licensee
retains responsibility for the source until the time of its transfer to another
appropriate licensee or to an authorized waste disposal facility. Detailed guidance
on the management of radioactive waste applicable to radiation therapy facilities
is given in SSG-45 [277].
5.293.
(a)

Specifically for radioactive source teletherapy equipment, the licensee:

Should notify the regulatory body of any intention to transfer or
decommission 60Co teletherapy equipment prior to doing so. Depleted
267

(b)

uranium used as shielding material should also be treated as radioactive
waste. For example, a 60Co teletherapy head might contain depleted
uranium and should be managed appropriately.
Should ensure that resources for the disposal of the sources will be made
available when the teletherapy equipment is to be decommissioned.

5.294. The regulatory body may require an applicant for a licence to have
in place a programme for the safe disposal or return of the radioactive sources
when their use is discontinued, before authorization for the import or purchase of
equipment or radiation sources is given. A contract with the manufacturer for the
return of sources is acceptable evidence of such a programme.
Activation products
5.295. When equipment used for radiotherapy purposes is decommissioned,
the licensee should ensure that activated materials from the head of the linac are
correctly disposed of.
Monitoring and reporting
5.296. The programme for monitoring public exposure arising from radiation
therapy should include dose assessment in the areas in and surrounding the
radiation therapy facility that are accessible to the public. Doses can be derived
from the shielding calculations in the planning stage, combined with the results
from area monitoring at the initial operation of the facility and periodically
thereafter. Records of dose assessments should be kept for a period that meets
any relevant regulatory requirements. In the absence of such requirements, a
suggested period for keeping records is seven to ten years.
PREVENTION AND MITIGATION OF ACCIDENTS
Safety assessments of potential exposure
5.297. To comply with the requirements for safety assessments established
in paras 3.29–3.36 of GSR Part 3 [3], the registrant or licensee is required to
conduct a safety assessment applied to all stages of the design and operation of
the radiotherapy facility. Furthermore, para. 3.29 of GSR Part 3 [3] states that:
“the responsible person or organization shall be required to submit a safety
assessment, which shall be reviewed and assessed by the regulatory body.”

268

Paragraphs 2.150–2.154 describe general considerations for facilities using
ionizing radiation for medical purposes.
5.298. The safety assessment of potential exposure should be systematic,
should identify unintended events that can lead to potential exposure, and should
consider their likelihood and potential consequences. Information on events,
causes and contributing factors identified from reported accidents is available in
Refs [276, 377, 379, 380, 404, 405, 410–413] (see also Appendix I for a summary
of typical causes and contributing factors to accidental exposures in radiation
therapy). The safety assessment should not only cover these events, but should
also aim at anticipating other events that have not previously been reported.
Clearly, the safety assessment should be documented.
5.299.
(a)
(b)
(c)

The safety assessment should be revised when:

New or modified radiation sources are introduced, including equipment and
new or renovated facilities;
Operational changes occur, including changes in workload;
Operational experience or information on accidents or errors indicates that
the safety assessment is to be reviewed.

5.300. Safety assessments for radiation therapy facilities performing
brachytherapy or teletherapy with sealed sources should include consideration of
all the steps associated with sealed sources, including the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Ordering, transporting and receiving sealed sources;
Unpacking, storing, preparing and handling sources prior to their use in the
treatment of the patient;
Care of patients with high amounts of activity;
Storage and handling of sources after removal and the management of
unused radioactive seeds.

5.301. The safety assessment for a radiation therapy facility, as described in
para. 5.300, can be complemented by participation in international networks
for sharing information, such as SAFRON and ROSEIS or in national networks
such as the Radiation Oncology Incident Learning System (RO–ILS) and the
National Reporting and Learning Systems (NRLS). In order to ensure that the
safety assessment is comprehensive and is not restricted to past events but also
anticipates other possible events, consideration should also be given to the use
of systematic techniques, for example fault and event trees and probabilistic

269

safety assessment technique, such as those described for unintended or accidental
medical exposure of patients in para. 5.268.
5.302. For radiation therapy, as described in para. 5.263, possible scenarios for
potential exposure include flaws in the design of medical radiological equipment,
failures of medical radiological equipment while in operation, failures and errors
in software that control or influence the delivery of the radiation, and human
error. Potential exposure can also arise in imaging, during patient preparation,
simulation in treatment planning and in guidance during treatment.
Prevention of accidents
5.303. Accident prevention is clearly the best means for avoiding potential
exposure, and paras 3.39–3.42 of GSR Part 3 [3] establish the requirements for
good engineering practice, defence in depth and facility based arrangements to
achieve this. Design considerations for medical radiological equipment, ancillary
equipment and the radiation therapy facility are described in paras 5.10–5.87.
5.304.
(a)
(b)

The licensee should incorporate:

Defence in depth measures to cope with events identified in the safety
assessment, and evaluation of the reliability of the safety systems (including
administrative and operational procedures, equipment and facility design).
Operational experience and lessons from accidents and errors [276,
379, 410]. This information should be incorporated into the training,
maintenance and quality assurance programmes.

5.305. Means for preventing or minimizing unintended and accidental medical
exposures in radiation therapy are described in paras 5.263–5.270, and the
ensuing investigation and corrective actions are described in paras 5.271–5.276.
Mitigation of the consequences of accidents
5.306.

Paragraph 1.20 of GSR Part 3 [3] states that:
“If an event or a sequence of events that has been considered in the
assessment of potential exposure does actually occur, it may be treated
either as a planned exposure situation or, if an emergency has been
declared, as an emergency exposure situation.”

270

On the basis of events identified in the safety assessment for the radiotherapy
facility, mitigatory procedures should be prepared for events associated with
potential exposure, including the allocation of responsibilities and resources, the
development and implementation of procedures, and the provision of training
and periodic retraining of the relevant staff in executing the mitigatory measures.
5.307.

Paragraph 3.43 of GSR Part 3 [3] states that:
“If the safety assessment indicates that there is a reasonable likelihood
of an emergency affecting either workers or members of the public, the
registrant or licensee shall prepare an emergency plan for the protection
of people and the environment.”

Emergency arrangements and procedures commensurate with the hazard assessed
and the potential consequences are required to be established, as appropriate, in
accordance with GSR Part 7 [7], GSG-2 [8] and GS-G-2.1 [9]. As part of the
emergency arrangements, responsibilities and resources, emergency procedures,
and the provision of training and periodic retraining of the relevant staff in
executing the necessary response actions should be established.
5.308. Owing to the fact that very high doses can be received within seconds
or minutes, if an emergency occurs in a radiation therapy facility, personnel
should act promptly. Thus, emergency procedures should include response time
objectives, and they should be regularly tested in exercises.
5.309. The exposure of workers involved in mitigation of the consequences
of radiation therapy events or in emergency response should be kept below the
dose limits for occupational exposure in planned exposure situations. However,
if it is justified that these dose limits are exceeded, emergency workers should
be protected in accordance with the requirements and guidance for emergency
exposure situations contained in section 4 of GSR Part 3 [3], and GSR Part 7 [7]
and GSG-7 [23].
Stuck sources: General
5.310. Mitigatory procedures and emergency procedures should be short,
concise, unambiguous and, if necessary, illustrated with drawings without
explanatory text. They should be able to be read at ‘first sight’ and followed. It
should be made clear that the first sight procedures refer to actions to be taken
immediately to prevent or limit serious overexposures, or to take other lifesaving

271

actions [417]. Further actions to recover the source, and to repair and test the
equipment for returning it to use are not of the same urgency.
5.311. In radiation therapy, however, the patient is directly in the radiation
beam or brachytherapy sources are placed inside the patient; for this reason, some
of the response actions will be the same as source recovery actions, for example
the retrieval of remote control brachytherapy sources from the patient and their
return to the safe, either manually, electrically or using the manual crank.
Stuck sources: 60Co teletherapy units
5.312. Mitigation procedures and emergency procedures should be posted at
the treatment unit. These procedures should ensure that the patient is removed
from the primary beam as quickly and efficiently as possible whilst minimizing
exposure of the personnel involved.
5.313. In the case of such an event, the first step is to note the time, and
immediately to use the source driving mechanism to return the source to the
shielded position. If there is a patient on the treatment couch, the patient should
be removed from the area and the area should be secured from further entry.
Emphasis should be placed on avoiding exposure of personnel to the primary
beam. The medical physicist or the RPO should be notified and should take
control of the situation, including deciding when it is safe to re-enter the room.
Before resuming the treatment of patients, the medical physicist should check
the calibration of the radiation therapy and should verify that it has not changed,
particularly in the event of a timer error in 60Co teletherapy units.
5.314. Actions should be performed only by personnel that are knowledgeable
and trained in the response actions and have regularly participated in drills and
exercises.
5.315. After the necessary response actions have been implemented, the
following should be done:
(a)
(b)
(c)

272

The maintenance or service engineer should be contacted to perform an
inspection of the machine.
The medical physicist should assess the patient doses and should check the
machine for re-use after the engineer has completed the inspection and any
associated maintenance.
The RPO should assess the doses to personnel involved in response to the
event and recovery.

(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)

A record should be kept of all actions.
The regulatory body may need to be notified, depending on the State’s
regulations.
Information should be sent to an international safety learning system such
as SAFRON or ROSEIS or a national learning system.
Medical attention, as necessary, should be provided to those involved,
commensurate with the doses received [7, 8].

Stuck sources: Remote control brachytherapy units
5.316. The emergency plan should require having an emergency container
available in the treatment room, as well as an emergency kit containing long
handled forceps for manipulation of the source guide tubes, and applicators
if the source fails to return to the safe, as stated in paras 5.135 and 5.137.
The emergency container should be placed close to the patient and should be
sufficiently large to accept the entire applicator assembly containing the source
that has been removed from the patient. Staff should be trained on how to apply
such a procedure and should regularly participate in drills and exercises.
5.317. In HDR applications, the short response time (minutes) required
for contingency actions imposes the need for the immediate availability of a
radiological medical practitioner, a medical physicist and a medical radiation
technologist during all applications. Each one of these professionals should be
educated and trained in emergency procedures and actions.
5.318. Manufacturers usually provide suggested emergency procedures if
the source fails to return to the safe. Such procedures assume that the physical
integrity of the applicator is maintained. These procedures are specific to the
actual afterloading unit but generally involve a standard sequence, as stated in
para. 5.136.
5.319. After the necessary response actions have been implemented, the
following should be done:
(a)
(b)
(c)

The maintenance or service engineer should be contacted to perform an
inspection and, if necessary, repair the machine.
The medical physicist should make an assessment of the patient doses
arising from the incident, and should check the machine for re-use after the
engineer has completed the inspection and any associated maintenance.
The RPO should make an assessment of the dose to personnel involved in
response and recovery.
273

(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)

The assessments should be recorded.
The regulatory body may need to be notified, depending on the State’s
regulations.
Information should be sent to an international safety learning system such
as SAFRON or ROSEIS or a national learning system.
Medical attention, as necessary, should be provided to those involved,
commensurate with the doses received [7, 8].

Incidents and accidents during source replacement
5.320. Only trained and authorized maintenance or servicing personnel should
deal with accidents during a change of a source in external beam radiotherapy
or remote control brachytherapy units. If the participation of radiation therapy
personnel is necessary for any of these actions, the scope of this participation
should be limited to operating the equipment. The respective responsibilities of
radiation therapy personnel and maintenance or servicing personnel for these
specific situations should be clearly defined.
Contamination
5.321. Although 226Ra has been removed from most radiation therapy facilities,
encapsulated 137Cs sources used in manual afterloading still exist, and there
is always a possibility that the encapsulation may rupture. In the case of a
contamination event, the area should be closed to further entry and all individuals
who were in the area should be surveyed, and decontaminated if necessary.
Windows should be closed and other ventilation systems should be turned off.
The RPO should be contacted immediately once the possibility of contamination
is suspected. Contact details for the RPO should be posted throughout the
radiation therapy facility.
Lost radiation therapy sources
5.322. A detailed, up to date inventory of all sources should be maintained by
the RPO of the radiation therapy facility so that it can be determined immediately
which source is missing, its type and activity, its last known location, and who
was last in possession of it. The area where the sources were last known to
be should be closed to entry and exit until after a survey has been conducted.
This search should be performed with the most sensitive radiation survey meter
available.

274

5.323. If a source cannot be located and it is suspected that it is off the site, the
relevant authorities should be notified and immediate actions should be taken in
accordance with GSR Part 7 [7] and GS-G-2.1 [9].
SAFETY IN THE TRANSPORT OF RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL
5.324. Paragraph 2.25 of GSR Part 3 [3] establishes the requirements for the
transport of radioactive material, invoking in particular SSR-6 (Rev. 1) [279].
SSR-6 (Rev. 1) [279] uses the defined terms ‘consignor’ to mean any person,
organization or government that prepares a consignment for transport, and
‘consignee’ to mean any person, organization or government that is entitled to
take delivery of a consignment. ‘Consignment’ is also a defined term, meaning
any package or packages, or load of radioactive material, presented by a
consignor for transport.
5.325. The licensee of a radiation therapy facility may be both a consignee
and a consignor, and hence may have responsibilities for both the receipt and
the shipment of radioactive sources, for example, sources for external beam
radiotherapy and brachytherapy.
5.326. The detailed requirements for the safe transport of radioactive material,
including general provisions, activity limits and classification, requirements and
controls for transport, requirements for radioactive material and for packagings
and packages, test procedures, and approval and administrative requirements, are
established in SSR-6 (Rev. 1) [279]. Emergency arrangements for the transport
of radioactive material should be put in place, in line with the requirements of
GSR Part 7 [7] and the guidelines of the regulatory body. The licensee and the
RPO of the radiation therapy facility should be familiar with these regulations to
ensure that the transport of radioactive material for which they are responsible
complies with the regulations.

275

Appendix I
SUMMARY OF TYPICAL CAUSES OF, AND CONTRIBUTING
FACTORS TO, ACCIDENTAL EXPOSURES IN MEDICAL USES OF
IONIZING RADIATION
DIAGNOSTIC RADIOLOGY AND INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
I.1. Problems leading to accidental exposures associated with the use of
radiation in diagnostic radiology and image guided interventional procedures that
have been identified from previously reported incidents include the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Equipment not meeting IEC or equivalent national standards;
Maintenance errors;
Errors in the identification of patients and examination sites;
Inappropriate examination protocols or a lack of examination protocols.

I.2. Factors that may influence the frequency and severity of accidental
exposures include the following:
(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)

Insufficient training and expertise of radiological medical practitioners
(in particular interventionists), medical physicists or medical radiation
technologists, in the following areas:
—— Lack of knowledge about the equipment being used and its features and
options;
—— Lack of knowledge about the optimization of protection and safety for
patients;
—— Lack of knowledge about the optimization of protection and safety for
staff.
No reassessment of staffing requirements after the purchase of new
equipment or an increase in workload.
Inadequate quality assurance and lack of defence in depth, as follows:
—— Dose rates for interventional equipment set too high;
—— AEC malfunction.
Lack of a programme for acceptance tests and commissioning of equipment.
Lack of a maintenance programme.
Poor, misunderstood or violated procedures.
Lack of operating documents in a language understandable to users.
Dose display or dose rate display not used during a procedure.
Lack of dose alerts if selected factors seem inappropriate.
277

(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)

Lack of radiation protection tools and devices in the examination room.
Misunderstanding of displays or software messages.
Inattention of staff to the task at hand.
Inconsistent use of different quantities and units.

I.3. In most accidental exposures, there was a combination of several
contributing factors, which can be summarized as follows:
(a)
(b)
(c)

Lack of commitment of the licensee (administrators and managers of the
medical facility and/or the radiology facility);
Staff insufficiently trained;
Insufficient quality assurance.

NUCLEAR MEDICINE
I.4. Problems that lead to accidental exposures associated with the use of
radiation in nuclear medicine that have been identified from previously reported
incidents include the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Communication
errors,
faulty
transmission
of
information,
misunderstanding of prescriptions and protocols, or use of obsolete
protocols;
Errors in the identification of the patient;
Use of the wrong source, the wrong radiopharmaceutical or the wrong
activity;
Calibration errors;
Maintenance errors.

I.5. Factors that may influence the frequency and severity of accidental
exposures include the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
278

Insufficient training and expertise of radiological medical practitioners
(nuclear medicine physicians), medical physicists or medical radiation
technologists (nuclear medicine technologists);
No reassessment of staffing requirements after the purchase of new
equipment, the hiring of new medical radiation technologists or an increase
in workload;
Inadequate quality assurance and lack of defence in depth;
Lack of a programme for acceptance tests and commissioning of equipment;
Lack of a maintenance programme;
Poor, misunderstood or violated procedures;

(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)

Lack of operating documents in a language understandable to users;
Misunderstanding of displays or software messages;
Inattention of staff to the task at hand;
Inconsistent use of different quantities and units.

I.6. In most accidental exposures, there was a combination of several
contributing factors, which can be summarized as follows:
(a)
(b)
(c)

Lack of commitment of the licensee (administrators and managers of the
medical facility and/or the nuclear medicine facility);
Staff insufficiently briefed or trained;
Insufficient quality assurance.

RADIATION THERAPY
I.7. Problems that lead to accidental exposures associated with using radiation
in radiation therapy that have been identified from previously reported incidents
include the following:
(a)

(b)

(c)

External beam radiotherapy and brachytherapy:
—— Equipment not meeting IEC or equivalent national standards;
—— Maintenance errors;
—— Errors in the identification of patients and treatment sites;
—— Conflicting signals and displays misinterpreted or not followed up;
—— Communication
errors,
transmission
of
information
and
misunderstanding of prescriptions and protocols, or use of obsolete
protocols;
—— Use of obsolete files and forms that were still accessible.
External beam radiotherapy:
—— Errors in acceptance tests and commissioning or lack of tests of radiation
equipment and sources and TPSs;
—— Errors in the calibration of radiotherapy beams;
—— Errors in the preparation of tables and curves from which the treatment
time is calculated;
—— Errors in the use of TPSs for individual patients.
Brachytherapy:
—— Use of an incorrect source, incorrect source applicator or incorrect units
of source strength;
—— Dislodging of HDR/PDR brachytherapy sources;
—— Mistakes in source handling during brachytherapy treatment;
—— Leakage or rupture of sealed source encapsulation;
279

—— Sources left in patients and loss of radiation sources;
—— Movement of the applicator during treatment.
I.8. The following contributing factors allowed these errors to remain
undetected until they became accidental medical exposures:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)

Insufficient education of the radiological medical practitioner (radiation
oncologist), medical physicist, medical radiation technologist (radiotherapy
technologist), maintenance engineers and brachytherapy nurses;
Overloaded staff when new equipment was purchased or workload
increased;
Insufficient quality assurance and lack of independent checks for safety
critical activities, such as beam calibration;
Lack of a programme for acceptance testing and commissioning;
Lack of a maintenance programme;
Poor, misunderstood or violated procedures;
Lack of operating documents in a language understandable to the users;
Inattention of staff to the task at hand (work in an environment in which
staff were prone to distraction);
Inconsistent use of quantities and units.

I.9. In most accidental exposures, there was a combination of several
contributing factors, which can be summarized as follows:
(a)
(b)
(c)

280

Lack of commitment of the licensee (administrators and managers of the
medical facility and/or the radiation therapy facility);
Insufficiently educated or trained staff;
Insufficient quality assurance and defence in depth.

Appendix II
AVOIDANCE OF PREGNANCY FOLLOWING
RADIOPHARMACEUTICAL THERAPY
II.1. The periods for which it is recommended to avoid becoming pregnant
following radiopharmaceutical therapy with long lived radionuclides are given in
Table 2, adapted with modifications from Ref. [238].
TABLE 2. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR AVOIDANCE OF PREGNANCY
FOLLOWING RADIOPHARMACEUTICAL THERAPY
Nuclide and
form

Disease

All activities
up toa (MBq)

Avoid pregnancy
(months)

32

Polycythaemia and related disorders

200

3

89

Bone metastases

150

24

90

Arthritic joints

400

0

90

Cancer

4000

1

131

Benign thyroid disease

800

6–12

131

Thyroid cancer

6000

6–12

131

Malignancy

7500

3

153

Bone metastases

2600

1

169

Arthritic joints

400

0

P phosphate
Sr chloride
Y colloid
Y antibody or
Y-octreotide

90

I iodide
I iodide
I MIBGb
Sm colloid
Er colloid

a

The administration of activities smaller than those indicated in column 3 does not imply that
the advisory period specified in column 4 can be reduced.
b
Metaiodobenzylguanidine.

281

Appendix III
CESSATION OF BREAST-FEEDING
III.1. Recommendations for cessation of breast-feeding following administration
of various radiopharmaceuticals are given in Table 3, adapted from the
recommendations of Refs [235, 236, 238, 259]. A conservative approach is
applied in cases in which recommendations in literature differ.
III.2. The advice on breast-feeding interruption takes into account both internal
exposure from breast milk and external exposure of the infant from the mother.
The milk expressed during the interruption period should be discharged.
III.3. For radiopharmaceuticals not included in the Table 3, the period of
interruption of breast-feeding should continue until the radiopharmaceutical is
no longer secreted in an amount estimated to give an effective dose greater than
1 mSv to the child [259].

282

TABLE 3. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CESSATION OF BREASTFEEDING
FOLLOWING
ADMINISTRATION
OF
RADIOPHARMACEUTICALS
Typical
administered
activity
(MBq)

Feeding
interruption
time

Tumour, brain or
myocardial imaging

Any

No

13

N labelled

Myocardial imaging

Any

No

15

O labelled

Flow/perfusion measurements

Any

No

18

F-FDG

Tumour and infection imaging

400

4 ha

51

Cr-EDTA

GFR

2

No

67

Ga-citrate

Tumour and infection imaging

200

>3 weeks or
complete
cessation

68

Ga-DOTA-conjugated
peptides

Tumour imaging

100–200

4 ha

99m

Tc-DMSA

Renal cortical imaging

80–200

4 hb

99m

Tc-DTPA

Renal imaging and function
(GFR)

40–400

4 hb

99m

Tc-ECD

Brain perfusion

800

4 hb

99m

Tc-HMPAO

Brain perfusion

500

4 hb

Tc-MDP and other
phosphate agents
(e.g. HDP and DPD)

Bone scan

800

4 hb

99m

Tc-MIBI

Myocardial perfusion,
parathyroid scanning

250–700

4 hb

99m

Tc-tetrofosmin

Myocardial perfusion

250–700

4 hb

99m

Tc-SC

Liver scan

200–400

4 hb

99m

Tc-DTPA aerosol

Lung ventilation imaging
and function

50

4 hb

Radiopharmaceutical

11

C labelled

99m

Most common clinical use

283

TABLE 3. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CESSATION OF BREASTFEEDING
FOLLOWING
ADMINISTRATION
OF
RADIOPHARMACEUTICALS (cont.)

Radiopharmaceutical

Most common clinical use

Typical
administered
activity
(MBq)

Feeding
interruption
time

99m

Tc labelled carbon
(Technegas)

Lung ventilation imaging

40

4 hb

99m

Tc-MAG3

Imaging and function of
kidneys and urinary tract

40–400

4 hb

99m

Tc-pertechnetate

Thyroid scan, Meckel’s
diverticulum

100–400

12 hc

99m

Tc-MAA

Lung perfusion imaging

40–150

12 h

99m

Infection imaging

180–400

12 h

99m

Radionuclide ventriculography

800

12 h

99m

Tc-mebrofenin/
disofenin and other IDA
derivatives

Hepatobiliary imaging
and function

300

4 hb

99m

Tc human albumin
nanocolloidal particles

Sentinel nodes
Liver scanning

5–120
120–200

4 hb
4 hb

111

Neuroendocrine tumours
(somatostatine receptor
scintigraphy)

100–200

60 h (2.5 d)

123

I-MIBG

Neuroblastoma imaging

400

>3 weeks or
complete
cessationd

123

I-NaI

Thyroid imaging and function

20

>3 weeks or
complete
cessationd

123

I-ioflupane (FP-CIT)

Dopaminergic
neurotransmission (D1) in
movement disorders

150–250

>3 weeks or
complete
cessationd

123

I-hippurate

Imaging and function of
kidneys and urinary tract

20–40

12 he

Tc-exametazime WBC
Tc labelled RBC

In-octreotide

284

TABLE 3. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CESSATION OF BREASTFEEDING
FOLLOWING
ADMINISTRATION
OF
RADIOPHARMACEUTICALS (cont.)

Radiopharmaceutical

Most common clinical use

Typical
administered
activity
(MBq)

Feeding
interruption
time

131

Diagnostic and therapy of
benign and malignant
thyroid diseases

Any

Complete
cessationf

131

Adrenal tumour imaging
and therapy

Any

>3 weeks or
complete
cessation

201

Myocardial perfusion

100

96 h (4 d)

I-NaI

I-MIBG

Tl-chloride

Note: DMSA — dimercaptosuccinic acid; DPD — dicarboxypropane diphosphonate;
DTPA — diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid; ECD — ethyl cysteinate dimer;
EDTA — ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid; FDG — fluorodeoxyglucose;
GFR — glomerular filtration rate; HDP — hydroxymethane diphosphonate;
HMPAO — hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime; IDA — iminodiacetic acid;
MAA — macroaggregate of albumin; MAG3 — mercaptoacetyltriglycine;
MDP — methylene diphosphonate; MIBG — metaiodobenzylguanidine;
MIBI — methoxyisobutylisonitrile; RBC — red blood cells; SC — sulphur colloid;
WBC — white blood cells.
a
The interruption time of 4 h during which one meal should be discharged takes into account
both internal exposure from breast milk and external exposure of the infant from the mother.
b
The interruption time of 4 h during which one meal should be discharged takes into account
both internal exposure from breast milk in those unusual situations when free pertechnetate
is not negligible, and external exposure of the infant from the mother.
c
Activities of 99mTc-pertechnetate higher than 400 MBq require an interruption time of 24 h.
d
The recommended interruption time of at least 3 weeks for all substances labelled with 123I
(except iodohippurate) is due to the risk of presence of impurities of other iodine isotopes
(124I or 125I).
e
The interruption time of 12 h only concerns patients with normal renal function.
f
Patients should discontinue breast-feeding 6 weeks before radioiodine administration in
order to minimize the radiation dose to the breast.

285

REFERENCES
[1] UNITED NATIONS SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON THE EFFECTS OF ATOMIC
RADIATION, Sources and Effects of Ionizing Radiation, UNSCEAR 2008 Report to
the General Assembly, with Scientific Annexes, Vol. I: Sources, United Nations,
New York (2010).
[2] EUROPEAN ATOMIC ENERGY COMMUNITY, FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS, INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC
ENERGY
AGENCY,
INTERNATIONAL
LABOUR
ORGANIZATION,
INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION, OECD NUCLEAR ENERGY
AGENCY, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, UNITED NATIONS
ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME, WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION,
Fundamental Safety Principles, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SF-1, IAEA,
Vienna (2006).
[3] EUROPEAN COMMISSION, FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF
THE UNITED NATIONS, INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY,
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION, OECD NUCLEAR ENERGY
AGENCY, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, UNITED NATIONS
ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME, WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Radiation
Protection and Safety of Radiation Sources: International Basic Safety Standards, IAEA
Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 3, IAEA, Vienna (2014).
[4] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, The 2007
Recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological Protection,
Publication 103, Elsevier (2007).
[5] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, IAEA Safety Glossary:
Terminology Used in Nuclear Safety and Radiation Protection (2007 Edition), IAEA,
Vienna (2007).
[6] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Justification of Practices, Including
Non-medical Human Imaging, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSG-5, IAEA,
Vienna (2014).
[7] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL CIVIL
AVIATION ORGANIZATION, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION,
INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION, INTERPOL, OECD NUCLEAR
ENERGY AGENCY, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, PREPARATORY
COMMISSION FOR THE COMPREHENSIVE NUCLEAR-TEST-BAN TREATY
ORGANIZATION, UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME, UNITED
NATIONS OFFICE FOR THE COORDINATION OF HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS,
WORLD
HEALTH
ORGANIZATION,
WORLD
METEOROLOGICAL
ORGANIZATION, Preparedness and Response for a Nuclear or Radiological
Emergency, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 7, IAEA, Vienna (2015).

287

[8] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR
OFFICE, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION, Criteria for Use in Preparedness and Response for a Nuclear or
Radiological Emergency, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSG-2, IAEA,
Vienna (2011).
[9] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR
OFFICE, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, UNITED NATIONS
OFFICE FOR THE COORDINATION OF HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS, WORLD
HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Arrangements for Preparedness for a Nuclear or
Radiological Emergency, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GS-G-2.1, IAEA,
Vienna (2007).
[10] INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSION
ON
RADIATION
UNITS
AND
MEASUREMENTS, Patient Dosimetry for X Rays used in Medical Imaging, ICRU
Report 74, ICRU, Bethesda, MD (2006).
[11] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Dosimetry in Diagnostic
Radiology: An International Code of Practice, Technical Reports Series No. 457, IAEA,
Vienna (2007).
[12] INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSION
ON
RADIATION
UNITS
AND
MEASUREMENTS, Radiation Dosimetry and Image Quality Assessment in Computed
Tomography, ICRU Report 87, ICRU, Bethesda, MD (2013).
[13] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Governmental, Legal and
Regulatory Framework for Safety, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR
Part 1 (Rev. 1), IAEA, Vienna (2016).
[14] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Diagnostic
Reference Levels in Medical Imaging, Publication 135, SAGE Publications (2017).
[15] EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Guidance on Diagnostic Reference Levels (DRLs) for
Medical Exposures, Radiation Protection No. 109, Office for Official Publications of
the European Communities, Luxembourg (1999).
[16] INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE, BRITISH
INSTITUTE OF RADIOLOGY, ROYAL COLLEGE OF RADIOLOGISTS,
NATIONAL
RADIATION
PROTECTION
BOARD,
COLLEGE
OF
RADIOGRAPHERS, Guidance on the Establishment and Use of Diagnostic Reference
Levels for Medical X-ray Examinations, IPEM Report 88, IPEM, York (2004).
[17] NATIONAL COUNCIL ON RADIATION PROTECTION AND MEASUREMENTS,
Reference Levels and Achievable Doses in Medical and Dental Imaging:
Recommendations for the United States, NCRP Report No. 172, NCRP, Bethesda,
MD (2012).
[18] EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Diagnostic Reference Levels in Thirty-six European
Countries: Part 2/2, Radiation Protection No. 180, Publications Office of the European
Union, Luxembourg (2015).
[19] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Radiation Protection in Paediatric
Radiology, Safety Reports Series No. 71, IAEA, Vienna (2012).

288

[20] HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE, Work with Ionising Radiation: Ionising
Radiations Regulations 1999, Approved Code of Practice and Guidance, L121,
HSE Books, Bootle (2000).
[21] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Release of Patients after
Radionuclide Therapy, Safety Reports Series No. 63, IAEA, Vienna (2009).
[22] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR
OFFICE, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION, Regulatory Control of Radiation Sources, IAEA Safety Standards
Series No. GS-G-1.5, IAEA, Vienna (2004).
[23] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Occupational Radiation Protection,
IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSG-7, IAEA, Vienna (in preparation).
[24] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, UNITED NATIONS
ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME. Radiation Protection of the Public and the
Environment, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSG-8, IAEA, Vienna (2018).
[25] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Application of the Management
System for Facilities and Activities, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GS-G-3.1,
IAEA, Vienna (2006).
[26] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Roles and Responsibilities, and
Education and Training Requirements for Clinically Qualified Medical Physicists,
IAEA Human Health Series No. 25, IAEA, Vienna (2013).
[27] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION,
Radiological Protection in Biomedical Research, Publication 62, Pergamon Press,
Oxford and New York (1992).
[28] AUSTRALIAN RADIATION PROTECTION AND NUCLEAR SAFETY AGENCY,
Code of Practice for the Exposure of Humans to Ionizing Radiation for Research
Purposes, Radiation Protection Series No. 8, Commonwealth of Australia,
Canberra (2005).
[29] INSPECTION GÉNÉRALE DES AFFAIRES SOCIALES, Summary of ASN Report
No. 2006 ENSTR 019 – IGAS No. RM 2007-015P on the Epinal Radiotherapy Accident,
IGAS, Paris (2007).
[30] WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Procurement Process Resource Guide, WHO
Medical Device Technical Series, WHO, Geneva (2011).
[31] EUROPEAN COORDINATION COMMITTEE OF THE RADIOLOGICAL,
ELECTROMEDICAL AND HEALTHCARE IT INDUSTRY, Medical Electrical
Equipment: Good Refurbishment Practice, COCIR, Brussels (2009).
[32] WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Guidelines for Health Care Equipment
Donations, WHO/ARA/97.3, WHO, Geneva (2000).
[33] WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Medical Device Donations: Considerations for
Solicitation and Provision, WHO Medical Device Technical Series, WHO,
Geneva (2011).

289

[34] EUROPEAN COORDINATION COMMITTEE OF THE RADIOLOGICAL,
ELECTROMEDICAL AND HEALTHCARE IT INDUSTRY, Good Maintenance
Services Practice Guide: Optimising the Equipment Life Cycle, COCIR,
Brussels (2013).
[35] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Strategic Approach to Education
and Training in Radiation, Transport and Waste Safety 2011–2020 (Continuation of the
Strategic Approach 2001–2010), Note by the Secretariat 2010/Note 44, IAEA,
Vienna (2009).
[36] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, A Guide for
Establishing a Credentialing and Privileging Program for Users of Fluoroscopic
Equipment in Healthcare Organizations, AAPM Report No. 124, AAPM, College Park,
MD (2012).
[37] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Education
and Training in Radiological Protection for Diagnostic and Interventional Procedures,
Publication 113, Elsevier (2009).
[38] EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Guidelines on Radiation Protection Education and
Training of Medical Professionals in the European Union, Radiation Protection No. 175,
Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg (2014).
[39] INTERNATIONAL LABOUR OFFICE, International Standard Classification of
Occupations: ISCO-08, Vol. I: Structure, Group Definitions and Correspondence Tables,
ILO, Geneva (2012).
[40] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Postgraduate Medical Physics
Academic Programmes, Training Course Series No. 56, IAEA, Vienna (2013).
[41] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Clinical Training of Medical
Physicists Specializing in Radiation Oncology, Training Course Series No. 37, IAEA,
Vienna (2009).
[42] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Clinical Training of Medical
Physicists Specializing in Diagnostic Radiology, Training Course Series No. 47, IAEA,
Vienna (2010).
[43] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Clinical Training of Medical
Physicists Specializing in Nuclear Medicine, Training Course Series No. 50, IAEA,
Vienna (2011).
[44] EUROPEAN COMMISSION, European Guidelines on Medical Physics Expert,
Radiation Protection No. 174, Publications Office of the European Union,
Luxembourg (2014).
[45] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Competency Based Hospital
Radiopharmacy Training, Training Course Series No. 39, IAEA, Vienna (2010).
[46] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, A Syllabus for the Education and
Training of Radiation Oncology Nurses, Training Course Series No. 28, IAEA,
Vienna (2008).
[47] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Leadership and Management for
Safety, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 2, IAEA, Vienna (2016).

290

[48] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Comprehensive Clinical Audits of
Diagnostic Radiology Practices: A Tool for Quality Improvement, IAEA Human Health
Series No. 4, IAEA, Vienna (2010).
[49] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Quality Management Audits in
Nuclear Medicine Practices, 2nd edn, IAEA Human Health Series No. 33, IAEA,
Vienna (2015).
[50] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Comprehensive Audits of
Radiotherapy Practices: A Tool for Quality Improvement, IAEA, Vienna (2007).
[51] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Safety Assessment for Facilities
and Activities, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 4 (Rev. 1), IAEA,
Vienna (2016).
[52] PALMER, P.E.S., HANSON, G.P., HONEYMAN-BUCK, J., Diagnostic Imaging in the
Community: A Manual for Clinics and Small Hospitals, Rotary International
District 6440 and Pan American Health Organization, Washington, DC (2011).
[53] NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE ESTATES, Facilities for Diagnostic Imaging and
Interventional Radiology, HBN 6 (Vol. 1), Stationary Office, London (2001).
[54] RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION INSTITUTE OF IRELAND, The Design of
Diagnostic Medical Facilities Where Ionising Radiation Is Used, RPII, Dublin (2009).
[55] ASSOCIATION FRANÇAISE DE NORMALISATION, Installations pour la production
et l’utilisation de rayonnements X: Exigences de radioprotection, NF C 15-160,
AFNOR, Paris (2011).
[56] INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION, Basic Ionizing
Radiation Symbol, ISO 361:1975, ISO, Geneva (1975).
[57] SUTTON, D.G., MARTIN, C.J., WILLIAMS, J.R., PEET, D.J., Radiation Shielding for
Diagnostic Radiology, 2nd edn, British Institute of Radiology, London (2012).
[58] NATIONAL COUNCIL ON RADIATION PROTECTION AND MEASUREMENTS,
Structural Shielding Design for Medical X-ray Imaging Facilities, NCRP Report
No. 147, NCRP, Bethesda, MD (2004).
[59] DEUTSCHES INSTITUT FÜR NORMUNG, Medizinische Röntgenanlagen bis
300 kV: Regeln für die Auslegung des baulichen Strahlenschutzes, DIN 6812:2013-06,
DIN (2013).
[60] HANSON, G.P., PALMER, P.E.S., Radiation Shielding for Clinics or Small Hospitals
with a WHIS-RAD, Rotary International District 6440 and Pan American Health
Organization, Washington, DC (2013).
[61] MADSEN, M.T., et al., AAPM Task Group 108: PET and PET/CT shielding
requirements, Med. Phys. 33 (2006) 4–15.
[62] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Radiation Protection in Newer
Medical Imaging Techniques: PET/CT, Safety Reports Series No. 58, IAEA,
Vienna (2008).
[63] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment: X-ray Tube Assemblies for Medical Diagnosis — Characteristics of Focal
Spots, IEC 60336:2005, IEC, Geneva (2005).
[64] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Determination of the
Permanent Filtration of X-ray Tube Assemblies, IEC 60522:1999, IEC, Geneva (1999).

291

[65] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, High-voltage Cable
Plug and Socket Connections for Medical X-ray Equipment, IEC 60526:1978, IEC,
Geneva (1978).
[66] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment: Dose Area Product Meters, IEC 60580:2000, IEC, Geneva (2000).
[67] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment, Part 1-3: General Requirements for Basic Safety and Essential Performance,
Collateral Standard: Radiation Protection in Diagnostic X-ray Equipment, IEC 60601-13:2008+AMD1:2013 CSV, IEC, Geneva (2013).
[68] Ibid., Part 2-28: Particular Requirements for the Basic Safety and Essential Performance
of X-ray Tube Assemblies for Medical Diagnosis, IEC 60601-2-28:2017 (2017).
[69] Ibid., Part 2-43: Particular Requirements for the Basic Safety and Essential Performance
of X-ray Equipment for Interventional Procedures, IEC 60601-2-43:2010 (2010).
[70] Ibid., Part 2-44: Particular Requirements for the Basic Safety and Essential Performance
of
X-ray
Equipment
for
Computed
Tomography,
IEC 60601-2-44:2009+AMD1:2012+AMD2:2016 CSV (2016).
[71] Ibid., Part 2-45: Particular Requirements for Basic Safety and Essential Performance of
Mammographic X-ray Equipment and Mammographic Stereotactic Devices,
IEC 60601-2-45:2011+AMD1:2015 CSV (2015).
[72] Ibid., Part 2-54: Particular Requirements for the Basic Safety and Essential Performance
of
X-ray
Equipment
for
Radiography
and
Radioscopy,
IEC 60601-2-54:2009+AMD1:2015 CSV (2015).
[73] Ibid., Part 2-63: Particular Requirements for the Basic Safety and Essential Performance
of Dental Extra-oral X-ray Equipment, IEC 60601-2-63:2012 (2012).
[74] Ibid., Part 2-65: Particular Requirements for the Basic Safety and Essential Performance
of Dental Intra-oral X-ray Equipment, IEC 60601-2-65:2012 (2012).
[75] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Electrical and Loading
Characteristics of X-ray Tube Assemblies for Medical Diagnosis, IEC 60613:2010, IEC,
Geneva (2010).
[76] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Diagnostic X-ray
Imaging Equipment: Characteristics of General Purpose and Mammographic
Anti-scatter Grids, IEC 60627:2013, IEC, Geneva (2013).
[77] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Determination of the
Maximum Symmetrical Radiation Field from a Rotating Anode X-ray Tube for Medical
Diagnosis, IEC 60806:1984, IEC, Geneva (1984).
[78] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Evaluation and Routine
Testing in Medical Imaging Departments, Part 1: General Aspects, IEC TS 61223-1:1993,
IEC, Geneva (1993).
[79] Ibid., Part 2-1: Constancy Tests — Film Processors, IEC TS 61223-2-1:1993 (1993).
[80] Ibid., Part 2­6: Constancy Tests — Imaging Performance of Computed Tomography
X-ray Equipment, IEC 61223-2-6:2006 (2006).
[81] Ibid., Part 3-2: Acceptance Tests — Imaging Performance of Mammographic X-ray
Equipment, IEC 61223-3-2:2007 (2007).

292

[82] Ibid., Part 3-4: Acceptance Tests — Imaging Performance of Dental X-ray Equipment,
IEC 61223-3-4:2000 (2000).
[83] Ibid., Part 3-5: Acceptance Tests — Imaging Performance of Computed Tomography
X-ray Equipment, IEC 61223-3-5:2004 (2004).
[84] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment: Characteristics of Electro-optical X-ray Image Intensifiers, Part 1:
Determination of the Entrance Field Size, IEC 61262-1:1994, IEC, Geneva (1994).
[85] Ibid., Part 2: Determination of the Conversion Factor, IEC 61262-2:1994 (1994).
[86] Ibid., Part 3: Determination of the Luminance Distribution and Luminance
Non-uniformity, IEC 61262-3:1994 (1994).
[87] Ibid., Part 4: Determination of the Image Distortion, IEC 61262-4:1994 (1994).
[88] Ibid., Part 5: Determination of the Detective Quantum Efficiency,
IEC 61262-5:1994 (1994).
[89] Ibid., Part 6: Determination of the Contrast Ratio and Veiling Glare Index,
IEC 61262-6:1994 (1994).
[90] Ibid., Part
7: Determination of the Modulation Transfer Function,
IEC 61262-7:1995 (1995).
[91] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Diagnostic
X-ray Equipment: Radiation Conditions for Use in the Determination of Characteristics,
IEC 61267:2005, IEC, Geneva (2005).
[92] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Protective Devices
against Diagnostic Medical X-radiation, Part 1: Determination of Attenuation Properties
of Materials, IEC 61331-1:2014, IEC, Geneva (2014).
[93] Ibid., Part 2: Translucent Protective Plates, IEC 61331-2:2014 (2014).
[94] Ibid., Part 3: Protective Clothing, Eyewear and Protective Patient Shields,
IEC 61331-3:2014 (2014).
[95] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment: Dosimeters with Ionization Chambers and/or Semiconductor Detectors as
Used in X-ray Diagnostic Imaging, IEC 61674:2012, IEC, Geneva (2012).
[96] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment: Dosimetric Instruments Used for Non-invasive Measurement of X-ray Tube
Voltage in Diagnostic Radiology, IEC 61676:2002+AMD1:2008 CSV, IEC,
Geneva (2009).
[97] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment: Radiation Dose Documentation, Part 1: Radiation Dose Structured Reports
for Radiography and Radioscopy, IEC 61910-1:2014, IEC, Geneva (2014).
[98] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment: Characteristics of Digital X-ray Imaging Devices, Part 1-1: Determination
of the Detective Quantum Efficiency — Detectors Used in Radiographic Imaging,
IEC 62220-1-1:2015, IEC, Geneva (2015).
[99] Ibid., Part 1-2: Determination of the Detective Quantum Efficiency — Detectors Used
in Mammography, IEC 62220-1-2:2007 (2007).
[100] Ibid., Part 1-3: Determination of the Detective Quantum Efficiency — Detectors Used
in Dynamic Imaging, IEC 62220-1-3:2008 (2008).

293

[101] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment: Exposure Index of Digital X-ray Imaging Systems, Part 1: Definitions and
Requirements for General Radiography, IEC 62494-1:2008, IEC, Geneva (2008).
[102] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment: Medical Image Display Systems, Part 1: Evaluation Methods,
IEC 62563-1:2009+AMD1:2016 CSV, IEC, Geneva (2016).
[103] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Good Refurbishment
Practices for Medical Imaging Equipment, IEC PAS 63077:2016, IEC, Geneva (2016).
[104] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, Cardiac
Catheterization Equipment Performance: Report of Task Group No. 17 Diagnostic
X-ray Imaging Committee, AAPM Report No. 70, AAPM, College Park, MD (2001).
[105] INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE, The Critical
Examination of X-ray Generating Equipment in Diagnostic Radiology, IPEM
Report 107, IPEM, York (2012).
[106] NATIONAL COUNCIL ON RADIATION PROTECTION AND MEASUREMENTS,
Medical X-ray, Electron Beam and Gamma-ray Protection for Energies up to 50 MeV
(Equipment Design, Performance and Use), NCRP Report No. 102, NCRP, Bethesda,
MD (1989).
[107] NATIONAL ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION, Computed
Tomography Dose Check, NEMA Standards Publication XR 25-2010, NEMA, Rosslyn,
VA (2010).
[108] WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Technical Specifications for the World Health
Imaging System for Radiography: The WHIS-RAD, WHO/RAD/TS/95.1, WHO,
Geneva (1995).
[109] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, Quality Control in
Diagnostic Radiology: Report of Task Group No. 12 Diagnostic X-ray Imaging
Committee, AAPM Report No. 74, AAPM, College Park, MD (2002).
[110] INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE, Recommended
Standards for the Routine Performance Testing of Diagnostic X-ray Systems, IPEM
Report 91, IPEM, York (2005).
[111] INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE, The Commissioning
and Routine Testing of Mammographic X-ray Systems: A Technical Quality Control
Protocol, IPEM Report 89, IPEM, York (2005).
[112] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Quality Assurance Programme for
Screen Film Mammography, IAEA Human Health Series No. 2, IAEA, Vienna (2009).
[113] AMERICAN COLLEGE OF RADIOLOGY, Mammography Quality Control Manual,
ACR, Reston, VA (1999).
[114] EUROPEAN COMMUNITITES, European Guidelines for Quality Assurance in Breast
Cancer Screening and Diagnosis, 4th edn, Office for Official Publications of the
European Communities, Luxembourg (2006).
[115] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, Assessment of
Display Performance for Medical Imaging Systems: Report of the American Association
of Physicists in Medicine Task Group 18 Imaging Informatics Subcommittee, AAPM
On-line Report No. 03, AAPM, College Park, MD (2005).

294

[116] HEADS OF THE EUROPEAN RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION COMPETENT
AUTHORITIES, Position Statement on Use of Handheld Portable Dental X-ray
Equipment (11 Jun. 2014).
[117] MILLER, D.L., et al., Occupational radiation protection in interventional radiology: A
Joint Guideline of the Cardiovascular and Interventional Radiology Society of Europe
and the Society of Interventional Radiology, Cardiovasc. Interv. Radiol. 33
(2010) 230–239.
[118] DURÁN, A., et al., Recommendations for occupational radiation protection in
interventional cardiology, Catheter. Cardiovasc. Interv. 82 (2013) 29–42.
[119] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION,
Conversion Coefficients for Radiological Protection Quantities for External Radiation
Exposures, ICRP Publication 116, Elsevier (2011).
[120] NATIONAL COUNCIL ON RADIATION PROTECTION AND MEASUREMENTS,
Use of Personal Monitors to Estimate Effective Dose Equivalent and Effective Dose to
Workers for External Exposure to Low-LET Radiation, NCRP Report No. 122, NCRP,
Bethesda, MD (1995).
[121] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Implications for Occupational
Radiation Protection of the New Dose Limit for the Lens of the Eye,
IAEA-TECDOC-1731, IAEA, Vienna (2013).
[122] MARTIN, C.J., A review of radiology staff doses and dose monitoring requirements,
Radiat. Prot. Dosim. 136 (2009) 140–157.
[123] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Avoidance
of Radiation Injuries from Medical Interventional Procedures, Publication 85, Pergamon
Press, Oxford and New York (2000).
[124] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Pregnancy
and Medical Radiation, Publication 84, Pergamon Press, Oxford and New York (2000).
[125] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION,
Radiological Protection and Safety in Medicine, Publication 73, Pergamon Press,
Oxford and New York (1996).
[126] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION,
Radiological Protection in Medicine, Publication 105, Elsevier (2007).
[127] WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Effective Choices for Diagnostic Imaging in
Clinical Practices, Technical Report Series No. 795, WHO, Geneva (1990).
[128] WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Rational Use of Diagnostic Imaging in
Paediatrics, Technical Report Series No. 757, WHO, Geneva (1987).
[129] EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Referral Guidelines for Imaging, Radiation Protection
No. 118, Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg (2000).
[130] EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Referral Guidelines for Medical Imaging Availability
and Use in the European Union, Radiation Protection No. 178, Publications Office of
the European Union, Luxembourg (2014).
[131] AMERICAN COLLEGE OF RADIOLOGY, 2017 ACR Appropriateness Criteria, ACR,
Reston, VA (2017).
[132] ROYAL COLLEGE OF RADIOLOGISTS, iRefer: Making the Best Use of Clinical
Radiology, 7th edn, RCR, London (2012).

295

[133] CANADIAN ASSOCIATION OF RADIOLOGISTS, 2012 CAR Diagnostic Imaging
Referral Guidelines, CAR (2012).
[134] AMERICAN DENTAL ASSOCIATION, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION,
Dental Radiographic Examinations: Recommendations for Patient Selection and
Limiting Radiation Exposure, ADA/FDA (2012).
[135] COMMITTEE ON MEDICAL ASPECTS OF RADIATION IN THE ENVIRONMENT,
Twelfth Report: The Impact of Personally Initiated X-ray Computed Tomography
Scanning for the Health Assessment of Asymptomatic Individuals, Health Protection
Agency (2007).
[136] Statutory Instruments 2011 No. 1567, Health and Safety, The Ionising Radiation
(Medical Exposure) (Amendment) Regulations (2011).
[137] AMERICAN COLLEGE OF RADIOLOGY, “Practice parameters by modality: General
diagnostic radiology”, 2017 Practice Parameters, ACR, Reston, VA (2017).
[138] Ibid., “Practice parameters by modality: Computed tomography (CT)”.
[139] Ibid., “Practice parameters by organ or body system: Breast imaging and intervention”.
[140] Ibid., “Practice parameters by radiology subspeciality: Interventional radiology”.
[141] Ibid., “Practice parameters by radiology subspeciality: Pediatric”.
[142] EUROPEAN COMMISSION, European Guidelines on Quality Criteria for Diagnostic
Radiographic Images, EUR 16260 EN, Office for Official Publications of the European
Communities, Luxembourg (1996).
[143] EUROPEAN COMMISSION, European Guidelines on Quality Criteria for Diagnostic
Radiographic Images in Paediatrics, EUR 16261, Office for Official Publications of the
European Communities, Luxembourg (1996).
[144] EUROPEAN COMMISSION, European Guidelines for Quality Criteria for Computed
Tomography, EUR 16262, Office for Official Publications of the European
Communities, Luxembourg (2000).
[145] IMAGE GENTLY, Pediatric CT Protocols and Instructions 2014,
www.imagegently.org/Procedures/Interventional-Radiology/Protocols
[146] Ibid., Interventional Procedures.
[147] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, The Alliance for
Quality Computed Tomography: Protocols,
www.aapm.org/pubs/CTProtocols
[148] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Protection
of the Patient in Diagnostic Radiology, Publication 34, Pergamon Press, Oxford and
New York (1982).
[149] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Managing
Patient Dose in Digital Radiology, Publication 93, Elsevier (2004).
[150] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION,
Radiological Protection in Paediatric Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology,
Publication 121, Elsevier (2013).
[151] HERRMANN, T.L., et al., Best Practices in Digital Radiography, American Society of
Radiologic Technologists White Paper, ASRT, Albuquerque, NM (2012).
[152] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Dosimetry in Diagnostic Radiology
for Paediatric Patients, IAEA Human Health Series No. 24, IAEA, Vienna (2013).

296

[153] INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE, Cost-effective
Methods of Patient Dose Reduction in Diagnostic Radiology, IPEM Report 82, IPEM,
York (2001).
[154] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, An Exposure
Indicator for Digital Radiography, AAPM Report No. 116, AAPM, College Park,
MD (2009).
[155] NATIONAL COUNCIL ON RADIATION PROTECTION AND MEASUREMENTS,
A Guide to Mammography and Other Breast Imaging Procedures, NCRP Report
No. 149, NCRP, Bethesda, MD (2004).
[156] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Quality Assurance Programme for
Digital Mammography, IAEA Human Health Series No. 17, IAEA, Vienna (2011).
[157] VAN ENGEN, R.E., Protocol for the Quality Control of the Physical and Technical
Aspects of Digital Breast Tomosynthesis Systems, European Reference Organisation for
Quality Assured Breast Screening and Diagnostic Services, Nijmegen (2015).
[158] SECHOPOULOS, I., A review of breast tomosynthesis, Part I. The image acquisition
process, Med. Phys. 40 (2013) 014301.
[159] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Managing
Patient Dose in Computed Tomography, Publication 87, Pergamon Press, Oxford and
New York (2000).
[160] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Managing
Patient Dose in Multi-detector Computed Tomography (MDCT), Publication 102,
Elsevier (2007).
[161] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, The Measurement,
Reporting, and Management of Radiation Dose in CT, AAPM Report No. 96, AAPM,
College Park, MD (2008).
[162] NAGEL, H.D. (Ed.), Radiation Exposure in Computed Tomography: Fundamentals,
Influencing Parameters, Dose Assessment, Optimisation, Scanner Data, Terminology,
4th edn, European Coordination Committee of the Radiological and Electromedical
Industries, Hamburg (2002).
[163] McCOLLOUGH, C.H., BRUESEWITZ, M.R., KOFLER, J.M., Jr., CT dose reduction
and dose management tools: Overview of available options, Radiogr. 26 (2006) 503–512.
[164] EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Cone Beam CT for Dental and Maxillofacial Radiology
(Evidence-based Guidelines), Radiation Protection No. 172, Publications Office of the
European Union, Luxembourg (2012).
[165] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION,
Radiological Protection in Cone Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT),
Publication 129, SAGE Publications (2015).
[166] EUROPEAN COMMISSION, European Guidelines on Radiation Protection in Dental
Radiology: The Safe Use of Radiographs in Dental Practice, Radiation Protection
No. 136, Office for Official Publications of the European Communities,
Luxembourg (2004).
[167] NATIONAL COUNCIL ON RADIATION PROTECTION AND MEASUREMENTS,
Radiation Protection in Dentistry, NCRP Report No. 145, NCRP, Bethesda, MD (2003).

297

[168] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION,
Radiological Protection in Cardiology, Publication 120, Elsevier (2013).
[169] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION,
Radiological Protection in Fluoroscopically Guided Procedures Outside the Imaging
Department, Publication 117, Elsevier (2010).
[170] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, Functionality and
Operation of Fluoroscopic Automatic Brightness Control/Automatic Dose Rate Control
Logic in Modern Cardiovascular and Interventional Angiography Systems, AAPM
Report No. 125, AAPM, College Park, MD (2012).
[171] NATIONAL COUNCIL ON RADIATION PROTECTION AND MEASUREMENTS,
Radiation Dose Management for Fluoroscopically-guided Interventional Medical
Procedures, NCRP Report No. 168, NCRP, Bethesda, MD (2010).
[172] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Dual Energy X Ray Absorptiometry
for Bone Mineral Density and Body Composition Assessment, IAEA Human Health
Series No. 15, IAEA, Vienna (2010).
[173] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Diagnostic Radiology Physics: A
Handbook for Teachers and Students, IAEA, Vienna (2014).
[174] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Implementation of the International
Code of Practice on Dosimetry in Diagnostic Radiology (TRS 457): Review of Test
Results, IAEA Human Health Reports No. 4, IAEA, Vienna (2011).
[175] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Status of Computed Tomography
Dosimetry for Wide Cone Beam Scanners, IAEA Human Health Reports No. 5, IAEA,
Vienna (2011).
[176] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, Comprehensive
Methodology for the Evaluation of Radiation Dose in X-ray Computed Tomography,
AAPM Report No. 111, AAPM, College Park, MD (2010).
[177] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, Size-specific Dose
Estimates (SSDE) in Pediatric and Adult Body CT Examinations, AAPM Report
No. 204, AAPM, College Park, MD (2011).
[178] SOCIÉTÉ FRANÇAISE DE PHYSIQUE MÉDICALE, Dosimétrie des explorations
diagnostiques en radiologie, Rapport SFPM No. 30, SFPM, Paris (2014).
[179] BALTER, S., HOPEWELL, J.W., MILLER, D.L., WAGNER, L.K., ZELEFSKY, M.J.,
Fluoroscopically guided interventional procedures: A review of radiation effects on
patients’ skin and hair, Radiology 254 (2010) 326–341.
[180] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, ICRP
Statement on Tissue Reactions and Early and Late Effects of Radiation in Normal
Tissues and Organs: Threshold Doses for Tissue Reactions in a Radiation Protection
Context, ICRP Publication 118, Elsevier (2012).
[181] HEGGIE, J.C.P., et al., Recommendations for a Digital Mammography Quality
Assurance Program V4.0, ACPSEM Position Paper, Australasian College of Physical
Scientists and Engineers in Medicine, Mascot (2017).
[182] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Quality Assurance Programme for
Computed Tomography: Diagnostic and Therapy Applications, IAEA Human Health
Series No. 19, IAEA, Vienna (2012).

298

[183] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Quality Assurance for PET and
PET/CT Systems, IAEA Human Health Series No. 1, IAEA, Vienna (2009).
[184] EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Criteria for Acceptability of Medical Radiological
Equipment used in Diagnostic Radiology, Nuclear Medicine and Radiotherapy,
Radiation Protection No. 162, Publications Office of the European Union,
Luxembourg (2012).
[185] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, Acceptance Testing
and Quality Control of Photostimulable Storage Phosphor Imaging Systems, AAPM
Report No. 93, AAPM, College Park, MD (2006).
[186] INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSION
ON
RADIATION
UNITS
AND
MEASUREMENTS, Mammography: Assessment of Image Quality, ICRU Report 82,
ICRU, Bethesda, MD (2009).
[187] INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE, Quality Assurance
of PET and PET/CT Systems, IPEM Report 108, IPEM, York (2013).
[188] BRITISH INSTITUTE OF RADIOLOGY, Assurance of Quality in the Diagnostic
X Ray Department, 2nd edn, QA Working Group of the Radiation Protection Committee
of the BIR, London (2001).
[189] CRANLEY, K., Measurement of the Performance Characteristics of Diagnostic X-ray
Systems Used in Medicine: Report No. 32, Part I. X-ray Tubes and Generators, 2nd edn,
Institution of Physics and Engineering in Medicine and Biology, York (1996).
[190] HILES, P.A., STARRIT, H.C., ibid., Part II. X-ray Image Intensifier Television Systems.
[191] EDYVEAN, S., LEWIS, M.A., KEAT, N., JONES, A.P., ibid., Part III. Computed
Tomography X-ray Scanners.
[192] HOLUBINKA, M.R., ibid., Part IV. Intensifying Screens, Films, Processors and Auto
Exposure Control.
[193] FAULKNER, K., ibid., Part V. Conventional Tomographic Equipment.
[194] ROBERTSON, J., ibid., Part VI. X-ray Image Intensifier Fluorography Systems.
[195] MACKENZIE, A., DOYLE, P., HONEY, I., ibid., Part VII. Digital Imaging Systems.
[196] NATIONAL COUNCIL ON RADIATION PROTECTION AND MEASUREMENTS,
Quality Assurance for Diagnostic Imaging, NCRP Report No. 99, NCRP, Bethesda,
MD (1988).
[197] UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, FOOD
AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, Mammography Facility Surveys, Mammography
Equipment Evaluations, and Medical Physicist Qualification Requirements under
MQSA, Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff, FDA, Rockville, MD (2005).
[198] NHS CANCER SCREENING PROGRAMMES, Commissioning and Routine Testing
of Full Field Digital Mammography Systems, NHSBSP Equipment Report 0604,
Version 3, NHS Cancer Screening Programmes, Sheffield (2006).
[199] NHS CANCER SCREENING PROGRAMMES, Routine Quality Control Tests for Full
Field Digital Mammography Systems, NHSBSP Equipment Report 0702, Version 1,
NHS Cancer Screening Programmes, Sheffield (2007).

299

[200] AMERICAN COLLEGE OF RADIOLOGY, AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, ACR–AAPM Technical Standard for Medical Physics
Performance Monitoring of SPECT–CT Equipment, Resolution 35, ACR, Reston,
VA (2014).
[201] AMERICAN COLLEGE OF RADIOLOGY, AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, ACR–AAPM Technical Standard for Medical Physics
Performance Monitoring of PET/CT Imaging Equipment, Resolution 45, ACR, Reston,
VA (2013).
[202] SHOPE, T.B., Radiation-induced skin injuries from fluoroscopy, Radiogr. 16
(1996) 1195–1199.
[203] FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, Avoidance of Serious X-ray-induced Skin
Injuries to Patients during Fluoroscopically-guided Procedures, FDA, Rockville,
MD (1994).
[204] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Nuclear Medicine Resources
Manual, IAEA, Vienna (2006).
[205] INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE, Radiation
Protection in Nuclear Medicine, IPEM Report 109, IPEM, York (2014).
[206] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Planning a Clinical PET Centre,
IAEA Human Health Series No. 11, IAEA, Vienna (2010).
[207] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Operational Guidance on Hospital
Radiopharmacy: A Safe and Effective Approach, IAEA, Vienna (2008).
[208] ELSINGA, P., et al., Guidance on current good radiopharmacy practice (cGRPP) for the
small-scale preparation of radiopharmaceuticals, Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 37
(2010) 1049–1062.
[209] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Nuclear Medicine Physics: A
Handbook for Teachers and Students, IAEA, Vienna (2014).
[210] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Cyclotron Produced Radionuclides:
Guidance on Facility Design and Production of [18F]Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG), IAEA
Radioisotopes and Radiopharmaceuticals Series No. 3, IAEA, Vienna (2012).
[211] WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Quality Assurance of Pharmaceuticals: A
Compendium of Guidelines and Related Materials, Vol. 2: Good Manufacturing
Practices and Inspection, WHO, Geneva (1999).
[212] EUROPE DIRECTORATE FOR THE QUALITY OF MEDICINES AND
HEALTHCARE, The European Pharmacopoeia 9.0, 3 vols, Council of Europe,
Strasbourg (2016).
[213] BRITISH PHARMACOPOEIA COMMISSION, British Pharmacopoeia 2017, The
Stationery Office, London (2016).
[214] UNITED STATES PHARMACOPOEIA, NATIONAL FORMULARY, USP 40–NF 35,
The United States Pharmacopoeial Convention, Rockville, MD (2017).
[215] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment: Radionuclide Calibrators — Particular Methods for Describing
Performance, IEC 61303:1994, IEC, Geneva (1994).

300

[216] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Radionuclide Imaging
Devices: Characteristics and Test Conditions, Part 1: Positron Emission Tomographs,
IEC 61675-1:2013, IEC, Geneva (2013).
[217] Ibid., Part 2: Gamma Cameras for Planar, Wholebody, and SPECT Imaging,
IEC 61675-2:2015 (2015).
[218] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Nuclear Medicine
Instrumentation: Routine Tests, Part 1: Gamma Radiation Counting Systems,
IEC TR 61948-1:2016 (2016).
[219] Ibid., Part 2: Scintillation Cameras and Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography
Imaging, IEC TR 61948-2:2001 (2001).
[220] Ibid., Part 3: Positron Emission Tomographs, IEC TR 61948-3:2005 (2005).
[221] Ibid., Part 4: Radionuclide Calibrators, IEC TR 61948-4:2006 (2006).
[222] NATIONAL ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION, Performance
Measurements of Gamma Cameras, NEMA Standards Publication NU 1-2012, NEMA,
Rosslyn, VA (2013).
[223] NATIONAL ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION, Performance
Measurements of Positron Emission Tomographs, NEMA Standards Publication
NU 2-2012, NEMA, Rosslyn, VA (2013).
[224] NATIONAL ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION, Performance
Measurements and Quality Control Guidelines for Non-imaging Intraoperative Gamma
Probes, NEMA Standards Publication NU 3-2004, NEMA, Rosslyn, VA (2004).
[225] AMERICAN COLLEGE OF RADIOLOGY, AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, ACR–AAPM Technical Standard for Medical Nuclear
Physics Performance Monitoring of PET Imaging Equipment, ACR, Reston, VA (2016).
[226] AMERICAN COLLEGE OF RADIOLOGY, AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, ACR–AAPM Technical Standard for Medical Nuclear
Physics Performance Monitoring of Gamma Cameras, ACR, Reston, VA (2013).
[227] BUSEMANN SOKOLE, E., PŁACHCÍNSKA, A., BRITTEN, A., Acceptance testing
for nuclear medicine instrumentation, Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 37
(2010) 672–81.
[228] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Quality Assurance for SPECT
Systems, IAEA Human Health Series No. 6, IAEA, Vienna (2009).
[229] INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE, DICOM Image and
Data Management for Nuclear Medicine, Physiological Measurements, Radiotherapy
and Ultrasound, IPEM Report 99, IPEM, York (2010).
[230] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, The Selection, Use,
Calibration, and Quality Assurance of Radionuclide Calibrators Used in Nuclear
Medicine, AAPM Report No. 181, AAPM, College Park, MD (2012).
[231] INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION, Unsealed
Radioactive Substances: Identification and Documentation, ISO 3925:2014, ISO,
Geneva (2014).
[232] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Security of Radioactive Sources,
IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 11, IAEA, Vienna (2009).

301

[233] ROYAL COLLEGE OF RADIOLOGISTS, Guidelines for the Use of PET–CT in
Children: Second Edition, RCR, London (2014).
[234] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Doses to
the Embryo and Fetus from Intakes of Radionuclides by the Mother, Publication 88,
Pergamon Press, Oxford and New York (2001).
[235] STABIN, M.G., BREITZ, H.B., Breast milk excretion of radiopharmaceuticals:
Mechanisms, findings, and radiation dosimetry, J. Nucl. Med. 41 (2000) 863–873.
[236] LEIDE-SVEGBORN, S., AHLGREN, L., JOHANSSON, L., MATTSSON, S.,
Excretion of radionuclides in human breast milk after nuclear medicine examinations.
Biokinetic and dosimetric data and recommendations on breastfeeding interruption, Eur.
J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 43 (2016) 808–821.
[237] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Doses to
Infants from Ingestion of Radionuclides in Mothers’ Milk, Publication 95,
Elsevier (2004).
[238] PUBLIC HEALTH ENGLAND, Notes for Guidance on the Clinical Administration of
Radiopharmaceuticals and Use of Sealed Radioactive Sources, Crown (2018).
[239] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Quantitative Nuclear Medicine
Imaging: Concepts, Requirements and Methods, IAEA Human Health Reports No. 9,
IAEA, Vienna (2014).
[240] DORBALA, S., et al., SNMMI/ASNC/SCCT guideline for cardiac SPECT/CT and
PET/CT 1.0, J. Nucl. Med. 54 (2013) 1485–1507.
[241] GELFAND, M.J., PARISI, M.T., TREVES, S.T., PEDIATRIC NUCLEAR MEDICINE
DOSE REDUCTION WORKGROUP, Pediatric radiopharmaceutical administered
doses: 2010 North American consensus guidelines, J. Nucl. Med. 52 (2011) 318–322.
[242] EUROPEAN ASSOCIATION OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE, Dosage Card, EANM,
Vienna (2016).
[243] LASSMANN, M., TREVES, S.T., EANM/SNMMI PAEDIATRIC DOSAGE
HARMONIZATION
WORKING
GROUP,
Paediatric
radiopharmaceutical
administration: Harmonization of the 2007 EANM Paediatric Dosage Card
(version 1.5.2008) and the 2010 North American consensus guidelines, Eur. J. Nucl.
Med. Mol. Imaging 41 (2014) 1036–1041.
[244] HENKIN, R.E., et al., ACR–ASTRO practice guideline for the performance of therapy
with unsealed radiopharmaceutical sources, Clin. Nucl. Med. 36 (2011) e72–e80.
[245] SILBERSTEIN, E.B., et al., The SNM practice guideline for therapy of thyroid disease
with 131I 3.0, J. Nucl. Med. 53 (2012) 1633–1651.
[246] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Release of
Patients after Therapy with Unsealed Radionuclides, Publication 94, Elsevier (2004).
[247] EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Radiation Protection following Iodine-131 Therapy
(Exposure due to Out-patients or Discharged In-patients), Radiation Protection No. 97,
Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, Luxembourg (1998).
[248] AMERICAN THYROID ASSOCIATION TASKFORCE ON RADIOIODINE
SAFETY, et al., Radiation safety in the treatment of patients with thyroid diseases by
radioiodine 131I: Practice recommendations of the American Thyroid Association,
Thyroid 21 (2011) 335–346.

302

[249] NATIONAL COUNCIL ON RADIATION PROTECTION AND MEASUREMENTS,
Management of Radionuclide Therapy Patients, NCRP Report No. 155, NCRP,
Bethesda, MD (2006).
[250] INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSION
ON
RADIATION
UNITS
AND
MEASUREMENTS, Absorbed-dose Specification in Nuclear Medicine, ICRU
Report 67, ICRU, Bethesda, MD (2002).
[251] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, A Primer for
Radioimmunotherapy and Radionuclide Therapy, AAPM Report No. 71, AAPM,
College Park, MD (2001).
[252] HINDORF, C., et al., EANM Dosimetry Committee guidelines for bone marrow and
whole-body dosimetry, Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 37 (2010) 1238–1250.
[253] HÄNSCHEID, H., et al., EANM Dosimetry Committee Series on Standard Operational
Procedures for Pre-therapeutic Dosimetry, II. Dosimetry prior to radioiodine therapy of
benign thyroid diseases, Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 40 (2013) 1126–1134.
[254] LASSMANN, M., et al., EANM Dosimetry Committee Series on Standard Operational
Procedures for Pre-therapeutic Dosimetry, I. Blood and bone marrow dosimetry in
differentiated thyroid cancer therapy, Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 35
(2008) 1405–1412.
[255] BOLCH, W.E., ECKERMAN, K.F., SGOUROS, G., THOMAS, S.R., MIRD Pamphlet
No. 21: A generalized schema for radiopharmaceutical dosimetry — Standardization of
nomenclature, J. Nucl. Med. 50 (2009) 477–484.
[256] SGOUROS, G., et al., MIRD Pamphlet No. 22 (abridged): Radiobiology and dosimetry
of alpha-particle emitters for targeted radionuclide therapy, J. Nucl. Med. 51
(2010) 311–328.
[257] ROYAL COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS, Radioiodine in the Management of Benign
Thyroid Disease: Clinical Guidelines, RCP, London (2007).
[258] COLLETTI, P.M., PET–CT in the Pregnant Patient, Image Wisely (2012),
www.imagewisely.org/~/media/ImageWisely-Files/NucMed/PETCT-in-the-PregnantPatient.pdf
[259] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Radiation
Dose to Patients from Radiopharmaceuticals: A Third Amendment to ICRP
Publication 53, Publication 106, Elsevier (2008).
[260] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Quality Assurance for Radioactivity
Measurement in Nuclear Medicine, Technical Report Series No. 454, IAEA,
Vienna (2006).
[261] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Radiation
Dose to Patients from Radiopharmaceuticals, Publication 53, Pergamon Press, Oxford
and New York (1988).
[262] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Radiation
Dose to Patients from Radiopharmaceuticals: Addendum 2 to ICRP Publication 53,
Publication 80, Pergamon Press, Oxford and New York (1998).
[263] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Radiation
Dose to Patients from Radiopharmaceuticals: A Compendium of Current Information
Related to Frequently Used Substances, Publication 128, SAGE Publications (2015).

303

[264] STABIN, M.G., STUBBS, J.B., TOOHEY, R.E., Radiation Dose Estimates for
Radiopharmaceuticals, NUREG/CR-6345, Oak Ridge Institute of Science and
Education, Oak Ridge, TN (1996).
[265] STABIN, M.G., “Internal dosimetry in pediatric nuclear medicine”, Pediatric Nuclear
Medicine, 2nd edn (TREVES, S.T., Ed.), Springer, New York (1995) 556–581.
[266] DEZARN, W.A., et al., Recommendations of the American Association of Physicists in
Medicine on dosimetry, imaging, and quality assurance procedures for 90Y microsphere
brachytherapy in the treatment of hepatic malignancies, Med. Phys. 38
(2011) 4824–4845.
[267] INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE, Dosimetry for
Radionuclide Therapy, IPEM Report 104, IPEM, York (2011).
[268] FISHER, D.R., SHEN, S., MEREDITH, R.F., MIRD Dose Estimate Report No. 20:
Radiation absorbed-dose estimates for 111In- and 90Y-ibritumomab tiuxetan, J. Nucl.
Med. 50 (2009) 644–652.
[269] WESSELS, B.W., et al., MIRD pamphlet No. 20: The effect of model assumptions on
kidney dosimetry and response — Implications for radionuclide therapy, J. Nucl.
Med. 49 (2008) 1884–1899.
[270] LOEVINGER, R., BUDINGER, T.F., WATSON, E.E., MIRD Primer for Absorbed
Dose Calculations Society of Nuclear Medicine, Society of Nuclear Medicine,
New York (1991).
[271] BOUCHET, L.G., et al., MIRD Pamphlet No. 19: Absorbed fractions and radionuclide
S values for six age-dependent multiregion models of the kidney, J. Nucl. Med. 44
(2003) 1113–1147.
[272] BOLCH, W.E., et al., MIRD Pamphlet No. 17: The dosimetry of nonuniform activity
distributions — Radionuclide S values at the voxel level, J. Nucl. Med. 40
(1999) 11S–36S.
[273] UK GAMMA PROBE WORKING GROUP, Guidelines on the Quality Assurance of
Intraoperative Gamma Probes, British Nuclear Medicine Society (2005).
[274] EANM PHYSICS COMMITTEE, et al., Routine quality control recommendations for
nuclear medicine instrumentation, Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 37 (2010) 662–671.
[275] INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE, Quality Assurance
in Gamma Camera Systems, IPEM Report 86, IPEM, York (2003).
[276] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Lessons Learned from Accidental
Exposures in Radiotherapy, Safety Reports Series No. 17, IAEA, Vienna (2000).
[277] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Predisposal Management of
Radioactive Waste from the Use of Radioactive Material in Medicine, Industry,
Agriculture, Research and Education, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSG-45,
IAEA, Vienna (in preparation).
[278] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Management of Discharge of Low
Level Liquid Radioactive Waste Generated in Medical, Educational, Research and
Industrial Facilities, IAEA-TECDOC-1714, IAEA, Vienna (2013).
[279] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Regulations for the Safe Transport
of Radioactive Material, 2018 Edition, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6
(Rev. 1), IAEA, Vienna (2018).

304

[280] MIJNHEER, B., et al., 3D EPID-based in vivo dosimetry for IMRT and VMAT, J. Phys.
Conf. Ser. 444 (2013) 012011.
[281] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Setting Up a Radiotherapy
Programme: Clinical, Medical Physics, Radiation Protection and Safety Aspects, IAEA,
Vienna (2008).
[282] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Radiation Protection in the Design
of Radiotherapy Facilities, Safety Report Series No. 47, IAEA, Vienna (2006).
[283] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Radiotherapy Facilities: Master
Planning and Concept Design Considerations, IAEA Human Health Reports No. 10,
IAEA, Vienna (2014).
[284] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Planning National Radiotherapy
Services: A Practical Tool, IAEA Human Health Series No. 14, IAEA, Vienna (2010).
[285] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Guidelines for
Radiotherapy Treatment Rooms Design, IEC TR 61859:1997, IEC, Geneva (1997).
[286] NATIONAL COUNCIL ON RADIATION PROTECTION AND MEASUREMENTS,
Structural Shielding Design and Evaluation for Megavoltage X- and Gamma-ray
Radiotherapy Facilities, NCRP Report No. 151, NCRP, Bethesda, MD (2005).
[287] INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE, Design and
Shielding of Radiotherapy Treatment Facilities, IPEM Report 75, 2nd edn, IOP
Publishing, Bristol (2017).
[288] VENSELAAR, J., BALTAS, D., MEIGOONI, A.S., HOSKIN, P.J. (Eds),
Comprehensive Brachytherapy: Physical and Clinical Aspects, CRC Press, Boca Raton,
FL (2013).
[289] CONFERENCE OF RADIATION CONTROL PROGRAM DIRECTORS, Technical
White Paper: Guidance for State Programs that Regulate the New Therapy Modality
Electronic Brachytherapy, CRCPD Publication No. E-11-2, CRCPD, Frankfort,
KY (2011).
[290] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment, Part 1: General Requirements for Basic Safety and Essential Performance,
IEC 60601-1:2005+AMD1:2012 CSV, Consolidated version, IEC, Geneva (2012).
[291] Ibid., Part 2-1: Particular Requirements for the Basic Safety and Essential Performance
of Electron Accelerators in the Range 1 MeV to 50 MeV, IEC 60601-21:2009+AMD1:2014 CSV, Consolidated version (2014).
[292] Ibid., Part 2-8: Particular Requirements for the Basic Safety and Essential Performance
of Therapeutic X-ray Equipment Operating in the Range 10 kV to 1 MV, IEC 60601-28:2010+AMD1:2015 CSV, Consolidated version (2015).
[293] Ibid., Part 2-11: Particular Requirements for the Basic Safety and Essential Performance
of Gamma Beam Therapy Equipment, IEC 60601-2-11:2013 (2013).
[294] Ibid., Part 2-17: Particular Requirements for the Basic Safety and Essential Performance
of
Automatically-controlled
Brachytherapy
Afterloading
Equipment,
IEC 60601-2-17:2013 (2013).
[295] Ibid., Part 2-29: Particular Requirements for the Basic Safety and Essential Performance
of Radiotherapy Simulators, IEC 60601-2-29:2008 (2008).

305

[296] Ibid., Part 2-68: Particular Requirements for the Basic Safety and Essential Performance
of X-ray-based Image-guided Radiotherapy Equipment for Use with Electron
Accelerators, Light Ion Beam Therapy Equipment and Radionuclide Beam Therapy
Equipment, IEC 60601-2-68:2014 (2014).
[297] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment: Dosimeters with Ionization Chambers as Used in Radiotherapy,
IEC 60731:2011+AMD1:2016 CSV, Consolidated version, IEC, Geneva (2016).
[298] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment: Medical Electron Accelerators — Functional Performance Characteristics,
IEC 60976:2007, IEC, Geneva (2007).
[299] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment: Medical Electron Accelerators — Guidelines for Functional Performance
Characteristics, IEC TR 60977:2008, IEC, Geneva (2008).
[300] INTERNATIONAL
ELECTROTECHNICAL
COMMISSION,
Radiotherapy
Simulators: Functional Performance Characteristics, IEC 61168:1993, IEC,
Geneva (1993).
[301] INTERNATIONAL
ELECTROTECHNICAL
COMMISSION,
Radiotherapy
Simulators: Guidelines for Functional Performance Characteristics, IEC TS 61170:1993,
IEC, Geneva (1993).
[302] INTERNATIONAL
ELECTROTECHNICAL
COMMISSION,
Radiotherapy
Equipment: Coordinates, Movements and Scales, IEC 61217:2011, IEC, Geneva (2011).
[303] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment: Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) —
Radiotherapy Objects, IEC TR 61852:1998, IEC, Geneva (1998).
[304] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment: Requirements for the Safety of Radiotherapy Treatment Planning Systems,
IEC 62083:2009, IEC, Geneva (2009).
[305] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment: Safety of Radiotherapy Record and Verify Systems, IEC 62274:2005, IEC,
Geneva (2005).
[306] INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION, Medical Electrical
Equipment: Dosimetric Instruments as Used in Brachytherapy, Part 1: Instruments
Based on Well-type Ionization Chambers, IEC 62467-1:2009, IEC, Geneva (2009).
[307] INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION, Radiological
Protection: Sealed Radioactive Sources — General Requirements and Classification,
ISO 2919:2012, ISO, Geneva (2012).
[308] INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION, Radiation
Protection: Sealed Radioactive Sources — Leakage Test Methods, ISO 9978:1992, ISO,
Geneva (1992).
[309] INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION, Clinical
Dosimetry: Beta Radiation Sources for Brachytherapy, ISO 21439:2009, ISO,
Geneva (2009).

306

[310] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Record and Verify Systems for
Radiation Treatment of Cancer: Acceptance Testing, Commissioning and Quality
Control, IAEA Human Health Reports No. 7, IAEA, Vienna (2013).
[311] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, AAPM Code of
Practice for Radiotherapy Accelerators, AAPM Report No. 47, AAPM, College Park,
MD (1994).
[312] INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE, Acceptance Testing
and Commissioning of Linear Accelerators, Report 94, IPEM, York (2007).
[313] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Radiation Oncology Physics:
A Handbook for Teachers and Students, IAEA, Vienna (2005).
[314] THOMADSEN, B., et al., Potential hazard due to induced radioactivity secondary to
radiotherapy: The report of Task Group 136 of the American Association of Physicists
in Medicine, Health Phys. 107 (2014) 442–460.
[315] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, Remote Afterloading
Technology, AAPM Report No. 41, AAPM, College Park, MD (1993).
[316] INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSION
ON
RADIATION
UNITS
AND
MEASUREMENTS, Fundamental Quantities and Units for Ionizing Radiation
(Revised), ICRU Report 85, ICRU, Bethesda, MD (2011)
[317] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Commissioning and Quality
Assurance of Computerized Planning Systems for Radiation Treatment of Cancer,
Technical Reports Series No. 430, IAEA, Vienna (2004).
[318] FRAASS, B., et al., American Association of Physicists in Medicine Radiation Therapy
Committee Task Group 53: Quality assurance for clinical radiotherapy treatment
planning, Med. Phys. 25 (1998) 1773–1829.
[319] SHAW, J. (Ed.), A Guide to Commissioning and Quality Control of Treatment Planning
Systems, IPEMB Report 68, Institution of Physics and Engineering in Medicine and
Biology, York (1996).
[320] BOMFORD, C.K., DAWES, P.J., LILLICRAP, S.C., YOUNG, J., Treatment simulators,
Br. J. Radiol. Suppl. 23 (1989) 1–49.
[321] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, The Role of In-room
kV X-ray Imaging for Patient Setup and Target Localization, AAPM Report No. 104,
AAPM, College Park, MD (2009).
[322] DAS, I.J., et al., Accelerator beam data commissioning equipment and procedures:
Report of the TG-106 of the Therapy Physics Committee of the AAPM, Med. Phys. 35
(2008) 4186–4215.
[323] LOW, D., MORAN, J., DEMPSEY, J., DONG, L., OLDHAM, M., Dosimetry Tools and
Techniques for IMRT, Report of AAPM Task Group 120, Med. Phys. 38
(2011) 1313–1338.
[324] NATH, R., et al., Code of practice for brachytherapy physics: Report of the AAPM
Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 56, Med. Phys. 24 (1997) 1557–1998.
[325] EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR RADIOTHERAPY AND ONCOLOGY, GEC–ESTRO
Handbook of Brachytherapy, 2nd edn, ESTRO, Brussels (2014).

307

[326] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, Neutron
Measurements around High Energy X-ray Radiotherapy Machines, AAPM Report
No. 19, AAPM, College Park, MD (1986).
[327] NATIONAL COUNCIL ON RADIATION PROTECTION AND MEASUREMENTS,
Preconception and Prenatal Radiation Exposure: Health Effects and Protective
Guidance, NCRP Report No. 174, NCRP, Bethesda, MD (2013).
[328] THOMADSEN, B.R., et al., A review of safety, quality management, and practice
guidelines for high-dose-rate brachytherapy: Executive summary, Pract. Radiat.
Oncol. 4 (2014) 65–70.
[329] JAFFRAY, D.A., et al., Safety considerations for IGRT: Executive summary, Pract.
Radiat. Oncol. 3 (2013) 167–170 (including Supplemental Material: Assuring Safety
and Quality in Image Guided Delivery of Radiation Therapy).
[330] MORAN, J.M., et al., Safety considerations for IMRT: Executive summary, Pract.
Radiat. Oncol. 1 (2011) 190–195 (including Supplemental Material: Safety
Considerations for IMRT).
[331] SOLBERG, T.D., et al., Quality and safety considerations in stereotactic radiosurgery
and stereotactic body radiation therapy: Executive summary, Pract. Radiat. Oncol. 2
(2012) 2–9 (including Supplemental Material: Quality and Safety Considerations in
Stereotactic Radiosurgery and Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy).
[332] ROYAL COLLEGE OF RADIOLOGISTS, SOCIETY AND COLLEGE OF
RADIOGRAPHERS, INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN
MEDICINE, NATIONAL PATIENT SAFETY AGENCY, BRITISH INSTITUTE OF
RADIOLOGY, Towards Safer Radiotherapy, RCR, London (2008).
[333] ROYAL COLLEGE OF RADIOLOGISTS, SOCIETY AND COLLEGE OF
RADIOGRAPHERS, CHILDREN’S CANCER AND LEUKAEMIA GROUP, Good
Practice Guide for Paediatric Radiotherapy, RCR, London (2012).
[334] STOVALL, M., et al., Fetal dose from radiotherapy with photon beams: Report of the
AAPM Radiation Therapy Task Group No. 36, Med. Phys. 22 (1995) 63–82.
[335] BISSONNETTE, J.P., et al., Quality assurance for image-guided radiation therapy
utilizing CT-based technologies: A report of the AAPM TG-179, Med. Phys. 39
(2012) 1946–1963.
[336] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Absorbed Dose Determination in
External Beam Radiotherapy: An International Code of Practice for Dosimetry Based
on Standards of Absorbed Dose to Water, Technical Reports Series No. 398, IAEA,
Vienna (2000).
[337] ALMOND, P.R., et al., AAPM’s TG-51 protocol for clinical reference dosimetry of
high-energy photon and electron beams, Med. Phys. 26 (1999) 1847–1870.
[338] MA, C.M., et al., AAPM protocol for 40–300 kV X-ray beam dosimetry in radiotherapy
and radiobiology, Med. Phys. 28 (2001) 868–893.
[339] KUTCHER, G.J., et al., Comprehensive QA for radiation oncology: Report of AAPM
Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 40, Med. Phys. 21 (1994) 581–618.
[340] YU, Y., et al., Permanent prostate seed implant brachytherapy: Report of the American
Association of Physicists in Medicine Task Group No. 64, Med. Phys. 26
(1999) 2054–2076.

308

[341] BUTLER, W.M., et al., Third-party brachytherapy source calibrations and physicist
responsibilities: Report of the AAPM Low Energy Brachytherapy Source Calibration
Working Group, Med. Phys. 35 (2008) 3860–3865.
[342] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Calibration of Photon and Beta Ray
Sources Used in Brachytherapy: Guidelines on Standardized Procedures at Secondary
Standards Dosimetry Laboratories (SSDLs) and Hospitals, IAEA-TECDOC-1274,
IAEA, Vienna (2002).
[343] INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE, Small Field MV
Photon Dosimetry, IPEM Report 103, IPEM, York (2010).
[344] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Dosimetry of Small Static Fields
Used in External Beam Radiotherapy, Technical Reports Series No. 483, IAEA,
Vienna (2017).
[345] HERMAN, M.G., et al., Clinical use of electronic portal imaging: Report of AAPM
Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 58, Med. Phys. 28 (2001) 712–737.
[346] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, Radiotherapy Portal
Imaging Quality, AAPM Report No. 24, AAPM, College Park, MD (1987).
[347] INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSION
ON
RADIATION
UNITS
AND
MEASUREMENTS, Prescribing, Recording, and Reporting Photon Beam Therapy,
ICRU Report 50, ICRU, Bethesda, MD (1993).
[348] INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSION
ON
RADIATION
UNITS
AND
MEASUREMENTS, Prescribing, Recording and Reporting Photon Beam Therapy
(Supplement to ICRU Report 50), ICRU Report 62, ICRU, Bethesda, MD (1999).
[349] INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSION
ON
RADIATION
UNITS
AND
MEASUREMENTS, Prescribing, Recording, and Reporting Photon-Beam IntensityModulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT), ICRU Report 83, ICRU, Bethesda, MD (2010).
[350] INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSION
ON
RADIATION
UNITS
AND
MEASUREMENTS, Prescribing, Recording, and Reporting Electron Beam Therapy,
ICRU Report 71, ICRU, Bethesda, MD (2004).
[351] INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSION
ON
RADIATION
UNITS
AND
MEASUREMENTS, Prescribing, Recording, and Reporting Proton-Beam Therapy,
ICRU Report 78, ICRU, Bethesda, MD (2007).
[352] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Dose Reporting in Ion Beam
Therapy (Proc. Mtg Ohio, 2006), IAEA-TECDOC-1560, IAEA, Vienna (2007).
[353] GERBI, B.J., Recommendations for clinical electron beam dosimetry: Supplement to
the recommendations of Task Group 25, Med. Phys. 36 (2009) 3239–3279.
[354] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, Diode In Vivo
Dosimetry for Patients Receiving External Beam Radiation Therapy, AAPM Report
No. 87, AAPM, College Park, MD (2005).
[355] VAN DAM, J., MARINELLO, G., Methods for In Vivo Dosimetry in External
Radiotherapy, 2nd edn, European Society for Radiotherapy and Oncology,
Brussels (2006).
[356] HUYSKENS, D.P., et al., Practical Guidelines for the Implementation of In Vivo
Dosimetry with Diodes in External Radiotherapy with Photon Beams (Entrance Dose),
European Society for Radiotherapy and Oncology, Brussels (2001).

309

[357] KARLSSON, M., et al., Independent Dose Calculations Concepts and Models,
European Society for Radiotherapy and Oncology, Brussels (2010).
[358] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Development of Procedures for
In Vivo Dosimetry in Radiotherapy, IAEA Human Health Reports No. 8, IAEA,
Vienna (2013).
[359] BRITISH INSTITUTE OF RADIOLOGY, Central axis depth dose data for use in
radiotherapy, Br. J. Radiol. Suppl. 17 (1996) 1–147.
[360] INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSION
ON
RADIATION
UNITS
AND
MEASUREMENTS, Dose and Volume Specification for Reporting Intracavitary
Therapy in Gynecology, ICRU Report 38, ICRU, Bethesda, MD (1985).
[361] INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSION
ON
RADIATION
UNITS
AND
MEASUREMENTS, Dose and Volume Specification for Reporting Interstitial Therapy,
ICRU Report 58, ICRU, Bethesda, MD (1997).
[362] INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSION
ON
RADIATION
UNITS
AND
MEASUREMENTS, Dosimetry of Beta Rays and Low-energy Photons for
Brachytherapy with Sealed Sources ICRU Report 72, ICRU, Bethesda, MD (2004).
[363] PÉREZ-CALATAYUD, J., et al., Dose calculation for photon-emitting brachytherapy
sources with average energy higher than 50 keV: Report of the AAPM and ESTRO,
Med. Phys. 39 (2012) 2904–2929.
[364] BEAULIEU, L., et al., Report of the Task Group 186 on model-based dose calculation
methods in brachytherapy beyond the TG-43 formalism: Current status and
recommendations for clinical implementation, Med. Phys. 39 (2012) 6208–6236.
[365] CHIU-TSAO, S.T., SCHAART, D.R., SOARES, C.G., NATH, R., Dose calculation
formalisms and consensus dosimetry parameters for intravascular brachytherapy
dosimetry: Recommendations of the AAPM Therapy Physics Committee Task Group
No. 149, Med. Phys. 34 (2007) 4126–4157.
[366] NATH, R., et al., AAPM recommendations on dose prescription and reporting methods
for permanent interstitial brachytherapy for prostate cancer: Report of Task Group 137,
Med. Phys. 36 (2009) 5310–5322.
[367] CHIU-TSAO, S.T., et al., Dosimetry of 125I and 103Pd COMS eye plaques for intraocular
tumors: Report of Task Group 129 by the AAPM and ABS, Med. Phys. 39
(2012) 6161–6184.
[368] RIVARD, M.J., et al., Update of AAPM Task Group No. 43 Report: A revised AAPM
protocol for brachytherapy dose calculations, Med. Phys. 31 (2004) 633–674.
[369] NATH, R., et al., Intravascular brachytherapy physics: Report of the AAPM Radiation
Therapy Committee Task Group No. 60, Med. Phys. 26 (1999) 119–152.
[370] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, Dosimetry of
Interstitial Brachytherapy Sources, AAPM Report No. 51, AAPM, College Park,
MD (1995).
[371] MURPHY, M.J., et al., The management of imaging dose during image-guided
radiotherapy: Report of the AAPM Task Group 75, Med. Phys. 34 (2007) 4041–4063.
[372] SÁNCHEZ-DOBLADO, F., et al., Estimation of neutron-equivalent dose in organs of
patients undergoing radiotherapy by the use of a novel online digital detector, Phys.
Med. Biol. 57 (2012) 6167–6191.

310

[373] FOWLER, J.F., 21 years of biologically effective dose, Br. J. Radiol. 83 (2010) 554–568.
[374] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Specification and Acceptance
Testing of Radiotherapy Treatment Planning Systems, IAEA-TECDOC-1540, IAEA,
Vienna (2007).
[375] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Commissioning of Radiotherapy
Treatment Planning Systems: Testing for Typical External Beam Treatment Techniques,
IAEA-TECDOC-1583, IAEA, Vienna (2008).
[376] BALDWIN, P., JOSLIN, C.A.F., WILLIAMS, P.C., Report of the Independent Inquiry
Commissioned by the West Midlands Regional Health Authority into the Conduct of
Isocentric Radiotherapy at the North Staffordshire Royal Infirmary between 1982 and
1991, HM Stationery Office, London (1992).
[377] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Investigation of an Accidental
Exposure of Radiotherapy Patients in Panama, IAEA, Vienna (2001).
[378] SCOTTISH EXECUTIVE, Unintended Overexposure of Patient Lisa Norris during
Radiotherapy Treatment at the Beatson Oncology Centre, Glasgow in January 2006:
Report of an Investigation by the Inspector Appointed by the Scottish Ministers for The
Ionising Radiation (Medical Exposures) Regulations 2000, Edinburgh (2006).
[379] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Prevention
of Accidental Exposures to Patients Undergoing Radiation Therapy, Publication 86,
Pergamon Press, Oxford and New York (2000).
[380] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Accidental Overexposure of
Radiotherapy Patients in San José, Costa Rica, IAEA, Vienna (1998).
[381] SOCIEDAD ESPAÑOLA DE FÍSICA MÉDICA, The Accident of the Linear Accelerator
in the ‘Hospital Clínico de Zaragoza’, SEFM, Madrid (1991).
[382] LEER, J.W.H., McKENZIE, A.L., SCALLIET, P., THWAITES, D.I., Practical
Guidelines for the Implementation of a Quality System in Radiotherapy, European
Society for Radiotherapy and Oncology, Brussels (1998).
[383] THWAITES, D., SCALLIET, P., LEER, J.W., OVERGAARD, J., Quality assurance in
radiotherapy: European Society for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology Advisory
Report to the Commission of the European Union for the ‘Europe Against Cancer
Programme’, Radiother. Oncol. 35 (1995) 61–73.
[384] ALETTI, P., BEY, P. (Eds), Recommendations for a Quality Assurance Programme in
External Radiotherapy, European Society for Radiotherapy and Oncology,
Brussels (1995).
[385] DUTREIX, A., et al., Monitor Unit Calculation for High Energy Photon Beams,
European Society for Radiotherapy and Oncology, Brussels (1997).
[386] MIJNHEER, B., BRIDIER, A., GARIBALDI, C., TORZSOK, K., VENSELAAR, J.,
Monitor Unit Calculation for High Energy Photon Beams: Practical Examples, European
Society for Radiotherapy and Oncology, Brussels (2001).
[387] MIJNHEER, B., et al., Quality Assurance of Treatment Planning Systems: Practical
Examples for Non-IMRT Photon Beams, European Society for Radiotherapy and
Oncology, Brussels (2004).

311

[388] VENSELAAR, J., PÉREZ-CALATAYUD, J., A Practical Guide to Quality Control of
Brachytherapy Equipment, European Society for Radiotherapy and Oncology,
Brussels (2004).
[389] ALBER, M., et al., Guidelines for the Verification of IMRT, European Society for
Radiotherapy and Oncology, Brussels (2008).
[390] GIBBONS, J.P., et al., Monitor unit calculations for external photon and electron beams:
Report of the AAPM Therapy Physics Committee Task Group No. 71, Med.
Phys. 41 (2014).
[391] LANGEN, K., et al., QA for helical tomotherapy: Report of the AAPM Task Group 148,
Med. Phys. 37 (2010) 4817–4853.
[392] KLEIN, E.E., et al., Task Group 142 report: Quality assurance of medical accelerators,
Med. Phys. 36 (2009) 4197–4212.
[393] EZZELL, G.A., et al., IMRT commissioning: Multiple institution planning and
dosimetry comparisons — A report from AAPM Task Group 119, Med. Phys. 36
(2009) 5359–5373.
[394] MUTIC, S., et al., Quality assurance for computed-tomography simulators and the
computed tomography-simulation process: Report of the AAPM Radiation Therapy
Committee Task Group No. 66, Med. Phys. 30 (2003) 2762–2792.
[395] KUBO, H.D., GLASGOW, G.P., PETHEL, T.D., THOMADSEN, B.R., WILLIAMSON,
J.F., High dose rate brachytherapy treatment delivery: Report of the AAPM Radiation
Therapy Committee Task Group No. 59, Med. Phys. 25 (1998) 375–403.
[396] AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICISTS IN MEDICINE, Physical Aspects of
Quality Assurance in Radiation Therapy, AAPM Report No. 13, AAPM,
New York (1984).
[397] INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE, Guidance for
Commissioning and Quality Assurance of a Networked Radiotherapy Department,
IPEM Report 93, IPEM, York (2006).
[398] INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE, Physics Aspects of
Quality Control in Radiotherapy, IPEM Report 81, IPEM, York (1999).
[399] INSTITUTION OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE AND BIOLOGY,
Commissioning and Quality Assurance of Linear Accelerators, IPEMB Report 54,
IPEMB, York (1990).
[400] FONTENOT, J.D., et al., AAPM Medical Physics Practice Guideline 2.a:
Commissioning and quality assurance of X-ray-based image-guided radiotherapy
systems, J. Appl. Clin. Med. Phys. 15 (2014) 3–13.
[401] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Radiation
Safety Aspects of Brachytherapy for Prostate Cancer using Permanently Implanted
Sources, Publication 98, Elsevier (2005).
[402] EZZELL, G.A., et al., Guidance document on delivery, treatment planning, and clinical
implementation of IMRT: Report of the IMRT subcommittee of the AAPM radiation
therapy committee, Med. Phys. 30 (2003) 2089–2115.
[403] PURDY, J.A., et al., Medical accelerator safety considerations: Report of AAPM
Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 35, Med. Phys. 20 (1993) 1261–1275.

312

[404] EUROPEAN COMMISSION, General Guidelines on Risk Management in External
Beam Radiotherapy, Radiation Protection No. 181, Publications Office of the European
Union, Luxembourg (2015).
[405] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Prevention
of High-dose-rate Brachytherapy Accidents, Publication 97, Elsevier (2005).
[406] INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE, Guidance for the
Clinical Implementation of Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy, IPEM Report 96,
IPEM, York (2008).
[407] ROYAL COLLEGE OF RADIOLOGISTS, Quality Assurance Practice Guidelines for
Transperineal LDR Permanent Seed Brachytherapy of Prostate Cancer, RCR,
London (2012).
[408] ROYAL COLLEGE OF RADIOLOGISTS, SOCIETY AND COLLEGE OF
RADIOGRAPHERS, INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN
MEDICINE, On Target: Ensuring Geometric Accuracy in Radiotherapy, RCR,
London (2008).
[409] FONG DE LOS SANTOS, L.E., et al., Medical Physics Practice Guideline 4.a:
Development, implementation, use and maintenance of safety checklists, J. Appl. Clin.
Med. Phys. 16 (2015) 37–59.
[410] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Preventing
Accidental Exposures from New External Beam Radiation Therapy Technologies,
Publication 112, Elsevier (2009).
[411] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, The Radiological Accident in
Istanbul, IAEA, Vienna (2000).
[412] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, The Radiological Accident in
Samut Prakarn, IAEA, Vienna (2002).
[413] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Accidental Overexposure of
Radiotherapy Patients in Białystok, IAEA, Vienna (2004).
[414] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, On-site Visits to Radiotherapy
Centres: Medical Physics Procedures, IAEA-TECDOC-1543, IAEA, Vienna (2007).
[415] NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION, Consolidated Guidance about Materials
Licenses: Program-specific Guidance about Medical Use Licenses, NUREG-1556,
Vol. 9, Rev. 2, Office of Federal and State Materials and Environmental Management
Programs, Washington, DC (2008).
[416] INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING IN MEDICINE, UK Guidance on
Radiation Protection Issues following Permanent Iodine-125 Seed Prostate
Brachytherapy, IPEM Report 106, IPEM, York (2012).
[417] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Method for Developing
Arrangements for Response to a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency: Updating
IAEA-TECDOC-953, EPR-METHOD (2003), IAEA, Vienna (2003).

313

ABBREVIATIONS
ABC
ADRC
AEC
CBCT
CPOE
CR
CT
DICOM
DR
DRL
DXA
EPID
FDG
HDR
HIS
ICRP
ICRU
IEC
IGRT
IMRT
IORT
ISO
kV
LDR
linac
MDR
MRI
MV
PACS
PDR
PET
RIS
ROSEIS
RPO
SAFRAD
SAFRON

automatic brightness control
automatic dose rate control
automatic exposure control
cone beam computed tomography
computerized physician order entry
computed radiography
computed tomography
Digital Imaging and Communication in Medicine
digital radiography
diagnostic reference level
dual energy X ray absorptiometry
electronic portal imaging device
fluorodeoxyglucose
high dose rate
hospital information system
International Commission on Radiological Protection
International Commission on Radiation Units and
Measurements
International Electrotechnical Commission
image guided radiation therapy
intensity modulated radiation therapy
intraoperative radiotherapy
International Organization for Standardization
kilovoltage
low dose rate
linear accelerator
medium dose rate
magnetic resonance imaging
megavoltage
picture archiving and communication system
pulsed dose rate
positron emission tomography
radiology information system
Radiation Oncology Safety Education and Information
System
radiation protection officer
Safety in Radiological Procedures
Safety in Radiation Oncology
315

SBRT
SPECT
SRS
SRT
TPS
VMAT

stereotactic body radiotherapy
single photon emission computed tomography
stereotactic radiosurgery
stereotactic radiotherapy
treatment planning system
volumetric modulated arc therapy

CONTRIBUTORS TO DRAFTING AND REVIEW
Asfaw, K.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Baeza, M.

Instituto de Radiomedicina, Chile

Bischof Delayoye, A.

University of Lausanne, Switzerland

Borras, C.

Consultant, United States of America

Cardew, P.

John Hunter Hospital, Australia

Coffey, M.

St. James’s Hospital, Ireland

Cowling, C.

Monash University, Australia

Delis, H.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Dondi, M.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Durán, A.

Clinical Hospital, University of the Republic, Uruguay

Ebdon-Jackson, S.

Public Health England, United Kingdom

Fraser, L.

Public Health England, United Kingdom

Gilley, D.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Healy, B.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Holmberg, O.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Jiménez, P.

Pan American Health Organization

Kashyap, R.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Knoos, T.

Skåne University Hospital and Lund University, Sweden

Le Heron, J.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Leide-Svegborn, S.

Skåne University Hospital, Sweden

Marengo, M.

Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria di Bologna, Italy

Meghzifene, A.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Moeller, K.

International Atomic Energy Agency

317

Nestoroska Madjunarova, S.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Newman, D.

MeritCare Medical Group, United States of America

Ng Kwan-Hoong

University of Malaya, Malaysia

Niu Shengli

International Labour Office

Ortiz, P.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Pérez, M.

World Health Organization

Poli, G.L.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Rehani, M.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Remedios, D.

Northwick Park Hospital, United Kingdom

Van der Merwe, D.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Vano, E.

Complutense University of Madrid, Spain

Vassileva, J.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Velez, G.

Hospital Oncólogico Provincial and Sociedad Argentina
de Física Médica, Argentina

Wallace, A.

Australian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety
Agency, Australia

318

@

No. 25

ORDERING LOCALLY
In the following countries, IAEA priced publications may be purchased from the sources listed below or
from major local booksellers.
Orders for unpriced publications should be made directly to the IAEA. The contact details are given at
the end of this list.

CANADA

Renouf Publishing Co. Ltd
22-1010 Polytek Street, Ottawa, ON K1J 9J1, CANADA
Telephone: +1 613 745 2665  Fax: +1 643 745 7660
Email: order@renoufbooks.com  Web site: www.renoufbooks.com
Bernan / Rowman & Littlefield
15200 NBN Way, Blue Ridge Summit, PA 17214, USA
Tel: +1 800 462 6420 • Fax: +1 800 338 4550
Email: orders@rowman.com Web site: www.rowman.com/bernan

CZECH REPUBLIC

Suweco CZ, s.r.o.
Sestupná 153/11, 162 00 Prague 6, CZECH REPUBLIC
Telephone: +420 242 459 205  Fax: +420 284 821 646
Email: nakup@suweco.cz  Web site: www.suweco.cz

FRANCE

Form-Edit
5 rue Janssen, PO Box 25, 75921 Paris CEDEX, FRANCE
Telephone: +33 1 42 01 49 49  Fax: +33 1 42 01 90 90
Email: formedit@formedit.fr  Web site: www.form-edit.com

GERMANY

Goethe Buchhandlung Teubig GmbH
Schweitzer Fachinformationen
Willstätterstrasse 15, 40549 Düsseldorf, GERMANY
Telephone: +49 (0) 211 49 874 015  Fax: +49 (0) 211 49 874 28
Email: kundenbetreuung.goethe@schweitzer-online.de  Web site: www.goethebuch.de

INDIA

Allied Publishers
1st Floor, Dubash House, 15, J.N. Heredi Marg, Ballard Estate, Mumbai 400001, INDIA
Telephone: +91 22 4212 6930/31/69  Fax: +91 22 2261 7928
Email: alliedpl@vsnl.com  Web site: www.alliedpublishers.com
Bookwell
3/79 Nirankari, Delhi 110009, INDIA
Telephone: +91 11 2760 1283/4536
Email: bkwell@nde.vsnl.net.in  Web site: www.bookwellindia.com

ITALY

Libreria Scientifica “AEIOU”
Via Vincenzo Maria Coronelli 6, 20146 Milan, ITALY
Telephone: +39 02 48 95 45 52  Fax: +39 02 48 95 45 48
Email: info@libreriaaeiou.eu  Web site: www.libreriaaeiou.eu

JAPAN

Maruzen-Yushodo Co., Ltd
10-10 Yotsuyasakamachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-0002, JAPAN
Telephone: +81 3 4335 9312  Fax: +81 3 4335 9364
Email: bookimport@maruzen.co.jp  Web site: www.maruzen.co.jp

RUSSIAN FEDERATION

Scientific and Engineering Centre for Nuclear and Radiation Safety
107140, Moscow, Malaya Krasnoselskaya st. 2/8, bld. 5, RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Telephone: +7 499 264 00 03  Fax: +7 499 264 28 59
Email: secnrs@secnrs.ru  Web site: www.secnrs.ru

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

Bernan / Rowman & Littlefield
15200 NBN Way, Blue Ridge Summit, PA 17214, USA
Tel: +1 800 462 6420 • Fax: +1 800 338 4550
Email: orders@rowman.com  Web site: www.rowman.com/bernan
Renouf Publishing Co. Ltd
812 Proctor Avenue, Ogdensburg, NY 13669-2205, USA
Telephone: +1 888 551 7470  Fax: +1 888 551 7471
Email: orders@renoufbooks.com  Web site: www.renoufbooks.com

Orders for both priced and unpriced publications may be addressed directly to:

17-24431

Marketing and Sales Unit
International Atomic Energy Agency
Vienna International Centre, PO Box 100, 1400 Vienna, Austria
Telephone: +43 1 2600 22529 or 22530 • Fax: +43 1 26007 22529
Email: sales.publications@iaea.org • Web site: www.iaea.org/books

RE L ATE D PU BL IC ATI ON S
Atoms for Peace

FUNDAMENTAL SAFETY PRINCIPLES
IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SF-1
STI/PUB/1273 (21 pp.; 2006)
ISBN 92–0–110706–4

Price: €25.00

GOVERNMENTAL, LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
FOR SAFETY
IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 1 (Rev. 1)
STI/PUB/1713 (42 pp.; 2016)
ISBN 978–92–0–108815–4

Price: €48.00

LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT FOR SAFETY
IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 2
STI/PUB/1750 (26 pp.; 2016)
ISBN 978–92–0–104516–4

Price: €30.00

RADIATION PROTECTION AND SAFETY OF RADIATION SOURCES:
INTERNATIONAL BASIC SAFETY STANDARDS
IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 3
STI/PUB/1578 (436 pp.; 2014)
ISBN 978–92–0–135310–8

Price: €68.00

SAFETY ASSESSMENT FOR FACILITIES AND ACTIVITIES
IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 4 (Rev. 1)
STI/PUB/1714 (38 pp.; 2016)
ISBN 978–92–0–109115–4

Price: €49.00

PREDISPOSAL MANAGEMENT OF RADIOACTIVE WASTE
IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 5
STI/PUB/1368 (38 pp.; 2009)
ISBN 978–92–0–111508–9

Price: €45.00

DECOMMISSIONING OF FACILITIES
IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 6
STI/PUB/1652 (23 pp.; 2014)
ISBN 978–92–0–102614–9

Price: €25.00

PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE FOR A NUCLEAR OR
RADIOLOGICAL EMERGENCY
IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 7
STI/PUB/1708 (102 pp.; 2015)
ISBN 978–92–0–105715–0

Price: €45.00

REGULATIONS FOR THE SAFE TRANSPORT OF RADIOACTIVE
MATERIAL, 2018 EDITION
IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 1)
STI/PUB/1798 (165 pp.; 2018)
ISBN 978–92–0–107917–6

www.iaea.org/books

Price: €49.00

Safety through international standards

“Governments, regulatory bodies and operators everywhere must
ensure that nuclear material and radiation sources are used
beneficially, safely and ethically. The IAEA safety standards are
designed to facilitate this, and I encourage all Member States to
make use of them.”
Yukiya Amano
Director General

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY
VIENNA
ISBN 978–92­–0–101717–8
ISSN 1020–525X

