Quality assurance for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based
technologies: A report of the AAPM TG-179
Jean-Pierre Bissonnettea)
Task Group 179, Department of Radiation Physics, Princess Margaret Hospital, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5G 2M9

Peter A. Balter and Lei Dong
Department of Radiation Physics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas 77030

Katja M. Langen
Department of Radiation Oncology, M. D. Anderson Cancer Center Orlando, Orlando, Florida 32806

D. Michael Lovelock
Department of Medical Physics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021

Moyed Miften
Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado 80045

Douglas J. Moseley
Department of Radiation Physics, Princess Margaret Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada, M5G 2M9

Jean Pouliot
Department of Radiation Oncology, UCSF Comprehensive Cancer Center, 1600 Divisadero St., Suite H 1031,
San Francisco, California 94143–1708

Jan-Jakob Sonke
Department of Radiation Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute—Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital,
Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Sua Yoo
Department of Radiation Oncology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27710

(Received 11 August 2011; revised 19 January 2012; accepted for publication 10 February 2012;
published 20 March 2012)
Purpose: Commercial CT-based image-guided radiotherapy (IGRT) systems allow widespread
management of geometric variations in patient setup and internal organ motion. This document
provides consensus recommendations for quality assurance protocols that ensure patient safety and
patient treatment fidelity for such systems.
Methods: The AAPM TG-179 reviews clinical implementation and quality assurance aspects for
commercially available CT-based IGRT, each with their unique capabilities and underlying
physics. The systems described are kilovolt and megavolt cone-beam CT, fan-beam MVCT, and
CT-on-rails. A summary of the literature describing current clinical usage is also provided.
Results: This report proposes a generic quality assurance program for CT-based IGRT systems in an
effort to provide a vendor-independent program for clinical users. Published data from long-term,
repeated quality control tests form the basis of the proposed test frequencies and tolerances.
Conclusion: A program for quality control of CT-based image-guidance systems has been produced,
with focus on geometry, image quality, image dose, system operation, and safety. Agreement and clarification with respect to reports from the AAPM TG-101, TG-104, TG-142, and TG-148 has been addressed.
C 2012 American Association of Physicists in Medicine. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1118/1.3690466]
V
Key words: quality assurance, cone-beam CT, fan-beam MVCT, CT-on-rails

I. INTRODUCTION
The goal of radiation therapy (RT) is to deliver accurately a
curative or palliative dose distribution to a well-defined target volume. Unlike dose calculation and measurement accuracy, the geometric accuracy of RT has been a challenge that
could only recently have been quantitatively and pragmatically ascertained.1 Lately, medical linear accelerator (linac)
1946

Med. Phys. 39 (4), April 2012

manufacturers and third-party vendors have developed
integrated imaging systems to improve and facilitate internal
patient anatomy visualization, enabling efficient positioning
of these anatomical structures relative to the treatment room.
These systems often use the accelerator isocenter as a reference point. The initial use of daily computed tomography
(CT) has been for assessing internal organ position and
defining the subsequent isocenter shifts to be performed at

0094-2405/2012/39(4)/1946/18/$30.00

C 2012 Am. Assoc. Phys. Med.
V

1946

1947

Bissonnette et al.: QA for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies

1947

TABLE I. Commercially available CT-based IGRT systems.
Make and model

Elekta XVI

Varian On-Board Imager

Siemens Artiste

TomoTherapy

Siemens Primatom

Imaging configuration
Field of view
Correction method

kV-CBCT
50  50  25.6
Automatic
couch motion
Optional
Submillimeter
0.1–3.5
2 min

kV-CBCT
45  45  17
Automatic
couch motion
None
Submillimeter
0.2–2.0
1.5 min

MV-CBCT
40  40  27.4
Automatic
couch motion
None
Submillimeter
3–10
1.5 min

MVCT
40 cm
Automatic in
2 directions
Optional
Submillimeter
0.7–3.0
5 s per slice

kVCT-on rails
50 cm
Manual
couch motion
Optional
Submillimeter
0.05–1
3 s per sec

Translation
Rotation

Geometric accuracy
Dose (cGy)
Image acquisition and
reconstruction time

the treatment unit.2 Fan-beam MVCT has been introduced
clinically by integrating it with helical tomotherapy based
with IMRT-based dose delivery.3 Megavoltage cone-beam
CT (MV-CBCT) uses the accelerator’s treatment beam and
its portal imaging system to provide volumetric datasets with
sufficient contrast for image-guidance4,5 while kilovoltage
CBCT (kV-CBCT) provides high contrast volumetric datasets using imaging components mounted orthogonally with
respect to the treatment beam.6 Clinical implementation of
both kV-CBCT and MV-CBCT systems necessitates conducting calibration procedures that correct for accelerator
and imaging component sags and flexes and to properly
register to the treatment beam isocentre.7 The clinical introduction of these guidance systems (Table I) has allowed the
assessment and correction of patient positioning uncertainties, revealed internal organ motion and deformation, and is
paving the way toward advanced and adaptive RT. By
improving the geometric accuracy of RT, incremental
improvements in tumor control probability, reduction in toxicity (thereby allowing dose escalation), conformal avoidance by intensity-modulated radiation therapy, and
individualized PTV margins can be achieved. To fully
exploit the information provided by these systems, clinics
need to employ robust quality assurance (QA) programs that
ensure that the system performance meets high expectations
consistent with patient care requirements.8 Due to the rapid
deployment and adoption of image-guided radiation therapy
(IGRT), clear and concise recommendations regarding clinical commissioning and QA of these technologies and their
related clinical processes are desired by the community.
As of this writing, there exist no consensus guidelines for
a comprehensive quality assurance of CT-based image-guidance systems. Early adopters of this technology have relied
on the spirit of established standards, such as the AAPM
TG-40 report,9 vendor literature, experience acquired at the
time of acceptance testing, and, less frequently, by assessing
the long-term performance of this novel equipment by analyzing data from quality control (QC) tests. Early publications on quality assurance of CT-based IGRT systems have
evaluated safety,10 geometric accuracy,7,11–17 image
quality,15,18–20 and imaging dose.20–24
Professional bodies interested in establishing QA and QC
guidelines are beginning to expose device-specific QC to formal analysis of the frequency and severity of the risks or perceived failure modes involved with novel technologies. This is
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2012

because many, if not most, undesirable events in RT have
resulted from human error rather than equipment failure.25
Users designing their own IGRT QA program should first
identify clearly the clinical aims and align the QA needs to
these aims, evaluating their resources to determine if additional
resources are required. Physicists who are involved in starting
CT-based IGRT technologies should study and understand not
only the clinical potential of IGRT but also the intricacies of
process design and development, workflow improvement, and
change implementation within a busy clinic.
In this report, we present a succinct review of commercially available CT-based IGRT systems and present the
general QA principles for these devices. This report concludes with a brief discussion of the safe and efficient implementation of these technologies.
II. EXISTING TECHNOLOGIES
II.A. CT-on-rails

Integrating a diagnostic CT scanner into a RT treatment
room was perhaps the earliest implementation of volumetric
image-guided radiotherapy. The first integrated clinical system combining a linac and an in-treatment-room CT unit was
developed by Uematsu et al. in Japan.26 The original system
was primarily designed for noninvasive, frameless, fractionated stereotactic treatments of brain and lung cancers. The
distinguishing feature of the integrated CT-linac system is the
moving gantry CT scanner, which is mounted on rails (henceforth referred to as “CT-on-rails”) so that it can move across
the patient instead of the couch moving the patient through
the scanner as in conventional CT scanner design. By rotating
the treatment couch, usually by 180 , the couch is aligned
with the CT gantry motion path, which acquires a patient’s
CT images while the patient remains in the immobilized position. Subsequently, the couch rotates back to the linac side to
proceed with treatment. While diagnostic CT effective doses
are in the range of 2 to 10 mSv,27 imaging doses typically can
be reduced further by a factor of 2–4 when used for daily targeting.28 This is because the image quality from low-dose CT
imaging is sufficient for image alignment.
II.B. Kilovoltage cone-beam CT

In the past several years, kV-CBCT has become an important tool for localization and patient monitoring in

1948

Bissonnette et al.: QA for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies

traditionally fractionated and hypofractionated RT.29–39 Traditional CT uses a fan shaped x-ray beam to acquire one or
more thin slices (0.06–2.4 cm in length) per tube=detector
rotation. In contrast, kV-CBCT uses a cone-shaped x-ray
beam and acquires an entire volume (14–26 cm in length) in
a single, relatively slow gantry rotation. To acquire the kVCBCT projection data, flat-panel detectors are used in fluoroscopy mode, obtaining multiple projections per second,
typically resulting in 2 projections per degree over 195–360
arcs. These projections are used to reconstruct the CBCT
volumetric images.4,40 Because of the high spatial resolution
of the imaging panels, the kV-CBCTs can be reconstructed
with submillimeter isotropic voxels. In radiotherapy applications, the kV-CBCT tube and detector are mounted on the
same gantry as the linac treatment head, a configuration that
is commercially available.29,40 kV-CBCT produces a full CT
data set that, though not of diagnostic quality, is generally
adequate for imaging bone and, in some anatomic sites, soft
tissue. kV-CBCT imaging dose varies widely with the acquisition technique. Doses ranging from 0.2 to 2 cGy per acquisition have been reported in the literature.21,22,41 kV-CBCT
image quality is limited compared to traditional CT for a
number of reasons including motion blur due to the long acquisition time, scattered radiation due to the volumetric
image acquisition, and image artifacts. Research is ongoing
to alleviate these factors and likely to improve rapidly with
advancements in acquisition techniques42–44 and reconstruction algorithms.45–51
II.C. Fan-beam MVCT

The helical tomotherapy delivery system can be used to
obtain fan-beam MVCT images of the patient in the treatment position.52,53 The imaging beam is produced by the
same accelerator that generates the treatment beam, but with
the nominal electron beam energy reduced to 3.5 MeV for
fan-beam MVCT.54 In comparison with kV-CBCT (Sec. II
A), those technologies using megavoltage beams for imaging
suffer from fewer scatter and beam hardening artifacts.55
Using megavoltage x-rays for imaging also eliminates artifacts normally caused when high-Z materials are imaged
with kilovoltage x-ray beams. The megavoltage beam, however, inherently causes poor subject contrast.56 During image
acquisition, the beam is collimated to 4 mm at the isocenter
and images are typically acquired with a pitch value of 1, 2,
or 3, which translates into slice thicknesses of 2, 4, of 6 mm,
respectively. The longitudinal extent of the scan is variable
and is selected by the user. The field of view is 40 cm in diameter. The fan-beam MVCT imaging dose is typically in
the range of 1–3 cGy per scan.24
Fan-beam MVCT image quality in terms of noise, uniformity, contrast, contrast linearity, and spatial resolution
has been reported by Meeks et al.19 Fan-beam MVCT scans
are noisier than kVCT scans but the resulting low contrast
resolution remains sufficient to identify some soft tissues.19
Woodford et al. have tested the registration accuracy and
precision of the fan-beam MVCT system using a set of
anthropomorphic phantoms.13,14 They have shown that the
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2012

1948

registration accuracy depends on the imaging slice thickness,
pitch value, the superior-inferior scan length, and the
scanned anatomical region. For head and thorax phantoms,
registration accuracies in the ranges of 0.5–1.5 mm and
0.5–2 mm were reported, respectively. The registration error
was dominated by the error in the superior–inferior
direction.
II.D. Megavoltage cone-beam CT

As of this writing, the commercially available MV-CBCT
system (ArtisteTM, Siemens, Concord, CA) consists of an aSi flat panel adapted for MV imaging attached to a linear accelerator and an integrated workflow application to generate
a three-dimensional representation of the patient in treatment
position. Similar to fan-beam MVCT, the imaging beam is
in the megavoltage range, thus rendering the images immune
to typical high-Z artifacts. The system performs the acquisition of projection images, CBCT image reconstruction, automatic CT to CBCT volumetric image registration, and
remote couch position adjustment.57 This provides a 3D
patient anatomy volume in the actual treatment position that
can be aligned to the planning CT moments before the dose
delivery, enabling the IGRT process. The MV-CBCT beam
geometry is fixed by the manufacturer, with the flat panel
positioned at 145 cm source-to-imager distance (SID). The
field width is set by the manufacturer at 27.4 cm, which projects to the detector’s 40 cm active region, and the field
length is adjustable to a maximum of 27.4 cm. The MVCBCT system can reconstruct a field of view of up to 27 cm,
with a slice thickness ranging from 0.5 to 10 mm. The current generation of MV CBCT systems offers a half-beam acquisition mode, increasing the reconstruction size in the
axial plane of up to 40 cm.
The MV-CBCT system demonstrates submillimeter localization precision23,58–60 and sufficient soft-tissue contrast to
visualize structures such as the prostate. The dose used for
MV-CBCT depends on the clinical application but typically
ranges from 3 to 10 cGy,20,61 with the lower end used when
daily acquisitions are performed on a patient, while 6 to 10
cGy are used for tumor monitoring studies or for treatment
planning purposes. The imaging dose can be straightforwardly accounted for in treatment planning; so, published
studies have used doses as high as 6–10 cGy per MV-CBCT
scan.20,61,62
One benefit of the MV-CBCT system is its simplicity.
There is only one x-ray source and one detector, the EPID.
This geometry provides easier access to the patient by the
therapists. The image is directly referenced to the beam, simplifying quality assurance of the system.23,58
III. TYPICAL CLINICAL APPLICATIONS
III.A. CT-on-rails

The CT-on-rails system produces diagnostic quality
images. The use of the same imaging modality as that
employed for treatment planning not only facilitates image
registration to align the gross tumor volume (GTV) directly

1949

Bissonnette et al.: QA for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies

but can also use the entire CT image set for adaptive replanning
to account for interfractional anatomy changes. CT-on-rails
systems have been used to study organ motion and soft-tissue
localization for prostate cancer,12,63–73 anatomy changes and
their dosimetric impact in head and neck cancers,74–76 and
stereotactic hypofractionated lung and paraspinal cancer
treatments.77–84 The potential use of repeat in-room CT for
online or offline adaptive radiotherapy has been studied by various researchers.85–94
III.B. kV-CBCT

In clinical applications, kV-CBCT offers a distinct
advantage over projection imaging in that some soft tissue
structures can be directly imaged and thus targeted. Two
clinical sites that directly benefit by this are the prostate95
and the lung;31,96 the former cannot be directly targeted with
projection imaging without implanted fiducial markers. kVCBCT guidance is also utilized extensively in other treatment sites like head and neck,97–99 breast,36,100 esophagus,101 liver,102 and bladder.103,104 Perhaps, the most
important application of CBCT has been the simplification
of hypofractionated, stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT).
While robust patient immobilization for the long treatment
times typical of this technique is still required, the high accuracy of kV-CBCT based target positioning has eliminated
the need for body frames equipped with stereotactic coordinate systems.32,105–108 Furthermore, the relatively low doses
delivered by this modality permit more frequent patient position monitoring during those long sessions, reducing the
effect of intrafraction position uncertainties.109,110 kVCBCT also makes adaptive planning possible, allowing for
either margin reduction104,111 or as a dataset for assessing
dose-related anatomical changes.112,113 Also, the intracranial
stereotactic radiotherapy workflow has been adapted to benefit from the volumetric information obtained from CBCT.114
III.C. Fan-beam MVCT

Daily fan-beam MVCT-based alignments are performed
typically for all patients who are treated with helical tomotherapy based IMRT. Alignments are based on soft tissue targets, bony anatomy, or implanted markers, depending on the
visibility of the target in fan-based MVCT images. The use of
fan-beam MVCT for alignments has been reported for prostate,115,116 lung,117 head and neck,118,119 breast,120 and gynecological tumors.121 In addition to patient alignment, fanbeam MVCT imaging has been used to document anatomical
variation for various anatomical sites. Lung cancer tumor
regression measurements based on fan-beam MVCT imaging
have been reported.122–124 Deformation of the pelvic anatomy
was reported for prostate patients.125,126 Movement of the
mesorectal space was evaluated on fan-beam MVCT images
by Tournel et al.127 The radiation response of an esophageal
patient has been documented by Chen et al.128 Li et al. report
anatomical variations for kidneys, pancreas, uterus, and sarcomas.129 Lastly, geometric changes in the parotid glands were
reported for head and neck patients using fan-beam MVCT
imaging.130,131 Daily fan-beam MVCT scans can be used for
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2012

1949

dose calculations, and the variations of target and organ at
risk doses have been reported.126,130,132,133
III.D. MV-CBCT

The MV-CBCT imaging procedure has been well integrated in the clinical workflow for the patient alignment and
IGRT processes. Since the first MV-CBCT image of a
patient was acquired in 2003,4 many papers have reported on
the clinical applications of MV-CBCT. These applications
include prostate, head and neck, and lung alignments.23,58,62
Other applications also include the monitoring of tumor
growth and shrinkage23,134 and more advanced IGRT strategies where a multiple adaptive plan IMRT procedure
accounts for the independent movement of the prostate and
pelvic lymph nodes.135 MV-CBCT has been used clinically
to improve the delineation of structures in CT images that
suffer from metal artifacts, such as paraspinal tumors in
proximity of orthopedic hardware,136 pelvic structures in the
presence of hip replacement prosthetics,55 brachytherapy
applicators and catheter visualization,137 and, finally, the
measurement of small lesions near metallic implants.138 An
emerging use of MV-CBCT images includes dose verification using dose recalculation139–141 and dose-guided radiation therapy (DGRT), an adaptive strategy where treatment
modifications are based on comparisons of the dose-of-theday with the planned dose distribution.142–145
III.E. Stereotactic body radiotherapy requirements

SBRT is characterized by the accurate delivery of high
doses of radiation in five or fewer fractions. When compared
against conventional fractionation, the relatively high dose
per fraction increases the potential for normal tissue damage
or serious target underdosing, if even a single treatment is
incorrectly delivered. Furthermore, it may be impossible to
correct for radiation delivery errors by modifying subsequent
fractions. Although the initial approach taken by SBRT developers was stereotactic in that the treatments were setup using
body-frame coordinates, target position uncertainties due to
organ motion and setup errors remained and were similar to
those encountered with conventional radiotherapy. These spatial positioning issues have been addressed in large part by the
widespread adoption of treatment machines with volumetric
kilovolt or megavolt imaging capabilities. The geometric accuracy achieved by such machines has been deemed sufficient
to permit bony or soft tissue localization or target-surrogates,
and in many cases, normal tissues just prior to treatment, permitting immediate correction of initial and intrafraction geometric discrepancies. The AAPM Task Group 101
recommends the use of image guidance for all SBRT treatments to eliminate the risk of a geometric miss.146
Target or normal structure positioning relies on the ancillary imaging equipment in the treatment room, necessitating
the development of a rigorous QA program. Patient safety,
geometric accuracy (including linearity and alignment between
the imaging system and the radiation isocenter), image quality,
and spatial resolution need to be evaluated as part of a regularly scheduled QA program designed and managed by

1950

Bissonnette et al.: QA for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies

medical physicists. Fortunately, geometric accuracy, localization, and geometric fidelity have been demonstrated, in a number of publications, to be well within 1 mm over extended
periods of time.7,11,12,15,17,18,147 The resolving power of CTbased IGRT systems can also be on the order of 1 mm under
favorable scatter conditions, except for MV-CBCT where the
localization accuracy is within 2 mm.18,58 Such geometric accuracy is considered sufficient for both SBRT and conventional radiotherapy treatments.1,148,149 Because of the critical
importance of the imaging system in SBRT patient positioning, daily quality assurance checks of geometric accuracy are
recommended. These checks can be easily made by imaging a
phantom that has been positioned independently, with the
room lasers, for example, and verifying that the setup correction is within tolerance. Because the geometric accuracy of
CT-based imaging systems for image-guidance is inherently
high, a well-designed QA program will satisfy simultaneously
the requirements of conventional and SBRT radiotherapy.
Importantly, clinical and physiological process issues
may ultimately affect the geometric accuracy of SBRT treatment delivery. While patients and tumors can be placed
within the intended position immediately prior to treatment,35,102,150,151 there is mounting evidence that internal
and external patient motion displaces the target away from
the intended position,35,152–158 and patient position reassessment may be required throughout SBRT delivery depending
on the chosen immobilization scheme, performance status,
or length of time spent on the accelerator couch.105,109

IV. QUALITY ASSURANCE ISSUES
Recommendations from this report are summarized in
Table II. These are generic test frequency and tolerance

1950

recommendations, representing the minimum imaging and
registration performance needed for conducting IGRT with
the technologies described in this report. Where noted, users
can modify test frequency and tolerance according to clinical
usage and machine capability, as specified elsewhere159–161
and in Sec. II B of the AAPM TG-142 report.160 Of note,
image quality test frequency could be aligned with those of
conventional CT scanners after sufficient experience with
the image-guided systems. While this report is in full agreement with the AAPM TG-101 and TG-104, and TG-148
reports, a discrepancy, discussed in Sec. IV G, is noted for
daily QC checks of CT-based IGRT technologies for SBRT
as described in the TG-142 report. TG-179 is of the opinion
that any major software or hardware upgrades that impact
geometric accuracy, image quality, or imaging dose necessitate full recommissioning of the IGRT system. Likewise,
service repairs and interventions should be followed by relevant and appropriate QC tests or baselines refreshing, as recommended by the manufacturer.
IV.A. Geometric accuracy

The value of CT-based image-guidance systems lies in
their three-dimensional description of internal patient anatomy and its spatial relationship to the linac radiation isocenter. Therefore, for technologies where the imaging and linac
radiation isocenters are mismatched (i.e., kV-CBCT, MVCBCT, and CT-on-rails), the relationship between the two
isocenters, henceforth termed geometric calibration, and the
periodic testing of this calibration, must be considered carefully. It is recommended that the geometric calibration be
tested daily (see Sec. IV G). The geometric calibration is
typically expressed as a function of gantry angle since the

TABLE II. Summary of QC tests recommended for CT-based IGRT systems. Tolerances may change according to expectations, experience and performance.
Frequency
Daily

Quality metric

Quality check

Tolerance

Safety

Collision and other interlocks
Warning lights
Laser=image=treatment isocentre coincidence OR
Phantom localization and repositioning with couch shift
Geometric calibration mapsa OR
kV=MV=laser alignment
Couch shifts: accuracy of motions
Scale, distance, and orientation accuracya
Uniformity, noisea
High contrast spatial resolutiona
Low contrast detectabilitya
CT number accuracy and stabilitya
Imaging dose
X-ray generator
performance (kV systems only):
tube potential, mA, ms accuracy, and linearity
Anteroposterior, mediolateral, and
craniocaudal orientations are maintained
(upon upgrade from CT to IGRT system)
Long and short term planning of
resources (disk space, manpower, etc.)

Functional
Functional
62 mm
62 mm
Replace=refresh
61 mm
61 mm
Baseline
Baseline
 2 mm (or  5 lp=cm)
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline

System operation and accuracy
Monthly or upon upgrade

Geometric

Image quality

If used for dose calculation
Annual

Image quality
Dose
Imaging system performance

Geometric

System operation

a

These tests can be performed on a semiannual basis after stability has been demonstrated, 6–12 months after commissioning.

Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2012

Accurate

Support clinical use and current
imaging policies and procedures

1951

Bissonnette et al.: QA for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies

imaging and therapy system components flex during gantry
rotation. A convenient method for performing kV-CBCT
system geometric calibration, derived from the Winston–Lutz procedure162 and closely following the procedure
described in Appendix G of the AAPM TG-66,163 consists of
placing a metal ball bearing (BB) near the radiation isocenter
and using portal images acquired at the four cardinal angles
to compare the ball bearing image centroid to the field edges.
To eliminate imprecision in the jaw position, images are
acquired with the collimator rotated by 180 . The ball bearing can then be moved iteratively toward the accelerator
radiation isocenter until it indicates accurately the location
of the isocentre.7,164 Once positioned, the ball bearing
images are obtained using the image-guidance system. Analyzing the apparent travel of the ball bearing on the projection images used for reconstruction of volumetric datasets
provides a measurement of the components’ flexing as a
function of gantry angle. Once this relationship is known,
the pixel coincident with the isocenter can be determined
and the projection image pixel locations referenced to the
isocenter pixel. A plot of the distance between the measured
isocenter pixel and the pixel that would nominally intersect
isocenter is termed a flexmap. The shifts identified in the
measured flexmap are performed automatically by the
image-guidance software. Not only does the flexmap correction remove the blur due to the imaging component flexes
but also aligns the resulting image with the accelerator isocenter. The flexmap is typically measured at commissioning
time, verified on a monthly basis, after system upgrades or
after service that could potentially invalidate it.
While similarities exist between the kV-CBCT geometric
calibration procedure and the Winston–Lutz test162 used to
verify the alignment of stereotactic radiosurgery frames and
attachment equipment, the two should not be confused. The
geometric calibration procedure described above expects
flexes and other misalignments to occur and actively corrects
them whereas the Winston–Lutz formalism assumes rigidity
of all system components. The Winston–Lutz test is a comprehensive test to identify misalignment without explicitly
identifying or correcting the cause of such misalignment.
Commercial vendors have proposed two automatic
approaches to correct for system flex. The first approach is to
digitally shift the projection images according to the measured flexmap prior to reconstruction of the volumetric datasets.165 This first approach can take up to 2 h to perform,
rendering it unsuitable for daily testing. The second
approach consists of moving the image-guidance system xray detector according to the flexmap to ensure that the detector is always coincident with the radiation beam central
axis.16,166 The residual error is well below 1 mm after correction irrespective of the correction type for image-guided
systems based on CBCT or for the CT-on-rails systems,11,16
demonstrating that CT-based IGRT systems are capable of
high geometric accuracy [typically, 60.3 mm (Refs. 11 and
15)], irrespective of conventional or hypofractionated radiotherapy regimes. Users are cautioned, however, to perform
the manufacturer recommended calibration procedures
whenever service that could modify geometric calibration is
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2012

1951

performed on the IGRT components or after major software
or hardware upgrades.
For fan-beam MVCT units, the imaging beam is generated by the same source that generates the treatment beam
and the two beams share a common geometry. This leads to
an inherent robustness of the MVCT imaging system geometry. However, the image acquisition, reconstruction, and
registration process uses hardware and software components
that have the potential to introduce geometric errors in the
fan-beam MVCT IGRT process. The spatial and geometric
accuracy of the fan-beam MVCT based IGRT system therefore needs to be tested routinely and consistently. Spatial accuracy and geometry tests for fan-beam MVCT are
described in TG-148,161 and the interested reader is referred
to that task group for a detailed discussion. Briefly, on a
daily basis, the image registration is tested for consistency,
and the subsequent alignment process is tested for accuracy.
A test of the image orientation and spatial integrity accuracy
is recommended with a monthly frequency. An annual test
of the imaging=treatment=laser coordinate coincidence is
recommended. This is a phantom based end-to-end test
intended to check the image registration and treatment delivery chain. A simultaneous test of the laser and imaging system coincidence with the imaging system enables the use of
the laser system as a surrogate for the isocenter for daily and
monthly consistency tests. Finally, the synchronization of
the imaging and couch motions is explicitly tested. The test
frequencies and tolerance values that are recommended in
TG-148 are consistent with TG-142.
Similar to fan-beam MVCT, the CT-on-rails solutions
offer high CT gantry motion rigidity and reproducibility.
The alignment between the CT and the linear accelerator isocenter, however, does not have the same rigidity as does
other CT-based image-guidance systems since the imaging
and treatment equipment do not share a gantry. The treatment couch is rotated prior to align the patient with the CT
scanner, and lateral and vertical shifts may be necessary to
fit the couch through the CT bore. Under controlled conditions using rigid phantoms, CT isocenter to treatment isocenter alignment accuracy of better than 61 mm has been
demonstrated.12 The clinical accuracy is expected to be
worse because the process of rotating the patient couch into
the CT imaging position introduces additional errors due to
couch bearings eccentricity, patient motion, and the limited
couch readout and control precision. Another approach to
ensure high geometric accuracy is to image external fiducial
markers, as is done during simulation, to transfer the radiation isocentre location into CT space. Fiducial markers, such
as BBs, can be placed on the couch, immobilization device,
or the patient’s surface at the laser intersection. The couch
coordinates of this location are recorded, enabling the BB
images to act as registration markers, which couples patient
location with couch coordinates. Shifts that will align the
patient’s anatomy with the planned isocenter can then be calculated and reported as updated couch coordinates. This
method relies on the room lasers acting as accurate surrogates of the accelerator isocenter. The accuracy of this
method is generally limited to the alignment of the room

1952

Bissonnette et al.: QA for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies

lasers and to the couch readout accuracy and tends to be on
the order of 1 mm. In either case, the 3D CT geometric accuracy should be checked annually and the alignment between
the CT and the radiation isocenter or the lasers and the radiation isocenters should be checked daily. This can be done by
imaging a device placed at radiation isocenter at a known
offset, shifting based on an acquired CT, and verified with
megavoltage portal images.
For MV-CBCT, a longitudinal (lateral) EPID positioning
error will result in an error in the longitudinal (radial) position of the image isocenter with respect to the machine isocenter. Therefore, the positional accuracy of the EPID in the
horizontal plane (i.e., the plane perpendicular to the beam
central axis) is recommended to be checked daily by acquiring two portal images for a reticule with two orthogonal
tungsten wires, one at a gantry angle of 0 and the other at
90 , and comparing the position of the projection of the
crossing of the wires with the position of the central pixel
corrected for the residual misalignments, with and without
gantry sag effects.23,58 EPID positioning errors with respect
to the machine isocenter should not exceed 1 mm in the horizontal plane. The residual misalignments are recommended
to be recalibrated and checked every 6 months. An error in
the vertical position of the flat panel does not translate in an
error in the reconstructed isocenter position, as the machine
isocenter still projects to the center of the EPID. However,
since the projection matrices derived during the geometry
calibration procedure are only strictly valid at a SID of
145 cm, a vertical position error may result in some image
distortion. Unlike the horizontal position, which is recommended to be checked daily, the vertical position of the
EPID is recommended to be checked monthly, using a ruler,
and with a recommended tolerance of 65 mm. This tolerance was selected because an error of 1 cm in the SID results
in a 0.7% magnification of the image.
A specialized phantom can be used to test MV-CBCT
geometric accuracy and registration. The phantom is a cylinder with four tungsten beads placed 90 apart on the surface.
The beads are positioned within a common transverse
plane.58 The position accuracy is checked by placing a reference point at the center of each bead in the CB image of the
phantom and ensuring that the recorded position of that reference point is within 1 mm of the physical bead position in
the phantom. To verify stability, this procedure can repeated
five times, on five consecutive images of the phantom in the
same position. A monthly check is recommended with all
beads required to be within 61 mm in the three principal
directions.
IV.B. Image quality

The general principles of image quality QA for CT-based
IGRT technologies follow those of fan-beam computed tomography systems (single and multislice third and fourth
generation scanners operated in axial or helical modes) that
have been described comprehensively in AAPM report 74167
and reiterated in the AAPM TG-142 report.160 Recommendations of this report are directly applicable to the CT on
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2012

1952

rails systems operating in a fan-beam mode. The design of
other CT-based IGRT systems, summarized in Sec II A, differs from conventional CT scanner designs, utilizing a megavolt imaging beam and=or a cone beam geometry,
differences that impact image quality.168 Improvements in
imaging physics and correction algorithms are required
before image quality levels approach those achieved with
fan-beam CT scanners. For commissioning purposes, the
methodologies described in the AAPM report 74 have been
adopted for CT-based technologies, with findings summarized below.15,18–20 Evidence-based guidelines have not yet
been established because few authors have repeated these
tests over extended periods of time, so test tolerances and
frequencies have not yet been determined.18 At this stage,
the AAPM TG-179 recommends that image quality tests be
performed initially on a monthly basis, and ultimately on a
semiannual basis, after parameter stability has been demonstrated by the users.
Technologies based on cone-beam geometry (i.e., MVCBCT and kV-CBCT) require large area detectors, usually
flat panel imagers (FPI) that are inferior, in terms of dynamic
range and detector quantum efficiency, to the high quality
detectors used in multislice CT scanners. Moreover, the
large cone angle used by these technologies allow x-ray scatter to contribute undesirable signals to the reconstructed
images.40,169 As a result, x-ray scatter reduces soft tissue
contrast, increases image noise, introduces cupping and capping artifacts in 3D reconstructions,159,170,171 and reduces
the reconstructed CT number accuracy.18 Finally, blurring
from internal structure motion affects the image quality since
image acquisition takes up to 2 min.
The QA program of a CT-based IGRT system should be
tailored to its utilization. IGRT systems are usually used to
localize targets and organs at risk and drive correction strategies to minimize geometric uncertainties. Soft-tissue detectability is thus an important aspect of CT-based IMRT
quality. CT number linearity and accuracy become important
only if the CT scans are also used for dose calculation (e.g.,
patient too large for conventional CT bore or adaptive radiotherapy programs).
Most image quality control tests can be performed using
commercially available phantoms that contain multiple
inserts tailored to test various aspects of image quality.
Examples include the CatPhan 500 phantom (The Phantom
Laboratory, Salem, NY) or the AAPM CT performance
phantom (CIRS, Norfolk, VA). Similar phantoms are being
adapted for megavoltage imaging purposes (Siemens Medical Solutions, Concord, CA).20,172 This section describes the
general principles of these tests. It is recommended that the
image quality tests be performed during system acceptance
to obtain a system performance baseline that can thereafter
be compared to quality assurance results acquired under
identical conditions. For example, changes in the scatter
environment (i.e., phantom size or field size) may yield spurious deviations from the baselines.18 Measurements
acquired over extended periods of time have shown that
most image quality parameters do not vary much over time.
Based on the available evidence and given the technological

1953

Bissonnette et al.: QA for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies

improvements expected in a few years, the AAPM TG-179
recommends the test frequencies and tolerances presented in
Table II. Users are justified to reduce the frequency of those
image-quality tests marked by an asterisk to semiannual or
upon extensive service after the stability of their own CTbased IGRT systems has been demonstrated.18
Several authors have reported on the scale and distance
accuracy, low contrast resolution, spatial resolution, uniformity, and image artifacts.15,17,18,20 These data are usually
acquired by imaging one of the phantoms mentioned in the
previous paragraph, therefore allowing several parameters to
be analyzed, offline, using a single volumetric image
acquisition.
IV.B.1. Scale and distance accuracy

Image scale and voxel size accuracy can be quantified by
scanning objects of known sizes and comparing the object
size in the image to the actual size. In general, CT-based
IGRT systems have displayed distance accuracy well within
1 mm.159 Deviations in scale and distance accuracy will
affect image registration accuracy and may reduce patient
positioning correction accuracy. Such deviations are likely
to be caused by unintended changes in scanner geometry
that could also degrade the spatial resolution. These changes
should be fixed by the geometric accuracy calibration procedure described in Sec. IV A. A monthly test frequency is recommended initially, adopting a 6-month schedule when
stability has been demonstrated.

1953

IV.B.3. Spatial resolution

Most CT-based IGRT systems clinically operate at a spatial resolution that is substantially lower than their best performance due to the large size of the volumetric datasets that
would be obtained at full resolution. There is an intrinsic
tradeoff between spatial resolution and low contrast detectability in computed tomography imaging. As the latter is
more important for IGRT, spatial resolution can be compromised. Routine QA of the spatial resolution is, nevertheless,
useful because a reduction in spatial resolution may indicate
changes in scanner geometry and=or gantry angle readout
calibration. Spatial resolution measurements are conducted
by imaging a series of high contrast objects with suitable resolution objects, e.g., rods, plates, or bars, embedded in the
image quality phantom. Authors report that spatial resolution
is on the order of 6–9 line-pairs=cm for kV-CBCT,15,17,18
and of up to 4 line-pairs=cm for MV-CBCT,20 thus enabling
visualization of high-contrast objects of 1–2.5 mm in size. In
fan-beam MVCT images, the vendor’s specification indicates that a 1.6 mm high contrast object should be
resolved.173 Spatial resolution has been shown to be independent of dose or location of the phantom with respect to
the isocenter plane.18 For routine QA, monthly spatial resolution evaluation against established baselines is sufficient.159,160 A monthly test frequency is recommended
initially, adopting a 6-month schedule when stability has
been demonstrated.
IV.B.4. Uniformity and noise

IV.B.2. Low contrast resolution

Low contrast detectability requirements for a CT-based
IGRT system are generally looser than for a diagnostic CT
scanner. While the diagnostic CT scan is used to diagnose
disease and identify the anatomy, the IGRT scan is mainly
used for localization of the preidentified and segmented
structures. Low contrast detectability is tested by scanning a
phantom containing objects with a variety of linear attenuation coefficients. Contrast detectability depends on phantom
size, object size, reconstructed voxel size, and imaging technique. It is, therefore, important to obtain the test images
using clinically relevant parameters and keep these parameters constant for quality control checks. The visibility of 1%
contrast objects that are 7 mm in diameter has been reported
for kV-CBCT systems.15,17 The fan-beam MVCT system
can resolve 13 mm diameter objects with 2% density differences from background,19 and MV-CBCT can resolve 2 cm
objects with 1% contrast.58 The required contrast resolution
for clinical scenarios depends on the anatomical region. For
example, the contrast difference between the prostate and
the rectum is typically 2% while that between the normal
breast tissue and a seroma cavity is 10–15%. The low contrast visibility should be tested against a baseline image on a
monthly basis. Changes in low contrast detectability are
likely related to changes in image noise and=or image uniformity. A monthly test frequency is recommended initially,
adopting a 6-month schedule when stability has been
demonstrated.
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2012

Nonuniformities and artifacts can be easily detected during a visual inspection of a volumetric image of a uniform
density phantom, such as a water bath or water-equivalent
object.174 The gray scale window width should be selected
to reveal clinically relevant artifacts: examples of such artifacts are provided in the AAPM TG-104 (Sec. III B 6).159
Ring artifacts are often caused by detector element malfunction and require recalibration of the defective pixels map.175
Cupping artifacts (i.e., the center of the image of a uniform
object appears darker than at the periphery) are mostly
caused by scattered radiation. While commercial systems
have cupping artifact correction calibrations, these calibrations occasionally cause their own artifacts.170,171 These
types of artifacts affect image uniformity, so scanning a uniform density phantom can provide quantitative image uniformity and noise values. Uniformity is characterized by the
variability of the average signal over several small regions
of interest (ROI) and should meet vendor specifications.
Noise is characterized by the average signal variability over
these ROIs and should also meet the vendor specifications.
Note that rather than using multiple small ROIs, using a single larger ROI makes it difficult to decouple the effects of
image noise and nonuniformity. Image uniformity may
reduce with increasing object size because of the subsequent
increase of scattered-to-primary x-ray fluence. Cone-beam
CT systems are more susceptible to this effect, while fanbeam systems, such as CT-on-rails and tomotherapy, exhibit
uniformity comparable to those of diagnostic CT scans,19

1954

Bissonnette et al.: QA for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies

and such systems can hold the same generally accepted tolerances.174 For cone-beam CT systems, repeating the uniformity measurements under conditions that were identical to
acceptance testing will be important to be able to compare
the results against the established baselines. For routine QA,
comparing uniformity and noise with the established baselines is sufficient;159,160 monitoring relative deviations is
more useful than measuring absolute contrast values. A
monthly test frequency is recommended initially, adopting a
6-month schedule when stability has been demonstrated.
Image nonuniformity also affects dose calculation accuracy. For fan-beam MVCT, for example, a maximum HU
difference in peripheral and central ROIs of 25 HU is recommended in TG-148 if the images are to be used for dose
calculations.161
IV.C. Image dose

CT-based IGRT has progressed rapidly as experience has
shown it to be a good means for identifying and correcting
geometric errors prior to initiating radiation therapy. Daily
imaging doses are generally small compared to therapeutic
doses but are distributed over the entire imaged volume.
Dosimetric CT-based imaging studies have been published10,22,24,172,176,177 and report dose ranging from 0.1 to 2
cGy=scan for kV-CBCT and 0.7 to 10.8 cGy=scan for MVCBCT. For fan-beam MVCT images, the doses range from
0.7 to 4 cGy and depend on the selected CT pitch and the
imaged anatomy thickness.24 Dose can, therefore, cumulate
from 3 to 370 cGy over a course of treatment, above the
threshold doses reported in the literature for secondary
malignancy occurrence.178,179
Image quality is intimately linked to imaging dose. It is,
therefore, tempting to use relatively high mAs imaging techniques such as those used for diagnostic imaging, without
reaching equivalent image quality for kV-CBCT, especially
for large and low-contrast volumes. It is, therefore, justified
to reduce the image dose while the task at hand (e.g., visualize bony anatomy to correct patient positioning) remains
feasible and particularly indicated for smaller volumes
containing high-contrast structures, such as head-and-neck.
Strategies to achieve doses that are reasonably low may
include reducing tube mAs, reducing the number of projections acquired for a whole scan or performing partial scans,
reducing imaging frequency, or minimizing the field-of-view
to reduce integral dose. Each of these strategies is the topic
of current research.119,180,181 Still, a compromise solution
between the risk estimated from image doses must be balanced with the benefit offered (high precision treatment leading to reduced high dose volumes) and should be contrasted
with the estimated risk from the extra doses that can result
from IMRT and volumetric arc therapy.182 At a minimum,
each facility should evaluate the doses associated with each
IGRT implementation and discuss the cost versus benefit
with the radiation oncologists. This may be especially important in treating patients with long post-treatment life expectancies, such as pediatric patients. Simple measurement
techniques and dose indices, usually variations on the CTDI
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2012

1954

dose indices used in conventional CT, have been suggested
to describe imaging dose.21,176,183 We refer the reader to the
AAPM Task Group 75 report on advice on managing image
dose for IGRT.183
IV.D. Accuracy of CT numbers

CT number accuracy becomes important when IGRT
scans are used for dose calculations.132,141,184,185 CT number
accuracy is measured by scanning a phantom containing
inserts with a wide range of electron densities and comparing
the CT numbers in the image with the specifications for the
inserts. CT numbers are defined as being proportional to linear attenuation coefficients, but individual scanners will exhibit inaccuracies in linear attenuation coefficient
measurements. The relationship between electron density
and linear attenuation coefficient for human tissues is bilinear.186 CT number accuracy for CBCT suffers from the sensitivity of scatter-to-primary x-ray fluence to object and=or
field size. The same holds true when a phantom size deviates
from calibration conditions, so faithfully reproducing test
conditions is crucial for obtaining meaningful quality control
check results.18,159,160 Research is ongoing to better correct
for scatter contribution and thus improve HU integrity of
CBCT scans. For these reasons, kV-CBCT does not provide
quantitative CT because small deviations from acceptance
phantom conditions significantly affect CT numbers. This is
not the case for either fan-beam MVCT132 or for CT-onrails.174 For fan-beam MVCT images, a monthly test of the
HU calibration is recommended in TG-148. HU for materials
with densities close to waterlike densities should be within
30 HU from the calibration data and within 50 HU for lung
and bonelike materials. This test is recommended only if
images are used for dose calculations.161
Because of the cupping artifact produced by scatter radiation and beam hardening, the calibration of MV-CBCT
images is more elaborate than conventional fan-beam CT
calibration. However, the smaller amount of scatter and the
reduced energy dependence of the photon interactions in the
MeV x-ray range produce a cupping artifact that is predictable. This allows for the use of simple nonpatient specific
correction methods to improve the MV-CBCT image uniformity and provide accurate and stable CT numbers, making MV-CBCT suitable for dose recalculation. Using
postprocessed images, dose calculations performed on MVCBCT images agree with calculations conducted using conventional kVCT images within 61% and 1–3% on phantom
and patient images, respectively.139–141,187
Once the corrections mentioned above become available
in released CT-based IGRT products, regular monitoring of
the daily patient dose based on on-board images acquired of
the patient on the treatment table can become a powerful
tool for tracking the progress and accuracy of the
treatment.142,143,187
IV.E. Image registration

Image registration is an important step in CT-based
IGRT. Due to the nonrigid nature of patient’s anatomy and

1955

Bissonnette et al.: QA for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies

the limited correction methods, the “best” alignment may
depend on the clinical case. A compromise between aligning
soft tissue structures, bony, or implanted fiducial surrogates,
and nearby critical structures, may be required. Selection
between available intervention methods (simple couch translations, available couch rotations, online replanning methods, etc.) will also be required and will impact the
registration method selection. At this writing, a uniform consensus for image registration quality assurance has not been
developed, although the AAPM TG-132 is currently designing protocols for patient specific image registration and
fusion software acceptance testing and quality assurance, so
this area falls outside the scope of the current task group.
It should be pointed out that difficulties in differentiating
soft tissues can arise with CT-based image-guidance systems. When soft tissue localization is ambiguous, it is prudent to adopt a two-staged image guidance approach. In this
approach, automatic registration based on bony anatomy is
used to identify and correct gross geometric discrepancies.
Subsequently, manual or automated soft-tissue registrations
are used to refine registration to improve the measurement
accuracy. Users are cautioned to visually assess image registration accuracy not only over the target area but also in its
surrounding volume. It is also highly recommended that the
user establish site-specific clinical protocols to explicitly
describe the volume of interest, alignment goals, and evaluation criteria.
Care should be taken to optimally derive a correction
from a registration result. Ideally, the volumetric image
registration algorithm should calculate both rotational and
translational shifts; shifts that are too large for a specific
treatment technology (e.g., any couch translation larger than
1 cm or rotation exceeding 3 degrees) might warrant repeating the patient setup procedure.188 Careful assessment of the
target position and rotation in combination with organs at
risk or other anatomical landmarks should be performed; assistance with this task might be provided by projecting contours defined on the planning scan onto the daily volumetric
image. As IGRT is employed to empower adaptive radiation
therapy, commercial vendors will have to develop reliable
algorithms to account for deforming or moving anatomy
over a single treatment or an entire radiation therapy course
and suggest test methods with the collaboration of early
adopters.189
IV.F Accuracy of remote-controlled couch

A key component to any image-guidance system is the
patient positioning device. This device typically involves a
motorized, remote-controlled couch that translates the
patient along three-axes.190 A couch with 6 degrees of freedom (3 translations and 3 rotations) is also commercially
available.191,192 Patient positioning corrections need to be
both accurate and precise to realize the full potential of
IGRT. The accuracy and precision of correction movements
should be assessed during commissioning. Submillimeter
couch position accuracy has been demonstrated, for several
commercial couches, using high-precision calipers,190 portal
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2012

1955

imaging,7,193 optical navigation systems,194 film,195 and the
image-guidance system196 itself. These data suggest that
couch motion accuracy is well within the vendor-provided
specifications or the tolerances suggested by the AAPM TG142 report (i.e., 62mm=1 )160 and should suffice for highprecision radiotherapy and SBRT. However, authors typically recommend repeating such procedures during regularly
scheduled QA activities but fail to specify test frequency.
Tracking the trends from repeating these tests over extended
periods of time may guide appropriate test frequencies, as
well as what long-term accuracy is achievable, but such time
trends have not yet been reported.
The AAPM TG-179 recommends that the tolerances for
accuracy of remote-controlled couches match those specified
in TG-142. One benefit from the end-to-end QC test
described in Sec. IV G is that the accuracy of couch motions
is tested on a daily basis. Therefore, Table II does not specify additional recommended tests to those of TG-142.
IV.G. Daily operational issues

This task group recommends that daily CT-based IGRT
QC tests be performed. The primary rationale for daily QC
procedures is to identify any sudden performance changes or
gross errors that could result from collisions, upgrades, or
afterhours service. Another benefit of daily QC is to obtain a
record of the geometric accuracy of the therapy equipment,
using a more efficient procedure than the lengthy but more
precise monthly procedure described in Sec. IV A. The rapid
daily procedure described below inherently involves other
routine QC items, such as warming up the x-ray tube, reporting certain warning messages and system interlocks, and verifying there is sufficient disk space for the work day.159 In
some implementations, the imaging equipment is positioned
by powerful robotic arms that move near the patient, creating
a potential for injury. Thus, the daily QC procedures also
need to ensure the touch panels or motion interlocks are all
functional.
Simple, integral tests have been described to check the
overall CT-simulation processes accuracy,163 and similar
tests, with adapted phantoms, have been proposed for
image-guidance systems.8,15,159,197,198 A variety of methods
have been proposed to achieve this goal. Cubic phantoms
with a marker placed at the center can be aligned with the
linac isocenter using room lasers or portal images; volumetric phantom images would therefore measure the isocenter
localization accuracy.8 A phantom with multiple markers at
known positions would provide additional assessments,
such as volumetric image orientation,8 confirm source-toimager distance,197 assess image sharpness,198 and even
assess dose.199,200 Typically, these phantoms are aligned to
the accelerator isocenter using the room lasers, thereby
speeding up the execution of the daily test at the cost of
relating accuracy to the laser system rather than directly to
the isocenter. A tolerance of 62 mm has been demonstrated
for such daily geometric accuracy assessment; the accuracy
should be confirmed with orthogonal portal images of the
phantom.11

1956

Bissonnette et al.: QA for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies

A variant of the daily QA procedure can be implemented
to assess communication between the image registration
software and the remote-controlled couch, to verify couch
motion accuracy, and to provide a rapid end-to-end test of
the IGRT process.8,11,201 The image acquisition and registration software is typically independent of the treatment couch
control system; hence, the software provides an objective
measure of the couch positioning accuracy and precision.
The “residual correction error” is a useful measure of the targeting and couch correction accuracy. This value can be estimated by first placing a phantom at isocenter and then
displacing the phantom at predefined distances in three
directions; this displacement is independently measured. The
displacement should be less than 2 cm in any cardinal direction because remote-controlled movements for most IGRT
couches are currently limited to 2 cm to reduce the likelihood of patient–machine collision. The daily QA procedure
should also avoid repeated, trivial, or clinically irrelevant
displacement magnitudes. For example, a displacement of
(1,1,1) cm in the (L=R, S=I, and A=P) directions would not
expose an error where the coordinate axes were mismatched
between a scan from the CT-based image-guidance system
and a reference CT scan.
After the displacement is applied, a localization image
dataset is acquired to assess what couch motions are
required to align the phantom to its nominal position. To
mimic patient treatments, a reference CT scan of the phantom is used as a surrogate of the CT simulation scan. The
shift is determined by comparing the localization and simulation images and a suggested couch shift is determined.
The shift is applied and a verification image dataset is
acquired and registered again to the reference CT dataset.
The displacement indicated from registering the verification dataset to the reference CT defines the residual couch
correction error. The residual error obtained with this simplified geometric accuracy check should be 0 6 2 mm,
based on a 95% confidence interval.11 Repeated measurements of this residual error define the systematic error
(mean) and the uncertainty (standard deviation) of the
targeting and correction system; again, submillimeter accuracy has been reported on phantom studies.202 However,
the overall accuracy has been shown to depend on the IG
modality (2D or 3D, kV or MV),203 the x-ray technique
(kVp, mAs, or MUs), the target (fiducial or soft-tissue or
bony matching), and the targeting method (manual or automatic). This daily QA procedure creates confidence in the
IGRT system accuracy and precision. It is also useful for
technical and clinical staff training as well as to provide a
quick check after scheduled or unscheduled service events
or other mishaps, such as a collision.
It should be noted that the tolerance supported by published data for daily geometric accuracy test is 0 6 2 mm to
a 95% confidence interval, in agreement with the AAPM
TG-101 report.11,146 The AAPM TG-142 report recommends
that daily tests of IGRT systems demonstrate an accuracy of
61 mm for SBRT techiniques160 while the AAPM TG-104
report does not distinguish between conventional and hypofractionated techniques.159 The AAPM Task Group 179 is
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2012

1956

consistent with the TG-101 and TG-104 reports for a number
of reasons. As described above, the daily test aims to detect
gross, unintentional misalignments that may be caused by
collisions, service, or research activities performed after
hours. Second, the daily procedures described in this section
provide rapid assessment of geometric accuracy, system integrity, and functionality; this rapidity is achieved at the cost
of a reduced test precision relative to the geometric calibration procedures described at the beginning of this section.
Daily geometric tests need to be performed in short amounts
of time, and accuracy is compromised because the user manually aligns the phantom with room lasers and because the
accelerator component flexes and torques are under sampled
when only orthogonal portal images are used to assess coincidence of all isocenters. Finally, for some systems, manual
image matching introduces further uncertainties in the test.11
The AAPM TG-179 stresses that the complete geometric
calibration procedure described in Sec. IV A has proven the
submillimeter accuracy of CT-based IGRT devices over
extended periods of time; repeating this procedure whenever
extensive service or upgrades are performed should maintain
a high, submillimetric geometric accuracy that suffices to
both conventional and hypofractionated radiotherapy fractionation schedules. Verifying the geometric accuracy using the
geometric calibration procedure described in Sec. IV A can
take up to 2 h and so is inappropriate for daily QC.
V. COMMISSIONING THE IMAGE-GUIDED
PROCESS
Clinical experience with CT-based image-guidance technologies is steadily growing. These technologies can achieve
several aims. First, they can increase radiotherapy accuracy
by verifying the patient position with respect to the treatment
beam immediately prior to irradiation. Second, the enhanced
geometric accuracy can be used to review and perhaps
reduce setup margins for PTV design, leading to reduced
doses to organs at risk and perhaps escalating dose. Finally,
IGRT may also empower adaptive radiotherapy because
clinicians can assess anatomical changes seen during a
course of radiation and rationally respond to those changes.
Secondary aims of IGRT might include replacing film or
portal imaging to document positional accuracy, manage
inter- and intrafractional organ motion during radiotherapy,
or measure the actual efficacy of immobilization accessories.
Thus, first-time users of this technology should ascertain
which of these aims are desirable for their own clinical contexts and tailor their commissioning and QA programs
accordingly.
One strategy for implementing wide-scale IGRT is to
build on several short-term successes, starting with acceptance testing of the first CT-based IGRT device to develop
image-guidance protocols. Several initiatives can be performed in parallel. Multidisciplinary teams can build their
confidence in the IGRT process, using end-to-end tests
where a phantom is treated exactly like a patient, from CT
simulation to treatment delivery. Such end-to-end tests simulate the process in a multidisciplinary environment, help

1957

Bissonnette et al.: QA for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies

identify and resolve issues, and develop expertise. Other
issues include the following:
• developing

an appropriate nomenclature for clearly and
systematically communicating and documenting imageguided measurements;
• assessing performance under a clinical load;
• defining an appropriate frequency of site-specific image
guidance protocols; and
• defining the roles, responsibilities, and involvement of
team members in the image-guidance process
A powerful motivating factor for multidisciplinary teams
is the clinical research required to establish safe and efficient
clinical operation. Specific operating issues include obtaining
soft-tissue contrast on volumetric datasets using doses lower
than or comparable to portal imaging opens the possibility of
frequent and accurate positioning of the patient at the onset
of each treatment.35,109,110 Teams can test and benchmark
CT-based IGRT against portal imaging guidance, initially
using rigid phantoms and end-to-end tests,7 followed with
patient studies.36,95,96,99,105,204 Often, such studies involve
verification imaging to assess the accuracy of the position
correction; this build clinicians’ confidence in the IGRT process accuracy. In parallel, a QA program must be established
to ensure the safe, reliable, and consistent operation of the
CT-based image-guidance technology,175 accounting for the
goals and aims to be achieved with such guidance systems, be
it simply the correction of geometric uncertainties to empowering an adaptive radiotherapy protocol for routine use.
Clinical patient studies are introduced gradually, selecting
a few anatomical sites prior to broadening the use of imageguidance across all anatomical sites.205 Depending on the
comfort and confidence levels of users, initial anatomical
site groups can be selected based on (i) research or personal
interests, (ii) sufficient patient volume to allow clinical team
to learn without overloading it (about five patients initially
on a treatment unit), (iii) difficulty of the imaging process, as
influenced by visualization of soft tissues and mobility of internal organs, and (iv) when image contrast gains offered by
kilovoltage over portal imaging are immediately obvious
(lung, pediatrics, and brain). Coordination meetings help

1957

share the findings from various site groups and identify
infrastructure issues, such as nomenclature, documentation
of the image-guidance protocols, disk space, and defining
data archiving requirements. A team with representation
from all disciplines (i.e., therapists, physicists, and physicians) should be involved in the development of site-specific
IGRT techniques. The team should develop an initial imageguidance procedure considering the following:
• definition of the initial positional accuracy requirements in

the clinic;
• recommendation

of appropriate imaging techniques for
specific anatomical sites;
• keep radiation doses low;
• identify appropriate immobilization accessories;
• document results from end-to-end image guidance testing;
and
• identify obstacles or potential pitfalls for safe and efficient
use of the technology.
Subsequently, the analysis of positional data from end-toend testing will help the team reassess setup margins, tolerances for residual positional errors, and opportunities for
dose escalation. Vendors have an obligation to provide user
training, and administrators need to allow extra time for staff
to learn the new process, over the course of a few months,
while making teams aware of the fiscal constraints that need
to be met once the new IGRT processes are stabilized. Each
team should fully document site-specific image-guided processes, with clear statements of accuracy requirements. These
documents can then be used as learning tools for other staff.
Depending on the aims of individual clinics in implementing IGRT, the time and resource commitment to implement CT-based IGRT technologies differs between clinics
around the world and between imaging systems. Table III
summarizes the collected experiences of AAPM TG-179
members as an estimate of the resource needs to maintain
image-guidance programs with CT-based technologies. Clinics are advised to plan for additional resources from radiation therapy, radiation oncology, and medical physics for
successful wide-scale implementation of CT-based image
guidance technologies and processes.

TABLE III. Estimated human resources required for image guidance using CT-based IGRT technologies. Estimates are obtained from the collected experiences
of the task group members. More time is required when performing commissioning and quality control testing of 2D functions on some platforms.
Activity

Responsibility

Time

Acceptance testing and commissioning
Education

Operation

Physicists
Physicists
Therapists
Dosimetrists
Therapists

2.5 days
2 days
2 days
2 days
5 mins=patient

Review of images
Daily quality control tests
Monthly quality control tests
Annual quality control tests
Continued clinical support

Dosimetrists
Physicians
Therapists
Physicists
Physicists
Physicists

10 min=patient
5 min=scan
10 min
1–2 h
2–4 h
0.05 full-time equivalent position

Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2012

Notes

First install only
First install only
First install only
Each treatment with IGRT; includes
image acquisition and evaluation
Data transfers to imaging platform
0 when performed by therapists

Ad hoc activity

1958

Bissonnette et al.: QA for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies

VI. CONCLUSIONS
CT-based image-guidance systems have the potential to
profoundly change how RT is delivered. The quality control
protocols employed for these devices are highly dependent
on their intended use. Since the primary aim of imageguidance is to detect and correct positional uncertainties,
particular attention should be paid to their geometric accuracy assessment. As PTV margins become tighter, the geometric accuracy of radiation therapy delivery systems
becomes as important as the dosimetric accuracy, warranting
implementation of daily QC procedures.
Image quality requirements for QA differ, however.
While most of the commercially -available systems are capable of visualizing bony anatomy, air, and some soft tissue,
their performance is subject to variations caused by the x-ray
scatter environment and beam hardening, both of which degrade image contrast, noise, and uniformity. For some configurations, it may be more difficult to use directly images
from IGRT systems for soft tissue target alignment or for
treatment planning because the CT number accuracy is
object-dependent. The tests described in this report and corroborated in the reports from the AAPM TG-101, 104, 142,
and 148 propose guidelines for test tolerance and frequency
of testing should be based on the intended use of the images.
a)

Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Electronic mail:
jean-pierre.bissonnette@rmp.uhn.on.ca
1
C. A. McBain, A. M. Henry, J. Sykes, A. Amer, T. Marchant, C. M.
Moore, J. Davies, J. Stratford, C. McCarthy, B. Porritt, P. Williams, V. S.
Khoo, and P. Price, “X-ray volumetric imaging in image-guided radiotherapy: The new standard in on-treatment imaging,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 64, 625–634 (2006).
2
J. Lattanzi, S. McNeely, A. Hanlon, I. Das, T. E. Schultheiss, and G. E.
Hanks, “Daily CT localization for correcting portal errors in the treatment
of prostate cancer,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 41, 1079–1086
(1998).
3
T. R. Mackie, J. Kapatoes, K. Ruchala, W. Lu, C. Wu, G. Olivera, L.
Forrest, W. Tome, J. Welsh, R. Jeraj, P. Harari, P. Reckwerdt, B. Paliwal,
M. Ritter, H. Keller, J. Fowler, and M. Mehta, “Image guidance for precise conformal radiotherapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 56,
89–105 (2003).
4
J. Pouliot, A. Bani-Hashemi, J. Chen, M. Svatos, F. Ghelmansarai, M.
Mitschke, M. Aubin, P. Xia, O. Morin, K. Bucci, M. Roach, III, P. Hernandez, Z. Zheng, D. Hristov, and L. Verhey, “Low-dose megavoltage
cone-beam CT for radiation therapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys.
61, 552–560 (2005).
5
R. G. Simpson, C. T. Chen, E. A. Grubbs, and W. Swindell, “A 4-MV CT
scanner for radiation therapy: the prototype system,” Med. Phys. 9,
574–579 (1982).
6
D. A. Jaffray, D. G. Drake, M. Moreau, A. A. Martinez, and J. W. Wong,
“A radiographic and tomographic imaging system integrated into a medical linear accelerator for localization of bone and soft-tissue targets,” Int.
J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 45, 773–789 (1999).
7
M. B. Sharpe, D. J. Moseley, T. G. Purdie, M. Islam, J. H. Siewerdsen,
and D. A. Jaffray, “The stability of mechanical calibration for a kV cone
beam computed tomography system integrated with linear accelerator,”
Med. Phys. 33, 136–144 (2006).
8
J. P. Bissonnette, “Quality assurance of image-guidance technologies,”
Semin. Radiat. Oncol. 17, 278–286 (2007).
9
G. J. Kutcher, L. Coia, M. Gillin, W. F. Hanson, S. Leibel, R. J. Morton,
J. R. Palta, J. A. Purdy, L. E. Reinstein, G. K. Svensson, M. Weller, and
L. Wingfield, “Comprehensive QA for radiation oncology: Report of the
AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 40,” Med. Phys. 21,
581–618 (1994).
10
J. Lehmann, J. Perks, S. Semon, R. Harse, and J. A. Purdy,
“Commissioning experience with cone-beam computed tomography for
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2012

1958

image-guided radiation therapy,” J. Appl. Clin. Med. Phys. 8, 2354
(2007).
11
J. P. Bissonnette, D. Moseley, E. White, M. Sharpe, T. Purdie, and D. A.
Jaffray, “Quality assurance for the geometric accuracy of cone-beam CT
guidance in radiation therapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 71,
S57–S61 (2008).
12
L. Court, I. Rosen, R. Mohan, and L. Dong, “Evaluation of mechanical
precision and alignment uncertainties for an integrated CT=LINAC system,” Med. Phys. 30, 1198–1210 (2003).
13
C. Woodford, S. Yartsev, and J. Van Dyk, “Optimization of megavoltage
CT scan registration settings for thoracic cases on helical tomotherapy,”
Phys. Med. Biol. 52, N345–N354 (2007).
14
C. Woodford, S. Yartsev, and J. Van Dyk, “Optimization of megavoltage
CT scan registration settings for brain cancer treatments on
tomotherapy,” Phys. Med. Biol. 52, N185–N193 (2007).
15
S. Yoo, G. Y. Kim, R. Hammoud, E. Elder, T. Pawlicki, H. Guan, T. Fox,
G. Luxton, F. F. Yin, and P. Munro, “A quality assurance program for the
on-board imagers,” Med. Phys. 33, 4431–4447 (2006).
16
K. Kuriyama, H. Onishi, N. Sano, T. Komiyama, Y. Aikawa, Y. Tateda,
T. Araki, and M. Uematsu, “A new irradiation unit constructed of selfmoving gantry-CT and linac,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 55,
428–435 (2003).
17
C. B. Saw, Y. Yang, F. Li, N. J. Yue, C. Ding, K. Komanduri, S. Huq,
and D. E. Heron, “Performance characteristics and quality assurance
aspects of kilovoltage cone-beam CT on medical linear accelerator,”
Med. Dosim. 32, 80–85 (2007).
18
J. P. Bissonnette, D. J. Moseley, and D. A. Jaffray, “A quality assurance
program for image quality of cone-beam CT guidance in radiation
therapy,” Med. Phys. 35, 1807–1815 (2008).
19
S. L. Meeks, J. F. Harmon, Jr., K. M. Langen, T. R. Willoughby, T. H.
Wagner, and P. A. Kupelian, “Performance characterization of megavoltage computed tomography imaging on a helical tomotherapy unit,” Med.
Phys. 32, 2673–2681 (2005).
20
O. Gayou, D. S. Parda, M. Johnson, and M. Miften, “Patient dose and
image quality from mega-voltage cone beam computed tomography
imaging,” Med. Phys. 34, 499–506 (2007).
21
A. Amer, T. Marchant, J. Sykes, J. Czajka, and C. Moore, “Imaging doses
from the Elekta Synergy X-ray cone beam CT system,” Br. J. Radiol. 80,
476–482 (2007).
22
M. K. Islam, T. G. Purdie, B. D. Norrlinger, H. Alasti, D. J. Moseley, M.
B. Sharpe, J. H. Siewerdsen, and D. A. Jaffray, “Patient dose from kilovoltage cone beam computed tomography imaging in radiation therapy,”
Med. Phys. 33, 1573–1582 (2006).
23
O. Morin, A. Gillis, J. Chen, M. Aubin, M. K. Bucci, M. Roach, III, and
J. Pouliot, “Megavoltage cone-beam CT: System description and clinical
applications,” Med. Dosim. 31, 51–61 (2006).
24
A. P. Shah, K. M. Langen, K. J. Ruchala, A. Cox, P. A. Kupelian, and S.
L. Meeks, “Patient dose from megavoltage computed tomography imaging,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 70, 1579–1587 (2008).
25
B. Thomadsen, “Critique of traditional quality assurance paradigm,” Int.
J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 71, S166–S169 (2008).
26
M. Uematsu, T. Fukui, A. Shioda, H. Tokumitsu, K. Takai, T. Kojima, Y.
Asai, and S. Kusano, “A dual computed tomography linear accelerator
unit for stereotactic radiation therapy: a new approach without cranially
fixated stereotactic frames,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 35,
587–592 (1996).
27
P. C. Shrimpton, M. C. Hillier, M. A. Lewis, and M. Dunn, “National survey of doses from CT in the UK: 2003,” Br. J. Radiol. 79, 968–980 (2006).
28
J. O’Daniel, T. Pan, R. Mohan, and L. Dong, “CT dose from daily inroom CT-guided radiotherapy,” Med. Phys. 31, 1876 (2004).
29
B. Sorcini and A. Tilikidis, “Clinical application of image-guided radiotherapy, IGRT (on the Varian OBI platform),” Cancer Radiother. 10,
252–257 (2006).
30
C. Thilmann, S. Nill, T. Tucking, A. Hoss, B. Hesse, L. Dietrich, R.
Bendl, B. Rhein, P. Haring, C. Thieke, U. Oelfke, J. Debus, and P. Huber,
“Correction of patient positioning errors based on in-line cone beam CTs:
Clinical implementation and first experiences,” Radiat. Oncol. 1, 16
(2006).
31
G. R. Borst, J. J. Sonke, A. Betgen, P. Remeijer, M. van Herk and J. V.
Lebesque, “Kilo-voltage cone-beam computed tomography setup measurements for lung cancer patients; first clinical results and comparison
with electronic portal-imaging device,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys.
68, 555–561 (2007).

1959

Bissonnette et al.: QA for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies

32

D. M. Duggan, G. X. Ding, C. W. Coffey, 2nd, W. Kirby, D. E. Hallahan,
A. Malcolm, and B. Lu, “Deep-inspiration breath-hold kilovoltage conebeam CT for setup of stereotactic body radiation therapy for lung tumors:
Initial experience,” Lung Cancer 56, 77–88 (2007).
33
L. H. Kim, J. Wong, and D. Yan, “On-line localization of the lumpectomy cavity using surgical clips,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 69,
1305–1309 (2007).
34
K. Nakagawa, H. Yamashita, K. Shiraishi, H. Igaki, A. Terahara, N.
Nakamura, K. Ohtomo, S. Saegusa, T. Shiraki, T. Oritate, and K. Yoda,
“Verification of in-treatment tumor position using kilovoltage cone-beam
computed tomography: A preliminary study,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 69, 970–973 (2007).
35
T. G. Purdie, J. P. Bissonnette, K. Franks, A. Bezjak, D. Payne, F. Sie, M.
B. Sharpe, and D. A. Jaffray, “Cone-beam computed tomography for online image guidance of lung stereotactic radiotherapy: Localization, verification, and intrafraction tumor position,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol.,
Phys. 68, 243–252 (2007).
36
E. A. White, J. Cho, K. A. Vallis, M. B. Sharpe, G. Lee, H. Blackburn, T.
Nageeti, C. McGibney, and D. A. Jaffray, “Cone beam computed tomography guidance for setup of patients receiving accelerated partial breast
irradiation,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 68, 547–554 (2007).
37
J. Boda-Heggemann, F. M. Kohler, H. Wertz, M. Ehmann, B. Hermann,
N. Riesenacker, B. Kupper, F. Lohr, and F. Wenz, “Intrafraction motion
of the prostate during an IMRT session: A fiducial-based 3D measurement with cone-beam CT,” Radiat. Oncol. 3, 37 (2008).
38
Y. Gong, J. Wang, S. Bai, X. Jiang, and F. Xu, “Conventionally-fractionated image-guided intensity modulated radiotherapy (IG-IMRT): A safe
and effective treatment for cancer spinal metastasis,” Radiat. Oncol. 3, 11
(2008).
39
G. Y. Kim, T. Pawlicki, Q. T. Le, and G. Luxton, “Linac-based on-board
imaging feasibility and the dosimetric consequences of head roll in headand-neck IMRT plans,” Med. Dosim. 33, 93–99 (2008).
40
D. A. Jaffray and J. H. Siewerdsen, “Cone-beam computed tomography
with a flat-panel imager: Initial performance characterization,” Med.
Phys. 27, 1311–1323 (2000).
41
G. X. Ding, P. Munro, J. Pawlowski, A. Malcolm, and C. W. Coffey,
“Reducing radiation exposure to patients from kV-CBCT imaging,”
Radiother. Oncol. 97, 585–592 (2010).
42
J. J. Sonke, L. Zijp, P. Remeijer, and M. van Herk, “Respiratory correlated cone beam CT,” Med. Phys. 32, 1176–1186 (2005).
43
L. Dietrich, S. Jetter, T. Tucking, S. Nill, and U. Oelfke, “Linac-integrated 4D cone beam CT: first experimental results,” Phys. Med. Biol.
51, 2939–2952 (2006).
44
T. Li, E. Schreibmann, Y. Yang, and L. Xing, “Motion correction for
improved target localization with on-board cone-beam computed
tomography,” Phys. Med. Biol. 51, 253–267 (2006).
45
J. H. Siewerdsen, M. J. Daly, B. Bakhtiar, D. J. Moseley, S. Richard, H.
Keller, and D. A. Jaffray, “A simple, direct method for x-ray scatter estimation and correction in digital radiography and cone-beam CT,” Med.
Phys. 33, 187–197 (2006).
46
S. Rit, J. Wolthaus, M. van Herk and J. J. Sonke, “On-the-fly motioncompensated cone-beam CT using an a priori motion model,” Medical
Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention—Part I, Vol. 11,
pp. 729–736 (2008).
47
S. Leng, J. Tang, J. Zambelli, B. Nett, R. Tolakanahalli, and G. H. Chen,
“High temporal resolution and streak-free four-dimensional cone-beam
computed tomography,” Phys. Med. Biol. 53, 5653–5673 (2008).
48
S. Mori, M. Endo, S. Komatsu, S. Kandatsu, T. Yashiro, and M. Baba, “A
combination-weighted Feldkamp-based reconstruction algorithm for
cone-beam CT,” Phys. Med. Biol. 51, 3953–3965 (2006).
49
J. Zhong, R. Ning, and D. Conover, “Image denoising based on multiscale singularity detection for cone beam CT breast imaging,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imaging 23, 696–703 (2004).
50
D. Letourneau, R. Wong, D. Moseley, M. B. Sharpe, S. Ansell, M.
Gospodarowicz, and D. A. Jaffray, “Online planning and delivery technique for radiotherapy of spinal metastases using cone-beam CT: Image
quality and system performance,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 67,
1229–1237 (2007).
51
L. Zhu, Y. Xie, J. Wang, and L. Xing, “Scatter correction for cone-beam
CT in radiation therapy,” Med. Phys. 36, 2258–2268 (2009).
52
T. R. Mackie, G. H. Olivera, J. M. Kapatoes, K. J. Ruchala, J. P. Balog,
W. A. Tome, S. Hui, M. Kissick, C. Wu, R. Jeraj, P. J. Rockwerdt, P.
Harari, M. Ritter, L. Forrest, J. S. Welsh, and M. P. Metha, “Helical
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2012

1959

tomotherapy,” in Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy. The state of the
Art. AAPM Summer School Proceedings, edited by J. Palta and T. R.
Mackie (Medical Physics Publishing, Madison, WI, 2003), pp. 247–284.
53
K. J. Ruchala, G. H. Olivera, E. A. Schloesser, and T. R. Mackie,
“Megavoltage CT on a tomotherapy system,” Phys. Med. Biol. 44,
2597–2621 (1999).
54
R. Jeraj, T. R. Mackie, J. Balog, G. Olivera, D. Pearson, J. Kapatoes, K.
Ruchala, and P. Reckwerdt, “Radiation characteristics of helical
tomotherapy,” Med. Phys. 31, 396–404 (2004).
55
M. Aubin, O. Morin, J. Chen, A. Gillis, B. Pickett, J. F. Aubry, C. Akazawa,
J. Speight, M. Roach, III, and J. Pouliot, “The use of megavoltage conebeam CT to complement CT for target definition in pelvic radiotherapy in
the presence of hip replacement,” Br. J. Radiol. 79, 918–921 (2006).
56
P. Munro, J. A. Rawlinson, and A. Fenster, “Therapy imaging: Limitations of imaging with high energy x-ray beams,” Proc. SPIE 767,
178–184 (1987).
57
C. Amies, A. Bani-Hashemi, J. C. Celi, G. Grousset, F. Ghelmansarai, D.
Hristov, D. Lane, M. Mitschke, A. Singh, H. Shukla, J. Stein, and M.
Wofford, “A multi-platform approach to image guided radiation therapy
(IGRT),” Med. Dosim. 31, 12–19 (2006).
58
O. Gayou and M. Miften, “Commissioning and clinical implementation
of a mega-voltage cone beam CT system for treatment localization,”
Med. Phys. 34, 3183–3192 (2007).
59
K. M. Langen, S. L. Meeks, and J. Pouliot, “Quality assurance of onboard
megavoltage computed tomography imaging and target localization systems for on- and off-line image-guided radiotherapy,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 71, S62–S65 (2008).
60
O. Morin, J. F. Aubry, M. Aubin, J. Chen, M. Descovich, A. L. Hashemi,
and J. Pouliot, “Physical performance and image optimization of megavoltage cone-beam CT,” Med. Phys. 36, 1421–1432 (2009).
61
O. Morin, A. Gillis, M. Descovich, J. Chen, M. Aubin, J. F. Aubry, H.
Chen, A. R. Gottschalk, P. Xia, and J. Pouliot, “Patient dose considerations for routine megavoltage cone-beam CT imaging,” Med. Phys. 34,
1819–1827 (2007).
62
M. Miften, O. Gayou, B. Reitz, R. Fuhrer, B. Leicher, and D. S. Parda,
“IMRT planning and delivery incorporating daily dose from megavoltage cone-beam computed tomography imaging,” Med. Phys. 34,
3760–3767 (2007).
63
A. Y. Fung, S. Y. Grimm, J. R. Wong, and M. Uematsu, “Computed tomography localization of radiation treatment delivery versus conventional localization with bony landmarks,” J. Appl. Clin. Med. Phys. 4,
112–119 (2003).
64
J. R. Wong, L. Grimm, M. Uematsu, R. Oren, C. W. Cheng, S. Merrick, and P. Schiff, “Image-guided radiotherapy for prostate cancer by
CT-linear accelerator combination: Prostate movements and dosimetric considerations,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 61, 561–569
(2005).
65
M. Uematsu, A. Shioda, A. Suda, T. Fukui, Y. Ozeki, Y. Hama, J. R.
Wong, and S. Kusano, “Computed tomography-guided frameless stereotactic radiotherapy for stage I non-small cell lung cancer: A 5-year experience,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 51, 666–670 (2001).
66
J. R. Wong, Z. Gao, M. Uematsu, S. Merrick, N. P. Machernis, T. Chen,
and C. W. Cheng, “Interfractional prostate shifts: Review of 1870 computed tomography (CT) scans obtained during image-guided radiotherapy
using CT-on-rails for the treatment of prostate cancer,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 72, 1396–1401 (2008).
67
K. Paskalev, S. Feigenberg, R. Jacob, S. McNeeley, E. Horwitz, R. Price,
C. Ma, and A. Pollack, “Target localization for post-prostatectomy
patients using CT and ultrasound image guidance,” J. Appl. Clin. Med.
Phys. 6, 40–49 (2005).
68
L. E. Court, L. Dong, N. Taylor, M. Ballo, K. Kitamura, A. K. Lee, J.
O’Daniel, R. A. White, R. Cheung, and D. Kuban, “Evaluation of a
contour-alignment technique for CT-guided prostate radiotherapy: An
intra- and interobserver study,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 59,
412–418 (2004).
69
L. E. Court and L. Dong, “Automatic registration of the prostate for computed-tomography-guided radiotherapy,” Med. Phys. 30, 2750–2757
(2003).
70
K. Paskalev, C. M. Ma, R. Jacob, R. Price, S. McNeeley, L. Wang, B.
Movsas, and A. Pollack, “Daily target localization for prostate patients
based on 3D image correlation,” Phys. Med. Biol. 49, 931–939 (2004).
71
C. M. Ma and K. Paskalev, “In-room CT techniques for image-guided
radiation therapy,” Med. Dosim. 31, 30–39 (2006).

1960

Bissonnette et al.: QA for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies

72

J. C. O’Daniel, L. Dong, L. Zhang, H. Wang, S. L. Tucker, R. J. Kudchadker, A. K. Lee, R. Cheung, J. D. Cox, D. A. Kuban, and R. Mohan,
“Daily bone alignment with limited repeat CT correction rivals daily
ultrasound alignment for prostate radiotherapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 71, 274–280 (2008).
73
S. J. Frank, L. Dong, R. J. Kudchadker, R. De Crevoisier, A. K. Lee, R.
Cheung, S. Choi, J. O’Daniel, S. L. Tucker, H. Wang, and D. A. Kuban,
“Quantification of prostate and seminal vesicle interfraction variation
during IMRT,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 71, 813–820 (2008).
74
X. Zhang, L. Dong, A. K. Lee, J. D. Cox, D. A. Kuban, R. X. Zhu, X.
Wang, Y. Li, W. D. Newhauser, M. Gillin, and R. Mohan, “Effect of anatomic motion on proton therapy dose distributions in prostate cancer
treatment,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 67, 620–629 (2007).
75
J. L. Barker, Jr., A. S. Garden, K. K. Ang, J. C. O’Daniel, H. Wang, L. E.
Court, W. H. Morrison, D. I. Rosenthal, K. S. Chao, S. L. Tucker, R.
Mohan, and L. Dong, “Quantification of volumetric and geometric
changes occurring during fractionated radiotherapy for head-and-neck
cancer using an integrated CT=linear accelerator system,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 59, 960–970 (2004).
76
J. C. O’Daniel, A. S. Garden, D. L. Schwartz, H. Wang, K. K. Ang, A.
Ahamad, D. I. Rosenthal, W. H. Morrison, J. A. Asper, L. Zhang, S. M.
Tung, R. Mohan, and L. Dong, “Parotid gland dose in intensitymodulated radiotherapy for head and neck cancer: Is what you plan what
you get?,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 69, 1290–1296 (2007).
77
M. Uematsu, “[Stereotactic radiation therapy for non small cell lung cancer],” Nippon Geka Gakkai Zasshi 103, 256–257 (2002).
78
H. Onishi, K. Kuriyama, T. Komiyama, S. Tanaka, N. Sano, Y. Aikawa,
Y. Tateda, T. Araki, S. Ikenaga, and M. Uematsu, “A new irradiation system for lung cancer combining linear accelerator, computed tomography,
patient self-breath-holding, and patient-directed beam-control without respiratory monitoring devices,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 56,
14–20 (2003).
79
K. M. Yenice, D. M. Lovelock, M. A. Hunt, W. R. Lutz, N. FournierBidoz, C. H. Hua, J. Yamada, M. Bilsky, H. Lee, K. Pfaff, S. V. Spirou,
and H. I. Amols, “CT image-guided intensity-modulated therapy for paraspinal tumors using stereotactic immobilization,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 55, 583–593 (2003).
80
A. S. Shiu, E. L. Chang, J. S. Ye, M. Lii, L. D. Rhines, E. Mendel, J.
Weinberg, S. Singh, M. H. Maor, R. Mohan, and J. D. Cox, “Near simultaneous computed tomography image-guided stereotactic spinal radiotherapy: An emerging paradigm for achieving true stereotaxy,” Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 57, 605–613 (2003).
81
J. Y. Chang, L. Dong, H. Liu, G. Starkschall, P. Balter, R. Mohan, Z.
Liao, J. D. Cox, and R. Komaki, “Image-guided radiation therapy for
non-small cell lung cancer,” J. Thorac. Oncol. 3, 177–186 (2008).
82
J. Y. Chang, P. A. Balter, L. Dong, Q. Yang, Z. Liao, M. Jeter, M. K.
Bucci, M. F. McAleer, R. J. Mehran, J. A. Roth, and R. Komaki,
“Stereotactic body radiation therapy in centrally and superiorly located
stage I or isolated recurrent non-small-cell lung cancer,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 72, 967–971 (2008).
83
E. L. Chang, A. S. Shiu, E. Mendel, L. A. Mathews, A. Mahajan, P. K.
Allen, J. S. Weinberg, B. W. Brown, X. S. Wang, S. Y. Woo, C. Cleeland, M. H. Maor, and L. D. Rhines, “Phase I=II study of stereotactic
body radiotherapy for spinal metastasis and its pattern of failure,” J. Neurosurg. Spine 7, 151–160 (2007).
84
C. Wang, A. Shiu, M. Lii, S. Woo, and E. L. Chang, “Automatic target
localization and verification for on-line image-guided stereotactic body
radiotherapy of the spine,” Technol. Cancer Res. Treat. 6, 187–196 (2007).
85
M. Birkner, D. Yan, M. Alber, J. Liang, and F. Nusslin, “Adapting
inverse planning to patient and organ geometrical variation: Algorithm
and implementation,” Med. Phys. 30, 2822–2831 (2003).
86
B. Schaly, J. A. Kempe, G. S. Bauman, J. J. Battista, and J. Van Dyk,
“Tracking the dose distribution in radiation therapy by accounting for
variable anatomy,” Phys. Med. Biol. 49, 791–805 (2004).
87
L. E. Court, L. Dong, A. K. Lee, R. Cheung, M. D. Bonnen, J. O’Daniel,
H. Wang, R. Mohan, and D. Kuban, “An automatic CT-guided adaptive
radiation therapy technique by online modification of multileaf collimator
leaf positions for prostate cancer,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 62,
154–163 (2005).
88
L. E. Court, R. B. Tishler, J. Petit, R. Cormack, and L. Chin, “Automatic
online adaptive radiation therapy techniques for targets with significant
shape change: a feasibility study,” Phys. Med. Biol. 51, 2493–2501
(2006).
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2012

89

1960

R. Mohan, X. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Kang, X. Wang, H. Liu, K. K. Ang, D.
Kuban, and L. Dong, “Use of deformed intensity distributions for on-line
modification of image-guided IMRT to account for interfractional anatomic changes,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 61, 1258–1266 (2005).
90
E. E. Ahunbay, C. Peng, G. P. Chen, S. Narayanan, C. Yu, C. Lawton,
and X. A. Li, “An on-line replanning scheme for interfractional variations,” Med. Phys. 35, 3607–3615 (2008).
91
Q. Wu, J. Liang, and D. Yan, “Application of dose compensation in
image-guided radiotherapy of prostate cancer,” Phys. Med. Biol. 51,
1405–1419 (2006).
92
Q. J. Wu, D. Thongphiew, Z. Wang, B. Mathayomchan, V. Chankong, S.
Yoo, W. R. Lee, and F. F. Yin, “On-line re-optimization of prostate
IMRT plans for adaptive radiation therapy,” Phys. Med. Biol. 53,
673–691 (2008).
93
W. Lu, M. Chen, Q. Chen, K. Ruchala, and G. Olivera, “Adaptive fractionation therapy: I. Basic concept and strategy,” Phys. Med. Biol. 53,
5495–5511 (2008).
94
H. Wang, A. S. Garden, L. Zhang, X. Wei, A. Ahamad, D. A. Kuban, R.
Komaki, J. O’Daniel, Y. Zhang, R. Mohan, and L. Dong, “Performance
evaluation of automatic anatomy segmentation algorithm on repeat or
four-dimensional computed tomography images using deformable image
registration method,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 72, 210–219
(2008).
95
D. J. Moseley, E. A. White, K. L. Wiltshire, T. Rosewall, M. B. Sharpe,
J. H. Siewerdsen, J. P. Bissonnette, M. Gospodarowicz, P. Warde, C. N.
Catton, and D. A. Jaffray, “Comparison of localization performance with
implanted fiducial markers and cone-beam computed tomography for online image-guided radiotherapy of the prostate,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 67, 942–953 (2007).
96
J. P. Bissonnette, T. G. Purdie, J. A. Higgins, W. Li, and A. Bezjak,
“Cone-beam computed tomographic image guidance for lung cancer radiation therapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 73, 927–934 (2009).
97
J. Wang, S. Bai, N. Chen, F. Xu, X. Jiang, Y. Li, Q. Xu, Y. Shen, H.
Zhang, Y. Gong, R. Zhong, and Q. Jiang, “The clinical feasibility and
effect of online cone beam computer tomography-guided intensity-modulated radiotherapy for nasopharyngeal cancer,” Radiother. Oncol. 90,
221–227 (2009).
98
B. Polat, J. Wilbert, K. Baier, M. Flentje, and M. Guckenberger,
“Nonrigid patient setup errors in the head-and-neck region,” Strahlenther.
Onkol. 183, 506–511 (2007).
99
G. G. Zeng, S. L. Breen, A. Bayley, E. White, H. Keller, L. Dawson, and
D. A. Jaffray, “A method to analyze the cord geometrical uncertainties
during head and neck radiation therapy using cone beam CT,” Radiother.
Oncol. 90, 228–230 (2009).
100
T. Fatunase, Z. Wang, S. Yoo, J. L. Hubbs, R. G. Prosnitz, F. F. Yin, and
L. B. Marks, “Assessment of the residual error in soft tissue setup in
patients undergoing partial breast irradiation: results of a prospective
study using cone-beam computed tomography,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 70, 1025–1034 (2008).
101
M. A. Hawkins, C. Brooks, V. N. Hansen, A. Aitken, and D. M. Tait,
“Cone beam computed tomography-derived adaptive radiotherapy for
radical treatment of esophageal cancer,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol.,
Phys. 77, 378–383.
102
M. A. Hawkins, D. Moseley, C. Eccles, D. Jaffray, and L. A. Dawson,
“Comparison of breath hold cone beam CT and orthogonal image guided
radiotherapy for liver cancer,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 63,
S555–S556 (2005).
103
F. Foroudi, A. Haworth, A. Pangehel, J. Wong, P. Roxby, G. Duchesne,
S. Williams, and K. H. Tai, “Inter-observer variability of clinical target
volume delineation for bladder cancer using CT and cone beam CT,” J.
Med. Imaging Radiat. Oncol. 53, 100–106 (2009).
104
N. Burridge, A. Amer, T. Marchant, J. Sykes, J. Stratford, A. Henry, C.
McBain, P. Price, and C. Moore, “Online adaptive radiotherapy of the
bladder: small bowel irradiated-volume reduction,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 66, 892–897 (2006).
105
T. G. Purdie, D. J. Moseley, J. P. Bissonnette, M. B. Sharpe, K. Franks,
A. Bezjak, and D. A. Jaffray, “Respiration correlated cone-beam computed tomography and 4DCT for evaluating target motion in Stereotactic
Lung Radiation Therapy,” Acta Oncol. 45, 915–922 (2006).
106
J. J. Sonke, M. Rossi, J. Wolthaus, M. van Herk, E. Damen, and J. Belderbos, “Frameless stereotactic body radiotherapy for lung cancer using
four-dimensional cone beam CT guidance,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol.,
Phys. 74, 567–574 (2009).

1961

Bissonnette et al.: QA for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies

107

F. F. Yin, Z. Wang, S. Yoo, Q. J. Wu, J. Kirkpatrick, N. Larrier, J. Meyer,
C. G. Willett, and L. B. Marks, “Integration of cone-beam CT in stereotactic
body radiation therapy,” Technol. Cancer Res. Treat. 7, 133–139 (2008).
108
Z. Wang, J. W. Nelson, S. Yoo, Q. J. Wu, J. P. Kirkpatrick, L. B. Marks,
and F. F. Yin, “Refinement of treatment setup and target localization accuracy using three-dimensional cone-beam computed tomography for stereotactic body radiotherapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 73,
571–577 (2009).
109
W. Li, T. G. Purdie, M. Taremi, S. Fung, A. Brade, J. B. C. Cho, A.
Hope, A. Sun, D. Jaffray, A. Bezjak, and J.-P. Bissonnette, “Effect of
immobilization and performance status on intra-fraction motion for stereotactic lung radiotherapy—analysis of 133 patients,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 81, 1568–1575 (2011).
110
J. Higgins, A. Bezjak, A. Hope, T. Panzarella, W. Li, J. B. Cho, T. Craig,
A. Brade, A. Sun, and J.-P. Bissonnette, “Effect of image-guidance frequency on geometric accuracy and setup margins in radiotherapy for
locally advanced lung cancer,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 80,
1330–1337 (2011).
111
J. Nijkamp, F. J. Pos, T. T. Nuver, R. de Jong, P. Remeijer, J. J. Sonke,
and J. V. Lebesque, “Adaptive radiotherapy for prostate cancer using kilovoltage cone-beam computed tomography: First clinical results,” Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 70, 75–82 (2008).
112
G. X. Ding, D. M. Duggan, C. W. Coffey, M. Deeley, D. E. Hallahan, A.
Cmelak, and A. Malcolm, “A study on adaptive IMRT treatment planning
using kV cone-beam CT,” Radiother. Oncol. 85, 116–125 (2007).
113
Y. Yang, E. Schreibmann, T. Li, C. Wang, and L. Xing, “Evaluation of
on-board kV cone beam CT (CBCT)-based dose calculation,” Phys. Med.
Biol. 52, 685–705 (2007).
114
L. Masi, F. Casamassima, C. Polli, C. Menichelli, I. Bonucci, and C. Cavedon, “Cone beam CT image guidance for intracranial stereotactic treatments: Comparison with a frame guided set-up,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 71, 926–933 (2008).
115
C. Fiorino, F. Alongi, S. Broggi, G. M. Cattaneo, C. Cozzarini, N. Di
Muzio, E. Maggiulli, P. Mangili, L. Perna, R. Valdagni, F. Fazio, and R.
Calandrino, “Physics aspects of prostate tomotherapy: Planning optimization and image-guidance issues,” Acta Oncol. 47, 1309–1316 (2008).
116
K. M. Langen, Y. Zhang, R. D. Andrews, M. E. Hurley, S. L. Meeks, D.
O. Poole, T. R. Willoughby, and P. A. Kupelian, “Initial experience with
megavoltage (MV) CT guidance for daily prostate alignments,” Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 62, 1517–1524 (2005).
117
W. Hodge, W. A. Tome, H. A. Jaradat, N. P. Orton, D. Khuntia, A. Traynor, T. Weigel, and M. P. Mehta, “Feasibility report of image guided stereotactic body radiotherapy (IG-SBRT) with tomotherapy for early stage
medically inoperable lung cancer using extreme hypofractionation,” Acta
Oncol. 45, 890–896 (2006).
118
K. Sheng, M. C. Chow, G. Hunter, J. M. Larner, and P. W. Read, “Is daily
CT image guidance necessary for nasal cavity and nasopharyngeal radiotherapy: An investigation based on helical tomotherapy,” J. Appl. Clin.
Med. Phys. 9, 2686 (2008).
119
O. A. Zeidan, K. M. Langen, S. L. Meeks, R. R. Manon, T. H. Wagner,
T. R. Willoughby, D. W. Jenkins, and P. A. Kupelian, “Evaluation of
image-guidance protocols in the treatment of head and neck cancers,” Int.
J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 67, 670–677 (2007).
120
K. M. Langen, D. J. Buchholz, D. R. Burch, R. Burkavage, A. U. Limaye,
S. L. Meeks, P. A. Kupelian, K. J. Ruchala, J. Haimerl, D. Henderson,
and G. H. Olivera, “Investigation of accelerated partial breast patient
alignment and treatment with helical tomotherapy unit,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 70, 1272–1280 (2008).
121
L. Santanam, J. Esthappan, S. Mutic, E. E. Klein, S. M. Goddu, S. Chaudhari, S. Wahab, I. M. El Naqa, D. A. Low, and P. W. Grigsby,
“Estimation of setup uncertainty using planar and MVCT imaging for gynecologic malignancies,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 71,
1511–1517 (2008).
122
P. A. Kupelian, C. Ramsey, S. L. Meeks, T. R. Willoughby, A. Forbes, T.
H. Wagner, and K. M. Langen, “Serial megavoltage CT imaging during
external beam radiotherapy for non-small-cell lung cancer: Observations
on tumor regression during treatment,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys.
63, 1024–1028 (2005).
123
M. L. Siker, W. A. Tome, and M. P. Mehta, “Tumor volume changes on
serial imaging with megavoltage CT for non-small-cell lung cancer during
intensity-modulated radiotherapy: How reliable, consistent, and meaningful
is the effect?,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 66, 135–141 (2006).

Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2012

124

1961

C. Woodford, S. Yartsev, A. R. Dar, G. Bauman, and J. Van Dyk,
“Adaptive radiotherapy planning on decreasing gross tumor volumes as
seen on megavoltage computed tomography images,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 69, 1316–1322 (2007).
125
C. Fiorino, N. Di Muzio, S. Broggi, C. Cozzarini, E. Maggiulli, F. Alongi,
R. Valdagni, F. Fazio, and R. Calandrino, “Evidence of limited motion of
the prostate by carefully emptying the rectum as assessed by daily
MVCT image guidance with helical tomotherapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 71, 611–617 (2008).
126
P. A. Kupelian, K. M. Langen, O. A. Zeidan, S. L. Meeks, T. R. Willoughby, T. H. Wagner, S. Jeswani, K. J. Ruchala, J. Haimerl, and G. H.
Olivera, “Daily variations in delivered doses in patients treated with
radiotherapy for localized prostate cancer,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol.,
Phys. 66, 876–882 (2006).
127
K. Tournel, M. De Ridder, B. Engels, P. Bijdekerke, Y. Fierens, M.
Duchateau, N. Linthout, T. Reynders, D. Verellen, and G. Storme,
“Assessment of intrafractional movement and internal motion in radiotherapy of rectal cancer using megavoltage computed tomography,” Int.
J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 71, 934–939 (2008).
128
Y. J. Chen, C. Han, A. Liu, T. E. Schultheiss, K. H. Kernstine, S. Shibata,
N. L. Vora, R. D. Pezner, and J. Y. Wong, “Setup variations in radiotherapy of esophageal cancer: evaluation by daily megavoltage computed tomographic localization,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 68,
1537–1545 (2007).
129
X. A. Li, X. S. Qi, M. Pitterle, K. Kalakota, K. Mueller, B. A. Erickson,
D. Wang, C. J. Schultz, S. Y. Firat, and J. F. Wilson, “Interfractional
variations in patient setup and anatomic change assessed by daily computed tomography,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 68, 581–591
(2007).
130
C. Han, Y. J. Chen, A. Liu, T. E. Schultheiss, and J. Y. Wong, “Actual
dose variation of parotid glands and spinal cord for nasopharyngeal cancer patients during radiotherapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 70,
1256–1262 (2008).
131
C. Lee, K. M. Langen, W. Lu, J. Haimerl, E. Schnarr, K. J. Ruchala,
G. H. Olivera, S. L. Meeks, P. A. Kupelian, T. D. Shellenberger, and
R. R. Manon, “Evaluation of geometric changes of parotid glands during
head and neck cancer radiotherapy using daily megavoltage computed
tomography and deformable image registration,” Radiother. Oncol. 89,
81–88 (2008).
132
K. M. Langen, S. L. Meeks, D. O. Poole, T. H. Wagner, T. R. Willoughby, P. A. Kupelian, K. J. Ruchala, J. Haimerl, and G. H. Olivera,
“The use of megavoltage CT (MVCT) images for dose recomputations,”
Phys. Med. Biol. 50, 4259–4276 (2005).
133
C. Lee, K. M. Langen, W. Lu, J. Haimerl, E. Schnarr, K. J. Ruchala, G.
H. Olivera, S. L. Meeks, P. A. Kupelian, T. D. Shellenberger, and R. R.
Manon, “Assessment of parotid gland dose changes during head and neck
cancer radiotherapy using daily megavoltage computed tomography and
deformable image registration,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 70,
1563–1571 (2008).
134
J. F. Aubry and J. Pouliot, “Imaging changes in radation therapy: Does it
matter?,” MRI 12, 3–13 (2008).
135
M. Roach, J. Pouliot, and P. Xia, “Image-guided intensity modulated
radiotherapy (IGRT) for clinically localized prostate cancer: Targeting
pelvic lymph nodes,” in Image-Guided Radiation Therapy of Prostate
Cancer, edited by R. K. Valicenti, A. P. Dicker, and D. A. Jaffray
(Informa Healthcare, London, 2008), pp. 183–196.
136
E. K. Hansen, D. A. Larson, M. Aubin, J. Chen, M. Descovich, A. M. Gillis, O. Morin, P. Xia, and J. Pouliot, “Image-guided radiotherapy using
megavoltage cone-beam computed tomography for treatment of paraspinous tumors in the presence of orthopedic hardware,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 66, 323–326 (2006).
137
M. Descovich, O. Morin, J. F. Aubry, M. Aubin, J. Chen, H. Chen, I.-C.
Hsu, J. Speight, and J. Pouliot, “Megavoltage cone-beam CT to complement CT-based treatment planing for HDR brachytherapy,” Brachytherapy 5, 85–86 (2006).
138
V. Grigorescu, S. Prevrhal, and J. Pouliot, “Measurement of small lesions
near metallic implants with mega-voltage cone beam CT,” Proc. SPIE
6913, 69131N (2008).
139
J. F. Aubry, J. Cheung, O. Morin, A. Gottschalk, L. Beaulieu, and J. Pouliot, “Correction of megavoltage cone-beam CT images of the pelvic
region based on phantom measurements for dose calculation purposes,”
J. Appl. Clin. Med. Phys. 10, 2852 (2009).

1962

Bissonnette et al.: QA for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies

140

J. F. Aubry, J. Pouliot, and L. Beaulieu, “Correction of megavoltage
cone-beam CT images for dose calculation in the head and neck region,”
Med. Phys. 35, 900–907 (2008).
141
O. Morin, J. Chen, M. Aubin, A. Gillis, J. Aubry, S. Bose, H. Chen,
M. Descovich, P. Xia, and J. Pouliot, “Dose calculations using megavoltage cone-beam CT,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 67, 1202–1210
(2007).
142
J. Chen, O. Morin, M. Aubin, M. K. Bucci, C. F. Chuang, and J. Pouliot,
“Dose-guided radiation therapy with megavoltage cone-beam CT,” Br. J.
Radiol. 79, S87–S98 (2006).
143
J. Cheung, J. F. Aubry, A. Gottschalk, S. Yom, J. C. Celi, and J. Pouliot,
“Dose recalculation and the dose-guided radiation therapy (DGRT) process using megavoltage cone-beam CT,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol.,
Phys. 74, 583–592 (2009).
144
J. Pouliot, “Megavoltage imaging, megavoltage cone beam CT and doseguided radiation therapy,” Front. Radiat. Ther. Oncol. 40, 132–142 (2007).
145
J. Pouliot, “From dose to image to dose: IGRT to DGRT,” in Choices in
Advanced Radiotherapy, edited by R. Mould, (Nucletron, The Netherlands, 2007), pp. 243–250.
146
S. H. Benedict, K. M. Yenice, D. Followill, J. M. Galvin, W. Hinson, B.
Kavanagh, P. Keall, M. Lovelock, S. Meeks, L. Papiez, T. Purdie, R.
Sadagopan, M. C. Schell, B. Salter, D. J. Schlesinger, A. S. Shiu, T. Solberg, D. Y. Song, V. Stieber, R. Timmerman, W. A. Tome, D. Verellen,
L. Wang, and F. F. Yin, “Stereotactic body radiation therapy: The report
of AAPM Task Group 101,” Med. Phys. 37, 4078–4101 (2010).
147
S. Boswell, W. Tome, R. Jeraj, H. Jaradat, and T. R. Mackie, “Automatic
registration of megavoltage to kilovoltage CT images in helical tomotherapy: An evaluation of the setup verification process for the special case of
a rigid head phantom,” Med. Phys. 33, 4395–4404 (2006).
148
M. Fuss, J. Boda-Heggemann, N. Papanikolau, and B. J. Salter, “Imageguidance for stereotactic body radiation therapy,” Med. Dosim. 32,
102–110 (2007).
149
L. A. Dawson and D. A. Jaffray, “Advances in image-guided radiation
therapy,” J. Clin. Oncol. 25, 938–946 (2007).
150
A. Sahgal, D. A. Larson, and E. L. Chang, “Stereotactic body radiosurgery for spinal metastases: A critical review,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 71, 652–665 (2008).
151
Y. Yamada, M. H. Bilsky, D. M. Lovelock, E. S. Venkatraman, S. Toner,
J. Johnson, J. Zatcky, M. J. Zelefsky, and Z. Fuks, “High-dose, singlefraction image-guided intensity-modulated radiotherapy for metastatic
spinal lesions,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 71, 484–490 (2008).
152
J. J. Sonke, J. Lebesque, and M. van Herk, “Variability of fourdimensional computed tomography patient models,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 70, 590–598 (2008).
153
H. Shirato, S. Shimizu, K. Kitamura, T. Nishioka, K. Kagei, S. Hashimoto, H. Aoyama, T. Kunieda, N. Shinohara, H. Dosaka-Akita and K.
Miyasaka, “Four-dimensional treatment planning and fluoroscopic realtime tumor tracking radiotherapy for moving tumor,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 48, 435–442 (2000).
154
Y. Seppenwoolde, H. Shirato, K. Kitamura, S. Shimizu, M. van Herk, J.
V. Lebesque, and K. Miyasaka, “Precise and real-time measurement of
3D tumor motion in lung due to breathing and heartbeat, measured during
radiotherapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 53, 822–834 (2002).
155
Y. G. van der Geld, S. Senan, J. R. van Sornsen de Koste, H. van Tinteren, B. J. Slotman, R. W. Underberg, and F. J. Lagerwaard, “Evaluating
mobility for radiotherapy planning of lung tumors: A comparison of virtual fluoroscopy and 4DCT,” Lung Cancer 53, 31–37 (2006).
156
M. Guckenberger, K. Baier, I. Guenther, A. Richter, J. Wilbert, O. Sauer,
D. Vordermark, and M. Flentje, “Reliability of the bony anatomy in
image-guided stereotactic radiotherapy of brain metastases,” Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 69, 294–301 (2007).
157
J. P. Bissonnette, K. N. Franks, T. G. Purdie, D. J. Moseley, J. J. Sonke,
D. A. Jaffray, L. A. Dawson, and A. Bezjak, “Quantifying interfraction
and intrafraction tumor motion in lung stereotactic body radiotherapy
using respiration-correlated cone beam computed tomography,” Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 75, 688–695 (2009).
158
L. Ma, A. Sahgal, S. Hossain, C. Chuang, M. Descovich, K. Huang, A.
Gottschalk, and D. A. Larson, “Nonrandom intrafraction target motions
and general strategy for correction of spine stereotactic body radiotherapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 75, 1261–1265 (2009).
159
F.-F. Yin, J. Wong, J. Balter, S. Benedict, J.-P. Bissonnette, T. Craig, L.
Dong, D. Jaffray, S. Jiang, S. Kim, C.-M. C. Ma, M. Murphy, P. Munro,
T. Solberg, and Q. J. Wu, “The role of in-room kV x-ray imaging for
Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2012

1962

patient setup and target localization: Report of AAPM Task Group 104,”
in AAPM Report (American Association of Physicists in Medicine, College Park, MD, 2009), p. 62.
160
E. E. Klein, J. Hanley, J. Bayouth, F. F. Yin, W. Simon, S. Dresser, C.
Serago, F. Aguirre, L. Ma, B. Arjomandy, C. Liu, C. Sandin, and T.
Holmes, “Task Group 142 report: Quality assurance of medical accelerators,” Med. Phys. 36, 4197–4212 (2009).
161
K. M. Langen, N. Papanikolaou, J. Balog, R. Crilly, D. Followill, S. M.
Goddu, W. Grant, III, G. Olivera, C. R. Ramsey, and C. Shi, “QA for helical tomotherapy: Report of the AAPM Task Group 148,” Med. Phys. 37,
4817–4853 (2010).
162
W. Lutz, K. R. Winston, and N. Maleki, “A system for stereotactic radiosurgery with a linear accelerator,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 14,
373–381 (1988).
163
S. Mutic, J. R. Palta, E. K. Butker, I. J. Das, M. S. Huq, L. N. Loo, B. J.
Salter, C. H. McCollough, and J. Van Dyk, “Quality assurance for
computed-tomography simulators and the computed-tomography-simulation process: report of the AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task
Group No. 66,” Med. Phys. 30, 2762–2792 (2003).
164
W. P. M. Mayles, R. Lake, A. McKenzie, E. M. Macaulay, H. M. Morgan, T. J. Jordan, and S. K. Powley, Physical Aspects of Quality Control
in Radiotherapy (The Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine,
New York, 1999), pp. 1–286.
165
D. A. Jaffray, J. H. Siewerdsen, J. W. Wong, and A. A. Martinez,
“Flat-panel cone-beam computed tomography for image-guided radiation therapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 53, 1337–1349
(2002).
166
F. F. Yin, H. Guan, and W. Lu, “A technique for on-board CT reconstruction using both kilovoltage and megavoltage beam projections for 3D
treatment verification,” Med. Phys. 32, 2819–2826 (2005).
167
S. J. Shepard, P.-J. P. Lin, J. M. Boone, D. D. Cody, J. R. Fisher, G. D.
Frey, H. Glasser, J. E. Gray, A. G. Haus, L. V. Hefner, J. Richard L.
Holmes, R. J. Kobistek, F. N. Ranallo, P. L. Rauch, R. P. Rossi, J. A. Seibert, K. J. Strauss, O. H. Suleiman, J. R. Schenck, and S. K. Thompson,
AAPM Report No. 74 Quality Control in Diagnostic Radiology, 1 ed.
(Medical Physics Publishing, Madison, WI, 2002).
168
J. Stutzel, U. Oelfke, and S. Nill, “A quantitative image quality comparison of four different image guided radiotherapy devices,” Radiother.
Oncol. 86, 20–24 (2008).
169
G. H. Glover, “Compton scatter effects in CT reconstructions,” Med.
Phys. 9, 860–867 (1982).
170
J. H. Siewerdsen and D. A. Jaffray, “Cone-beam computed tomography
with a flat-panel imager: magnitude and effects of x-ray scatter,” Med.
Phys. 28, 220–231 (2001).
171
J. F. Barrett and N. Keat, “Artifacts in CT: Recognition and avoidance,”
Radiographics 24, 1679–1691 (2004).
172
O. Morin, M. Aubin, J. Aubry, J. Chen, M. Descovich, and J. Pouliot, “Quality
assurance of megavoltage cone-beam CT,” Med. Phys. 34, 2634 (2007).
173
K. M. Langen, N. Papanikolaou, J. Balog, R. Crilly, D. Followhill, S. M.
Goddu, W. Grant III, G. Olivera, C. Ramsey, and C. Shi, “QA for helical
tomotherapy: Report of the AAPM Task Group 148,” Med. Phys. 37,
4817–4853 (2010).
174
P.-J. P. Lin, T. J. Beck, C. Borras, G. Cohen, R. A. Jucius, R. J. Kriz,
E. L. Nickoloff, L. N. Rothenberg, K. J. Strauss, and T. Villafana,
AAPM Report No. 39 Specification and Acceptance Testing of Computed
Tomography Scanners, 1 ed. (Medical Physics Publishing, Madison,
WI, 1993).
175
D. A. Jaffray, J.-P. Bissonnette, and T. Craig, “X-ray imaging for verification and localization in radiation therapy,” in The Modern Technology
of Radiation Oncology, Vol. 2, edited by J. Van Dyk (Medical Physics
Publishing, Madison, WI, 2005), pp. 259–284.
176
E. K. Osei, B. Schaly, A. Fleck, P. Charland, and R. Barnett, “Dose
assessment from an online kilovoltage imaging system in radiation
therapy,” J. Radiol. Prot. 29, 37–50 (2009).
177
W. Y. Song, S. Kamath, S. Ozawa, S. A. Ani, A. Chvetsov, N. Bhandare,
J. R. Palta, C. Liu, and J. G. Li, “A dose comparison study between XVI
and OBI CBCT systems,” Med. Phys. 35, 480–486 (2008).
178
M. Tubiana, “[Prevention of cancer and the dose-effect relationship: the
carcinogenic effects of ionizing radiations],” Cancer Radiother. 13,
238–258 (2009).
179
M. Tubiana, “Can we reduce the incidence of second primary malignancies occurring after radiotherapy? A critical review,” Radiother. Oncol.
91, 4–15; discussion 11–13 (2009).

1963

Bissonnette et al.: QA for image-guided radiation therapy utilizing CT-based technologies

180

D. J. Godfrey, F. F. Yin, M. Oldham, S. Yoo, and C. Willett, “Digital
tomosynthesis with an on-board kilovoltage imaging device,” Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 65, 8–15 (2006).
181
P. A. Kupelian, C. Lee, K. M. Langen, O. A. Zeidan, R. R. Manon, T. R.
Willoughby, and S. L. Meeks, “Evaluation of image-guidance strategies
in the treatment of localized prostate cancer,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol.,
Phys. 70, 1151–1157 (2008).
182
E. J. Hall, “Intensity-modulated radiation therapy, protons, and the risk of
second cancers,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 65, 1–7 (2006).
183
M. Murphy, J. Balter, S. Balter, J. A. BenComo, I. Das, S. Jiang, C.-M.
Ma, G. H. Olivera, R. F. Rodebaugh, K. J. Ruchala, H. Shirato, and F.-F.
Yin, “The management of imaging dose during image-guided radiotherapy: Report of the AAPM Task Group 75,” Med. Phys. 34, 4041–4063
(2007).
184
S. Yoo and F. F. Yin, “Dosimetric feasibility of cone-beam CT-based
treatment planning compared to CT-based treatment planning,” Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 66, 1553–1561 (2006).
185
A. Richter, Q. Hu, D. Steglich, K. Baier, J. Wilbert, M. Guckenberger,
and M. Flentje, “Investigation of the usability of conebeam CT data sets
for dose calculation,” Radiat. Oncol. 3, 42 (2008).
186
S. J. Thomas, “Relative electron density calibration of CT scanners for
radiotherapy treatment planning,” Br. J. Radiol. 72, 781–786 (1999).
187
S. F. Petit, W. J. C. v. Elmpt, P. Lambin, and A. L. A. J. Dekker, “Dose
recalculation in megavoltage cone-beam CT for treatment evaluation: Removal of cupping and truncation artefacts in scans of the thorax and
abdomen,” Radiother. Oncol. 94, 359–366 (2010).
188
M. J. Murphy, “Image-guided patient positioning: If one cannot correct
for rotational offsets in external-beam radiotherapy setup, how should
rotational offsets be managed?,” Med. Phys. 34, 1880–1883 (2007).
189
K. K. Brock, “Results of a multi-institution deformable registration
accuracy study (MIDRAS),” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 76,
583–596.
190
A. Bel, O. Petrascu, I. Van de Vondel, L. Coppens, N. Linthout, D. Verellen, and G. Storme, “A computerized remote table control for fast online patient repositioning: Implementation and clinical feasibility,” Med.
Phys. 27, 354–358 (2000).
191
J. Meyer, J. Wilbert, K. Baier, M. Guckenberger, A. Richter, O. Sauer,
and M. Flentje, “Positioning accuracy of cone-beam computed tomography in combination with a HexaPOD robot treatment table,” Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 67, 1220–1228 (2007).
192
M. Guckenberger, J. Meyer, J. Wilbert, K. Baier, O. Sauer, and M.
Flentje, “Precision of image-guided radiotherapy (IGRT) in six degrees

Medical Physics, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2012

1963

of freedom and limitations in clinical practice,” Strahlenther. Onkol. 183,
307–313 (2007).
193
M. Mamalui-Hunter, H. Li, and D. A. Low, “Linac mechanic QA using a
cylindrical phantom,” Phys. Med. Biol. 53, 5139–5149 (2008).
194
D. Moseley, W. Li, and D. Jaffray, “Accuracy of automatic couch corrections with on-line volumetric imaging,” Med. Phys. 34, 2378 (2007).
195
J. D. Fenwick, W. A. Tome, H. A. Jaradat, S. K. Hui, J. A. James, J. P.
Balog, C. N. DeSouza, D. B. Lucas, G. H. Olivera, T. R. Mackie, and B.
R. Paliwal, “Quality assurance of a helical tomotherapy machine,” Phys.
Med. Biol. 49, 2933–2953 (2004).
196
C. W. Cheng, J. Wong, L. Grimm, M. Chow, M. Uematsu, and A. Fung,
“Commissioning and clinical implementation of a sliding gantry CT scanner installed in an existing treatment room and early clinical experience
for precise tumor localization,” Am. J. Clin. Oncol. 26, e28–36 (2003).
197
W. Mao, L. Lee, and L. Xing, “Development of a QA phantom and automated analysis tool for geometric quality assurance of on-board MV and
kV x-ray imaging systems,” Med. Phys. 35, 1497–1506 (2008).
198
J. R. Sykes, R. Lindsay, C. J. Dean, D. S. Brettle, D. R. Magee, and D. I.
Thwaites, “Measurement of cone beam CT coincidence with megavoltage isocentre and image sharpness using the QUASAR Penta-Guide
phantom,” Phys. Med. Biol. 53, 5275–5293 (2008).
199
C. G. Rowbottom, and D. A. Jaffray, “Development of an integral system
test for image-guided radiotherapy,” Med. Phys. 31, 3500–3505 (2004).
200
D. Letourneau, H. Keller, M. B. Sharpe, and D. A. Jaffray, “Integral test
phantom for dosimetric quality assurance of image guided and intensity
modulated stereotactic radiotherapy,” Med. Phys. 34, 1842–1849 (2007).
201
E. White, D. Moseley, T. Purdie, M. Sharpe, J.-P. Bissonnette, and D. Jaffray, “Development of a daily quality assurance procedure for a kilovoltage cone-beam CT guidance system,” Radiother. Oncol. 81, S162 (2006).
202
A. McNiven, C. L. Chin, A. D. Vandermeer, and D. Moseley,
“Comparison of the residual error in treatment set-up using different
imaging modalities: A phantom study,” Med. Phys. 35, 2692 (2008).
203
G. S. Mageras and J. Mechalakos, “Planning in the IGRT context: Closing the loop,” Semin. Radiat. Oncol. 17, 268–277 (2007).
204
M. A. Hawkins, K. K. Brock, C. Eccles, D. Moseley, D. Jaffray, and L.
A. Dawson, “Assessment of residual error in liver position using kV
cone-beam computed tomography for liver cancer high-precision radiation therapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 66, 610–619 (2006).
205
J.-P. Bissonnette, “Linear accelerator: Implementation and use,” in Quality Assurance and Safety for Radiotherapy, edited by T. Pawlicki, P. Dunscombe, A. J. Mundt, and P. Scalliet (Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, FL,
2010), pp. 317–321.

