The report of Task Group 100 of the AAPM: Application of risk
analysis methods to radiation therapy quality management
M. Saiful Huqa)
Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute and UPMC CancerCenter,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15232

Benedick A. Fraass
Department of Radiation Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California 90048

Peter B. Dunscombe
Department of Oncology, University of Calgary, Calgary T2N 1N4, Canada

John P. Gibbons, Jr.
Ochsner Health System, New Orleans, Louisiana 70121

Geoffrey S. Ibbott
Department of Radiation Physics, UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030

Arno J. Mundt
Department of Radiation Medicine and Applied Sciences, University of California San Diego, San Diego,
California 92093-0843

Sasa Mutic
Department of Radiation Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110

Jatinder R. Palta
Department of Radiation Oncology, Virginia Commonwealth University, P.O. Box 980058, Richmond, Virginia
23298

Frank Rath
Department of Engineering Professional Development, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706

Bruce R. Thomadsen
Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53705-2275

Jeffrey F. Williamson
Department of Radiation Oncology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23298-0058

Ellen D. Yorke
Department of Medical Physics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Center, New York, New York 10065

(Received 13 May 2015; revised 13 March 2016; accepted for publication 14 March 2016;
published 15 June 2016)
The increasing complexity of modern radiation therapy planning and delivery challenges traditional
prescriptive quality management (QM) methods, such as many of those included in guidelines
published by organizations such as the AAPM, ASTRO, ACR, ESTRO, and IAEA. These prescriptive
guidelines have traditionally focused on monitoring all aspects of the functional performance of
radiotherapy (RT) equipment by comparing parameters against tolerances set at strict but achievable
values. Many errors that occur in radiation oncology are not due to failures in devices and software;
rather they are failures in workflow and process. A systematic understanding of the likelihood and
clinical impact of possible failures throughout a course of radiotherapy is needed to direct limit QM
resources efficiently to produce maximum safety and quality of patient care. Task Group 100 of
the AAPM has taken a broad view of these issues and has developed a framework for designing
QM activities, based on estimates of the probability of identified failures and their clinical outcome
through the RT planning and delivery process. The Task Group has chosen a specific radiotherapy
process required for “intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT)” as a case study. The goal of
this work is to apply modern risk-based analysis techniques to this complex RT process in order
to demonstrate to the RT community that such techniques may help identify more effective and
efficient ways to enhance the safety and quality of our treatment processes. The task group generated
by consensus an example quality management program strategy for the IMRT process performed
at the institution of one of the authors. This report describes the methodology and nomenclature
developed, presents the process maps, FMEAs, fault trees, and QM programs developed, and makes
suggestions on how this information could be used in the clinic. The development and implementation

4209

Med. Phys. 43 (7), July 2016

0094-2405/2016/43(7)/4209/54/$30.00

© 2016 Am. Assoc. Phys. Med.

4209

4210

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4210

of risk-assessment techniques will make radiation therapy safer and more efficient. C 2016 American
Association of Physicists in Medicine. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1118/1.4947547]
Key words: process mapping, FMEA, FTA, risk-based-QM program
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 PREFACE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4211
1.A Guide to readers and regulators on use of
the Task Group-100 report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4211
1.A.1 Developing prospective approaches
to radiotherapy quality management. 4211
1.A.2 Reading and using the TG-100
report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4212
1.A.3 Suggestions for regulators and
regulations related to prospective
radiotherapy quality management
programs based on TG-100
recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4212
1.A.4 Important guidance in following the
methodology in this report . . . . . . . . . 4213
1.A.5 Highlighted recommendations to
the AAPM to facilitate the use of
the TG-100 methodology . . . . . . . . . . 4213
2 CHARGE AND SCOPE OF THE REPORT . . . . . . . 4213
3 PROBLEMS WITH TRADITIONAL
APPROACHES TO QUALITY MANAGEMENT
IN RADIATION THERAPY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4214
3.A Need to address the treatment processes
comprehensively . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4214
3.B Excessive demand on physics resources . . . . 4214
3.C Difficulty in developing a QM protocol that
covers all permutations in clinical practice . . 4215
3.D Delays in establishing accepted QM
protocols for emerging technologies and
associated processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4215
4 QUALITY AND SAFETY: AN OVERVIEW . . . . . 4215
4.A Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4215
4.B Quality management: Components,
functions, and tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4216
4.C Reactive approaches to safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4217
4.D Prospective approaches to safety . . . . . . . . . . . 4217
5 TG-100 RISK ANALYSIS METHODOLOGY . . . . 4218
5.A Process mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4218
5.B Failure modes and effects analysis . . . . . . . . . 4218
5.C Fault tree analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4222
6 TG-100 METHODOLOGY FOR DESIGNING
QUALITY MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS IN
RADIATION THERAPY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4223
6.A Establishing the goals of the QM program . . 4223
6.B Prioritizing the potential failure modes
based on RPN and severity functions . . . . . . . 4224
6.C Marking the riskiest and most severe steps
in the process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4224
6.D Marking the same highest ranked steps on
the fault tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4224
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

6.E Selecting QM intervention placement . . . . . . 4224
6.F Selection of appropriate quality
management tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4224
7 COMPARISON WITH PREVIOUS WORK . . . . . . 4226
8 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR APPLYING RISK
ANALYSES IN RADIATION THERAPY . . . . . . . . 4228
8.A To individual clinics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4228
8.B To AAPM and other organizations . . . . . . . . . 4231
8.C Future research and development . . . . . . . . . . 4232
8.C.1 Assessment of FMEA/FTA
generality and optimal
implementation in individual clinics. 4232
8.C.2 Sensitivity, error propagation, and
process control studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4232
8.C.3 Observational studies and risk
analysis validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4233
8.C.4 Incident reporting and taxonomic
analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4233
9 EXAMPLE APPLICATION OF TG-100
METHODOLOGY TO IMRT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4234
9.A Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4234
9.B TG-100 risk analysis of a generic IMRT
clinical process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4234
9.B.1 IMRT process mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . 4234
9.B.2 IMRT failure modes and effects
analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4236
9.B.2.a Assignment of O, S, and D
values. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4236
9.B.2.b Method of analysis. . . . . . . . 4236
9.B.2.c Results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4237
9.B.3 IMRT Fault Tree Analysis (FTA) . . . 4239
9.B.3.a General features of the
fault tree derived from the
TG-100 FMEA. . . . . . . . . . . . 4239
9.B.3.b Simple example of FTA
guidance in QM design. . . . 4240
9.B.3.c Suggested use of FTA. . . . . . 4241
9.C Risk-informed design of IMRT QM
programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4242
9.C.1 Discussion of top ranked failure
modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4242
9.C.2 Failure mode #1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4242
9.C.3 Failure mode #2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4243
9.C.4 Failure mode #3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4244
9.C.4.a Example method for
determination of
tolerances and frequencies
for QA tests of Linac
output. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4245

4211

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

9.C.4.b Other dosimetric and
geometric performance
endpoints. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4246
9.D Additional observations from the TG-100
analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4247
9.D.1 Failure mode #11. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 4247
9.D.2 Failure mode #14. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 4249
9.D.3 Failure mode #24. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 4250
9.D.4 Failure mode #32. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 4251
9.D.5 Failure mode #153 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4251
9.E Quality management program components . 4252
9.F Summary and conclusions: IMRT example . 4253
10 CONCLUSIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4254
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4254
APPENDIX A: PRACTICAL GUIDES TO
PERFORMING FMEA, FTA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4254
1 Guidelines for applying risk assessment,
industrial quality management tools, and
techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4254
a Performing a process analysis and
risk assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4254
APPENDIX B: AN INTRODUCTORY
EXERCISE FOR PROCESS MAPPING, FMEA,
FTA, AND QM DESIGN FOR IMRT
TREATMENT PLANNING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4256
1 Process mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4256
a Learning objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4256
b Exercise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4256
2 Failure modes and effects analysis . . . . . . . . . 4256
a Exercise objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4256
b Exercise overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4256
3 Fault tree analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4258
a Exercise objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4258
b Exercise overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4258
4 Quality management design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4258
a Exercise objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4258
b Exercise overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4258

1. PREFACE
1.A. Guide to readers and regulators on use
of the Task Group-100 report

This report of task group (TG) 100 on application of risk analysis methods to radiation therapy quality management (QM)
is very different from most AAPM task group reports and
therefore should be read and used in a different way than most
task group reports. This preface addresses those differences by
describing the general goals of the report, suggesting ways to
read and use the report, and making comments on the use of the
TG-100 report by regulators and regulations. The importance
of reading and understanding the preface to this report cannot
be overemphasized because the concepts and application of
these concepts differ in important ways from previous task
group reports and use of the methodology contrary to the principles discussed in this preface could lead to greater hazard
rather than increased quality and safety.
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4211

1.A.1. Developing prospective approaches
to radiotherapy quality management

Prescriptive approaches to technical quality management
have served cancer patients well over the hundred-year history
of radiotherapy. With a cancer incidence rate in excess of
1.6 × 106 per year in North America and estimated radiotherapy utilization rates of 50% for new cases and 20% for
retreatment, approximately a million courses of radiotherapy
are delivered per year in the USA. The vast majority of
these are delivered safely and with considerable benefit to the
patient. However, as a community, we must continue to search
for ways to improve the quality and safety of the treatments
we offer. Traditionally, quality improvement in our specialty
has been driven largely by new technological advances, and
safety improvement has been driven by reactive responses
to past system failures. Clearly there is a synchronization
problem here. The strategies presented in this TG-100 report
provide a mechanism to enhance quality and safety, both for
new as well as for established technologies and processes. It
is imperative that we explore such a paradigm shift at this
time, when expectations from patients as well as providers
are rising while available resources are falling.
Prescriptive approaches to technical quality management,
such as those promulgated by the AAPM and other professional organizations, will continue to play a role in the future.
The development of these cornerstone documents has been
based on the consensus opinion of experts in the field. However, with the adoption of prospective quality management
techniques (techniques for designing safe clinical workflows
in advance of their use) proposed by TG 100, such as failure
modes and effects analysis (FMEA), we can envisage a
future in which such technical quality management documents
are informed by a more rigorous, although still subjective,
analysis of the technology involved and of the causes and
consequences of suboptimal performance. Familiarity with
the prospective error management techniques discussed in this
report will facilitate the transition to quality control protocols
that are weighted towards those tests or workflows that may
be more effective in preserving the safety of the patient and
will potentially enhance clinical outcomes.
This report presents a change in approach. Until recently,
the emphasis in radiotherapy quality management, particularly
by the Medical Physics community, has been on the technical
performance of radiotherapy equipment. In recent years,
however, there has been increasing recognition that a major
source of quality and safety impairment arises from weakness
or variability in radiotherapy processes. Whereas, for example,
there are a limited number of linear accelerator designs,
there is very little standardization of processes between
radiotherapy clinics. The high degree of commonality between
Linac designs lends itself to the development of more or less
generic machine quality control protocols, which, therefore,
can be prescriptive. The wide variability in processes requires
a much higher degree of customization that has to be carried
out by those with intimate knowledge of the processes
themselves. The techniques described in this document
constitute a structured methodology for analyzing clinical

4212

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

processes and for developing clinic- and site–specific quality
management programs that more effectively and efficiently
address work practices in individual clinics. Process mapping,
failure modes and effects analysis, and fault tree analysis
will assume more central roles in workflow design as we
strive for greater safety and enhanced quality through the
optimization of clinical processes. In other highly technical
and highly regulated industries, such as nuclear power,
prospective analyses, including these three techniques, has
been an important component of facility design and operation.
Technology in radiotherapy is advancing at a pace that
shows no sign of abating. Profession-wide, consensus-driven
approaches to the maintenance of quality and safety in
a rapidly changing landscape inevitably entail a time lag
between the implementation of new technologies and the
approved quality control protocols that should accompany
them. Prescriptive approaches alone to quality management
often do not address the huge variety of process and technique improvements and developments that help Radiation
Oncology continually improve patient care. The prospective
tools discussed in this document accommodate not only
clinic-to-clinic variability in risk profile, but also provide
a methodology for adapting a clinic’s quality and safety
program to changes in technology and patient care. Use of
these tools may produce a QM program that will save time, but,
more likely, it will provide guidance enabling each program
to direct resources toward achieving quality and safety in
radiotherapy more effectively.
1.A.2. Reading and using the TG-100 report

As already described, the TG-100 report is quite different
from most AAPM task group reports on quality assurance
(QA). How a medical physicist should read and use the report
is therefore also different. The major change is that the report
attempts to teach a whole new way of thinking about the
quality and safety needs of the radiotherapy planning and
delivery process, and to propose a prospective and processbased analysis of the quality management needs of the
radiotherapy process. The report describes (1) the rationale
for prospective risk analysis; (2) how to perform process- and
clinic-specific risk analysis and quality management program
formulation; and (3) a detailed sample application of the
method applied to a generic IMRT process.
While a typical AAPM Task Group report can often be
used as a reference1–7 [for example, to look up the frequency
for checks of the leaf position accuracy (IMRT) in Table V
of Task Group 142 (Ref. 1)], the TG-100 report should not
be used in that way. The detailed example analysis and the
QA program developed from that analysis are both based on a
default process modeled after that from the institution of one
of the authors, and are examples to help the readers understand
how to develop their own analysis. While the report attempts
to provide a detailed and realistic example program, it is
not appropriate to adopt that program into one’s own clinic.
The failures, ranking, analysis, and QM program may form
the basis for each institution’s analysis and QM program, but
individualization of each of the steps in the process is the
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4212

key to creating an effective and efficient quality management
program for each clinic. TG 100 will help guide readers
through that process to an appropriate quality management
program for their own clinic.
This Task group recommends that AAPM and other
organizations assist clinics with the implementation process
by:
• Forming task groups that develop guidance for implementing prospective analysis methods for specific
clinical processes.
• Providing local workshops to train AAPM members on
efficiently applying the TG-100 methodology.
• Providing more in-depth training (for example, establishing a website with model FMEAs for various
procedures as the analyses are developed, provide webbased training and focused workshops such as the
2013 Summer School on quality and safety in radiation
therapyc8).
• Providing competitive funding for clinics to develop
showcase prospective risk assessment implementations. Possibly attach a component to the receipt of
funds requiring that the clinic educate others in their
FMEA/FTA and other prospective risk assessment
implementation.
Many investigators have published their experience on the
application of failure mode and effects analysis in a radiation
oncology setting.9–30 Individual groups that successfully apply
the TG-100 methodology should publish their work (e.g., see
the paper by Ford et al.9).
Successful extension of the current prescriptive QA
methods to include the more prospective and risk-based
methods proposed by TG 100 will take considerable time
and effort from all involved. However, the complexity and
pace of technological improvements that bombard the field of
radiation oncology require that we implement the proposed
methodology if we are to maintain or improve the safety of
the patients and the quality of their treatments as we work to
cure their cancer.
1.A.3. Suggestions for regulators and regulations
related to prospective radiotherapy quality
management programs based on TG-100
recommendations

TG 100 presents a methodology for establishing a facility’s
quality management program where each facility determines
the hazards and risks at their own facility based on their own
processes and procedures. Other regulated industries utilize
risk-based quality programs and regulators have developed
techniques to review these types of programs. Examples
exist in the nuclear power and aviation industries. Risk-based
quality programs do not exclusively employ prescriptive lists
of checks. An important advantage of a risk-based approach
is that each facility can direct resources most efficaciously
towards patient safety and treatment quality as needed. This
results in varying quality management procedures, which
may be a challenge for regulations. Regulators are invited

4213

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

to familiarize themselves with TG-100 principles, learn how
to evaluate radiation therapy quality management programs
developed using risk-based approaches, and how to determine
if the programs provide the expected measure of safety
(see Sec. 1.A.4 for important guidance for following the
methodology in this report).
Risk-based QM procedure design has been mandated in the
United Kingdom for some time. In the U.S., beginning in 2001
the Joint Commission (then the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations) mandated that healthcare
organizations perform one proactive risk assessment on a
high-risk procedure each year, and while not mandating
FMEA as the only approach, based on the accompanying
discussion of intent and the booklet on compliance techniques,
it was clear that the expectation was that facilities would use
FMEA.31,32 To facilitate performance of risk-based analysis,
the Commission published an instruction manual on FMEA
(now in the third edition).33 The Joint Commission clearly
intended quality management for high-risk procedures to be
determined through risk assessment, and this has become
common in healthcare.
Most radiological regulators are familiar with the prescriptive task group reports from the AAPM making recommendations for radiotherapy quality assurance. These reports, for
example the reports of Task Group 40,2 and Task Group 142,1
present lists of items to check. Some of these reports have
been incorporated into regulations in some states. They have
provided useful frameworks against which regulators could
evaluate clinical quality assurance programs; whether or not
the AAPM reports are cited in regulations. The licensing
branches will have to work with licensees in developing
amendments that are consistent with the proposed risk-based
quality management methods and the transition to these new
methods.
Members of TG 100, as well as many other investigators,
have found that effective process QM requires active collaboration among all members of the radiation oncology team,
including physicians, therapists, nurses, dosimetrists, and
administrators as well as physicists. This report will contribute
to a broad discussion among stakeholders on the design and
implementation of radiation oncology QM programs. The
goal of this report is to provide information and guidance to
facilitate application of these methods in clinical practice. It
is emphatically not intended for prescriptive or regulatory
purposes.
1.A.4. Important guidance in following
the methodology in this report

In establishing risk-based quality management, these
guidelines should be followed:
1. Do not make sudden, major changes in your quality program. Any differences in the quality assurance program
between what comes from the TG-100 methodology and
the conventional QA as recommended by task group
reports or other guidance documents that would lead
to deletion of QA steps needs to be very carefully
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4213

considered and supported, and discussed with experts
familiar with both the conventional QA and the TG100 methodology. Compliance with regulation must be
maintained regardless of any analysis.
2. Start with a small project. Doing so serves several
purposes.
• First, it gives an opportunity to become accustomed
to the techniques on a manageable scale.
• Second, a small project has a higher chance of
being completed while all involved are enthusiastic,
and a successful completion of the first project will
engender greater support for future projects.
• Third, a small beginning project can provide experience that can help select subsequent projects. For
many facilities, there never has to be a large project,
just a series of small projects.
• Fourth, processes are dynamic, changing over time.
Over the duration of a large project the process under
review may change.
3. Critical facets of treatment should have redundancy.
Redundancy gives protection against errors creeping
into one of the systems.
4. Risk-based QM is likely used in other parts of a hospital
or clinic. The quality department may be able to provide
assistance with early projects.
1.A.5. Highlighted recommendations to the AAPM
to facilitate the use of the TG-100 methodology

1. The AAPM should provide guidance to regulators
for evaluating quality management programs in radiotherapy facilities. This guidance should be developed
by a panel of experts including some members of TG
100 and the Conference of Radiation Control Program
Directors (CRCPD). This guidance and the original
TG-100 document should be disseminated to the rulemaking, enforcement, and licensing units of all state
and Federal radiation control agencies.
2. The AAPM should give in-depth educational presentations on the new methodology for regulators at meetings
of the CRCPD and of the Organization of Agreement
States.
3. The AAPM should establish a repository on its website
for sample quality management programs that regulators could use to become familiar with what such
programs would look like.
More recommendations to the AAPM are in the body of
this report.

2. CHARGE AND SCOPE OF THE REPORT
Assuring the accuracy, efficacy, and safety of the physical
aspects of radiation treatment is the major responsibility of
the clinical medical physicist and one for which publications
from the American Association of Physicists in Medicine
[AAPM–Task Group (TG)-40,2 TG-43,3 TG-45,7 TG-53,4

4214

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

TG-56,5 TG-51,6 TG-142 (Ref. 1)] and other professional
societies34–39 provide continuing updated guidance. In general, these documents focus on device-specific evaluations—
assessing the functional performance of radiotherapy equipment by measuring specific parameters at specified frequencies with tolerances set at strict but achievable values.
However, since the 1994 publication of the AAPM Task Group
Report No. 40,2 technological advances have greatly expanded
the complexity of radiation therapy; there is a shortage
of resources to deal with this ever-increasing complexity.
Furthermore, recent public disclosures of radiation therapy
incidents with catastrophic outcomes40 have prompted growing appreciation of the need to improve safety measures in the
clinic. A number of analyses of events in radiation therapy41–44
find that they are far more often caused by flaws in the overall
process that takes a patient from initial consult through final
treatment than by isolated hardware or treatment planning
system calculation errors detectable by traditional physics
quality assurance (QA).
TG 100 was initially formed to address the problems
posed by ever increasing implementation of new advanced
technologies and the need for more effective ways to design
physics QA. The Task Group’s initial charge was:
1. Review and critique the existing guidance from the
AAPM in documents such as TG-40, 56, 59, 43, 60,
64, and guidance from ACR and ACMP reports on QA
in Radiation Oncology, ESTRO report on QA in radiotherapy, IEC publications on functional performance
of radiotherapy equipment, and finally ISO guidelines
on quality management and quality assurance. The
objective will be to determine the specific areas that
have been omitted and need better coverage and also
develop a suitable general quality assurance program.
2. Identify a structured systematic QA program approach
that balances patient safety and quality versus resources
commonly available and strike a good balance between
prescriptiveness and flexibility.
3. After the identification of the hazard analysis for
broad classes of radiotherapy procedures, develop the
framework of the QA program.
Given the rapid development of new technologies and
treatment methods, after discussion with the AAPM Therapy
Physics Committee, it was decided that TG 100 would address
only the second and third items of the charge. While many
tools exist for such analyses, the task group selected three
industrial engineering risk assessment and mitigation tools—
process mapping, failure modes (FMs) and effects analysis
(FMEA), and fault tree analysis (FTA)—because of their
widespread acceptance in high reliability industries. Intensity
modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is used as an example
application of these tools.
The TG’s report begins with a review of some issues
associated with traditional approaches to quality management
in radiation therapy (Sec. 3), followed by a brief description
of terminology and some of the major quality improvement
tools used in industry, including process mapping, FMEA,
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4214

and FTA (Secs. 4 and 5). Description of a methodology
for designing a QM program in radiation therapy is then
given (Sec. 6). Comparison of these methods with previous
work and suggestions for future research and development
and summary recommendations are given in Secs. 7 and
8. Section 9 is an example application of the general
methodology. Members of TG 100, as well as many other
investigators, have found that effective process QM requires
active collaboration among all members of the radiation
oncology team, including physicians, therapists, nurses,
dosimetrists, and administrators, as well as physicists. We
hope that this report can contribute to a broad discussion
among all these stakeholders related to how we can design and
implement more effective process QM in radiation oncology.
The goal of this report is to provide information and guidance
to facilitate application of these methods to IMRT and other
treatment modalities in individual clinical practices. It is
emphatically not intended for prescriptive or regulatory
purposes.

3. PROBLEMS WITH TRADITIONAL APPROACHES
TO QUALITY MANAGEMENT IN RADIATION
THERAPY
3.A. Need to address the treatment processes
comprehensively

Conventional approaches to radiation therapy QM mandate
checks, with associated tolerance levels and frequencies,
for each device used on patients throughout their course
of treatment. A major deficiency of this approach is its
emphasis on device-specific QA at the expense of errors
related to inadequate process design, information flow, poor
training, documentation, and poor matching of patientspecific checks against device vulnerabilities. Although many
reported serious radiation therapy errors involve incorrect
or inappropriate use of devices due to miscommunication
or misunderstanding,44 traditional physics QA is generally
focused elsewhere. While it is important that each device
used in planning and delivering RT treatment should perform
according to specifications and expectations, a better understanding of the interaction between the clinical processes,
human users, individual devices, and impact of various
“failures” on treatment outcome will help distribute resources
more efficiently and effectively.
3.B. Excessive demand on physics resources

As treatment methods become more numerous, complex,
and technologically intensive, the QM demands on medical
physics resources continually grow. The recent update of
the TG-40 QA requirements for Linacs by AAPM’s Task
Group 142 (Ref. 1) increases the number of daily, monthly,
and annual checks by over 60% each, mostly to account for
technologies such as IMRT and on-board imaging that were
not in clinical use in 1994.2 Medical physicists are required
to maintain quality for existing technologies and develop
procedures for safe and effective clinical implementation

4215

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

of new ones. They must perform acceptance testing and
commissioning of the software and hardware used for
treatment planning and delivery, establish QM programs for
ongoing safe use of the devices, develop procedures that
satisfy regulatory requirements, design and perform patientspecific tests to verify correct treatment delivery, and act as an
educational resource to the general public and the radiation
therapy community. These labor-intensive activities place a
heavy demand on medical physicists. Yet the number and
intensity of QM activities that an individual physicist can
safely perform is limited by human performance abilities and
the number of working hours in the day.10 Indeed, mental
and physical overload have been linked to serious errors
in many radiation therapy related incidents and accidents.45
It is thus desirable to consider new approaches to QM
that are based on formal risk assessments and that may
achieve improved quality and error reduction while providing
guidelines for a better distribution of physics resources. Such
approaches will identify “standard” QA activities whose
frequency can be safely reduced and also identify areas
where standard QA is inadequate. While the latter findings
do not necessarily decrease the physicist’s workload, they
provide a rationale for procurement of appropriate human and
equipment resources.
3.C. Difficulty in developing a QM protocol that covers
all permutations in clinical practice

Complexities in radiation therapy arise from the wide
range of conditions treated, technologies used, and professional expertise needed. For example, there are currently
more than seven IMRT delivery methods: “step-and-shoot,”
“sliding window,” physical compensators, helical and serial
TomoTherapy, and a variety of arc-based deliveries on conventional linear accelerators including constant and variable doserate “volumetric modulated arc therapy” methods. Details
of IMRT treatments depend on disease site, department
experience, technology available, and individual physician
preference. This complexity is compounded by the multiple
steps involved in the IMRT process, by intra and interdepartmental dynamics, by the variety of physical tests and
measurements that have been published, by the continual
changes brought about by clinical outcomes research, and
the introduction of new technologies. It is a daunting (and
likely impossible) task to develop a single QM protocol for
the ever-widening range of possible treatment techniques and
delivery equipment.
3.D. Delays in establishing accepted QM protocols
for emerging technologies and associated processes

Professional organizations such as the AAPM work diligently to develop thoughtful and consensus-based QM protocols to deal with new clinical technologies. Unfortunately, the
time scale required to develop consensus recommendations
can be too long for a clinic that is under pressure to implement
new therapeutic strategies when they become available for
use by the broad clinical community. For such situations, the
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4215

methods described by TG 100 will be helpful in developing
safe and efficient processes and QM programs.

4. QUALITY AND SAFETY: AN OVERVIEW
4.A. Quality

The effects of failure to maintain quality range from
clinically insignificant incidents [e.g., <5% (Refs. 46 and
47) variance in delivered dose compared with prescription]
to catastrophic events [e.g., cases reported in The NY Times,
NY (Ref. 40) leading to patient death]. The goal of a quality
management program is to protect the patient from all such
problems, though a feasible program is forced to concentrate
on failures with detectable impact.
The term quality enters this discussion frequently. While
often used in a general sense of “goodness,” a more precise
definition is useful in risk assessment. Modifying the definition given by Juran only slightly,48 quality in radiotherapy
consists of:
• Those features which meet the needs of the patient,
including rational medical, psychological, and economic goals while also taking into account the professional and economic needs of the caregivers and the
institution.
• A clinical process that is designed to realize cancer treatments that conform with nationally accepted standards
of practice and specifications; and
• Freedom from errors and mistakes.
Not meeting the desired level of quality is a Failure.
A specific process step can fail in different ways, each
of which constitutes a failure mode. In discussing failure
modes, as with quality, terms require more precise
definition and use than in casual conversation. While
even in the quality literature various definitions may be
found, the following definitions have become widely
accepted:
• Errors—failures consisting of acts, either of commission
(doing something that should not have been done)
or omission (not doing something that should have
been done), that incorrectly execute the intended action
required by the process.
• Mistakes—failures due to incorrect intentions or plans,
such that even if executed as intended would not achieve
the goal.
• Violations—failures due to intentionally not following
proper procedures, either as shortcuts with the intention
of achieving the correct goal or sabotage.
• Event—the entire scenario, including the failure itself and its propagation through the clinical process, resulting in a patient treatment of diminished
quality.
• Near event—a situation resulting from a failure that
would have compromised quality of the patient’s treatment had it not been detected and corrected. Also known
as close call, near miss, and good catch.

4216

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

Failures may result from errors, mistakes, or violations.
Many failures result in no detectable effects. Only when the
effects rise to a detectable and significant level, which may
happen months or even years after the failure, does the failure
produce an event.
The causes of failures are usually complex and difficult to classify, but often contain components of human failure (mistakes or errors) and/or equipment failure. While not as easy to identify, organizational or
design failures (called latent errors) refer to environmental,
managerial, or organizational factors that cause human or
equipment performance to deteriorate or increase the likelihood that such failures propagate into treatment. Examples
of organizational failure include excessive workload; a
noisy or distracting environment; or suboptimal access to
information.
Sometimes failures occur despite the fact that medical
electrical equipment design must address the concept of
essential performance, which is defined by the International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) as the performance necessary to achieve freedom from unacceptable risk (IEC 606011).49 While the design of systems can help minimize the
frequency of failures, it cannot entirely prevent them. Risk
management is the systematic application of management
policies, procedures, and practices to the tasks of analyzing,
evaluating, and controlling risk (IEC 60601-1).49 Risk assessment considers the way in which the quality of treatments
can fail to achieve the desired goals. Quality management
stands as the sentinel to protect the patient from the effects of
failures.

4216

4.B. Quality management: Components, functions,
and tools

Quality management consists of all the activities designed
to achieve the desired quality goals. According to Ford
et al. quality management includes quality planning, quality
control, quality assurance, and quality improvement.50 Two
components of QM are the focus of this report: quality control
(QC) and QA. Though many definitions for these concepts can
be found in the literature, in this report we use the following:
• QC encompasses procedures that force the desirable
level of quality by48
⃝ evaluating the current status of a treatment parameter,
⃝ comparing the parameter with the desired value, and
⃝ acting on the difference to achieve the goal.
• QA confirms the desired level of quality by demonstrating that the quality goals for a task or parameter are met.
Generally, QC works on the input to a process to make sure
that everything that goes together in the process is correct,
while QA assesses the correctness of the process output, as
schematically shown in Fig. 1. A process, according to the
IEC, is a set of inter-related resources and activities that
transform inputs into outputs.49 Both QC and QA work to
prevent bad outputs from passing out of a process. While
an error in an input might result in a poor quality product,
with QC in parallel with the input, both the input and its
corresponding QC would have to fail for the failure to pass
into the process. Similarly, were the process to result in a bad
product, there would have to be a QA failure to allow it to

F. 1. Example of a fault tree. The figure shows a process with four inputs, each with QC to maintain the integrity of the process, and QA to provide confidence
that the output of the process is correct. The red and green symbols represent “” and “” gates, respectively. Because an error in any of the four inputs can
propagate into an error in the calculation, they all enter into the process through an  gate (red symbol). Parallel to each of the boxes indicating errors in the
inputs are boxes indicating failure of QC associated with the process. Each of the “failure of QC” boxes enter an  gate (green symbol) with their respective
error in input box. This indicates that for the error in the input to pass into the calculation process, there must be a concomitant failure of the QC that works on
that input.
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4217

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

propagate out of the process. Classifying a given activity as
QC or QA can be complicated in most situations since the
output from one process often becomes the input for the next.
Both QC and QA interrupt the propagation of failures.
In general, QC requires more resources than QA. In Fig. 1,
preventing a process failure requires four QC activities, while
a single QA activity can provide similar protection. However,
identifying a failure during QC results in less wasted effort.
A failure detected by QA requires investigation to determine
its cause, followed by correction and repetition of the process
with the corrected input. Thus, an efficient and robust QM
program employs a mix of QC and QA, depending on variables
like the time taken within the process, the number of inputs,
and the probabilities of failures in the inputs. If QA frequently
finds failures, resources ideally would be shifted to QC. If QA
never (or very rarely) finds problems, the value of the QA step
ought to be reconsidered.
Quality audits comprise another important part of the QM
program. A quality audit is an assessment of the clinical
process by means of a manual or automated review of representative samples of treatment records that is independent of
the usual process. While there are several types of quality
audits, those of most interest in radiotherapy include process
and product audits. A process audit reviews the processes
used, while a product audit may review patient charts (for
example) to see if all of the required physics procedures were
completed and performed correctly. Quality audits considered
by AAPM Task Group 103 (Ref. 51) will not be discussed in
this report.
4.C. Reactive approaches to safety

Reactive approaches to safety are employed once a failure
is identified whether or not the effect of the failure penetrated
through to a clinical treatment. The objective of a reactive
approach is system improvement aimed at minimizing the risk
of patient harm in the future due to a repetition of the particular
observed failure mode. To reach this objective, it is necessary
to identify the causes of the particular failure mode and, on
the basis of these identified causes, to initiate appropriate
changes in the procedures or the quality management program
of the organization. This process of identifying the causes of
the event constitutes a root cause analysis (RCA), which is a
well-established approach to error management.52 As the term
implies, the objective of an RCA is to trace the sequence of
steps from the actual or potential clinical incident back to what
started the chain of actions and conditions leading to the event.
During the analysis contributing factors may also be identified.
An RCA takes the form of asking what and why at each
decision point until the root cause(s) is identified. The RCA
process should involve the entire treatment team to cover most
effectively all perspectives and should include individuals
close to the process or system in which the error occurred.
Organizations that study approaches to quality and implement
effective programs widely accept that a punitive or blaming
culture is counterproductive as an error management strategy.
An RCA therefore focuses on systems and processes rather
than individual performance.
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4217

As well as charting the series of actions and observing
the conditions that lead to the adverse event or near event,
an RCA also involves an evaluation of the effectiveness of
barriers and controls. Safety barriers, also known as critical
control points, are any process steps whose primary function
is to prevent errors or mistakes from occurring or propagating
through the radiotherapy workflow. Conventionally, one
would include barriers and controls as components of the
QM program. Comprehensive incident learning systems can
be built on the basis of an RCA (Refs. 44 and 53) and
can formally include corrective actions and learning through
feedback to the radiation therapy team.54 National incident
reporting and learning systems have just become available
for radiation oncology in the United States (https://www.
astro.org/Clinical-Practice/Patient-Safety/ROILS/Intro.aspx;
http://www.cars-pso.org).55,56 The systems assist clients
to work through RCA, or can perform the analyses for the
clients.
4.D. Prospective approaches to safety

As described in Sec. 4.C, RCA is a reactive QM tool that
addresses failures that actually happened in an existing clinical
process. By identifying root causes, process improvements
can be proposed through the quality management program
to minimize the probability of recurrence of the failure
modes.9,57,58 In contrast, the goal of prospective risk analysis
is to identify risky process steps before a failure happens. This
is then followed by a design of a new process or modification
of an existing process to reduce the likelihood that potential
failures will occur or to increase the likelihood that they are
detected before the desired outcome is compromised. The
fundamental starting point of any prospective risk or hazard
analysis is understanding the clinical process through the
development of a process map, followed by comprehensive
enumeration of potential failures that could occur at each step
of the process. Typically, knowledge of such potential failures
is derived from the expert team’s direct or shared experience
of the process, including experience with RCA and other
reactive QM tools. For failures outside of the treatment team’s
knowledge base, tabulations of reported radiation therapy
errors can be very useful.59
Prospective risk assessment is the process of analyzing
the hazards involved in a process. Risk assessment tools are
widely used to maintain quality in industry. Though there
are differences between an industrial product development
process and radiation therapy planning and delivery processes,
there are also important similarities. Particularly in recent
years, many studies have shown the benefits of risk-based
industrial techniques to safety and quality in medical settings.60–63 The field of clinical pharmacy science, for example,
has entirely revised its approach to quality management,
in an attempt to decrease the number of prescription drug
mistakes and errors, with impressive results.63 More recently,
the process-oriented and risk-based analysis of emergency
room procedures has been a major effort in the field of
emergency medicine. The goal of these efforts is to establish an
efficient program to maintain or improve quality in a reasoned

4218

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4218

and systematic manner without requiring ever-increasing
resources for QM.
Although many risk assessment and process analysis
techniques have been described in the literature (example:
Kaizen, state analysis, etc.), this report employs widely used
approaches and tools including: (1) Process mapping, (2)
FMEA, (3) FTA, and (4) the creation of a QM program to
mitigate the most important risks which were identified in
the previous analyses. This approach and others appear to be
directly adaptable to typical radiotherapy practices. Although
clinics are not discouraged from using these other approaches,
FMEA and FTA are highlighted in this report because the task
group felt that this approach would be most effective.
The first task in this risk-assessment approach is to describe
and understand each step in the process. Any method that
clarifies the processes, including a simple list of the steps,
can be used. Process map trees or charts can be very helpful,
as they graphically depict the relationship among steps in the
process. Section 5.A describes the development of process
mapping and shows the TG-100 process tree for the IMRT
process considered in this report. Process charts are logical
flow or organizational charts, and process maps are any other
diagrammatic illustration of how a process works.
After delineating the process, the next step is to assess the
potential risks involved in that process. TG 100 used FMEA,
since it is a relatively straightforward technique that requires
a short learning period. FMEA is discussed in detail in Sec.
5.B; it moves through the process and considers, for each
step, what could fail, how it could fail, what is the likelihood
of failure, what is the likelihood that a failure would not be
detected, and what the effects of failure would be. The overall
risk of each identified failure mode is then scored, so that
these failure modes can be prioritized.
The third step in the overall analysis is to evaluate the
propagation of failures using a fault tree analysis. We have
chosen to use a fault tree that gives a visual representation of
the propagation of failure in the procedure as it helps identify
intervention strategies to mitigate the risks which have been
identified (as described in Sec. 5.C).
To generalize, FMEA guides the development of failure
mode specific quality management activities while examination of the frequencies of progenitor causes, identified
through the FTA, provides guidance on the relative importance
of certain structural characteristics of a radiation treatment
program.
Once the FTA has been completed, the final step is to
determine how best to avoid the faults and risks that have
been identified. This analysis is then used to craft a quality
management program. A method for designing a QM program
(Sec. 6) and an example application of this to IMRT will be
discussed in Sec. 9.

therapists, nurses, IT support, machine maintenance, administration, etc.). The team members contribute to the analysis
of process steps and failure modes, especially those that
involve their work. Because of variations in offered treatment
techniques, available technology, physician training and
preferences, staffing resources, regulatory environment, and
other factors, each clinic is expected to have a unique process
map, FMEA analysis, fault tree, and QM program. As shown
later in this report, the FMEA is a risk-assessment tool that
makes use of data, when available, as well as the experiences
of people involved, so additional thought and analysis are
required to address new techniques for which there are limited
data and experience.

5. TG-100 RISK ANALYSIS METHODOLOGY

5.B. Failure modes and effects analysis

TG 100 recommends a team-based approach that requires
active participation of representatives from all treatment
team member categories (physicians, physicists, dosimetrists,

FMEA assesses the likelihood of failures in each step of
a process and considers their impact on the final process
outcome. FMEA has the goal of assessing everything that

Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

5.A. Process mapping

A process map (or chart or tree) is a convenient, visual
illustration of the physical and temporal relationships between
the different steps of a process that demonstrates the flow and
inter-relationship of these steps from process start to end.
Figure 2 shows the TG-100 process tree that encompasses
the major steps of the IMRT treatment process as agreed upon
by the task group members, based on the process at the facility
of one of the Task Group members. The trunk, which takes the
patient from entry into the radiation oncology system through
end of treatment, runs across the center of the tree. The
main boughs, representing the major subprocesses, emerge
in approximately chronological order. Further “branches”
emerging from each bough detail the steps required in the
subprocess represented by the branch; each branch may be
further broken down into twigs and leaves, which describe
finer details of the subprocess. The colored arrows show
the flow of information or actual physical material from one
major subprocess to another. For example, the purple arrows
show how immobilization and positioning impact on steps
further downstream, the cyan arrows show the downstream
flow of anatomic information, and the dark green arrows show
the transfer of initial images. Each step in the process tree
must be performed correctly for treatments to be successfully
conducted. Developing and understanding the process tree
are essential to performing FMEA and providing the physicist
and other team members an overview of the entire process
that may otherwise be obscured by daily clinical tasks.
When making a process tree, it is important to focus on the
appropriate level of detail. Extreme detail obscures the flow
and relationships. Too crude a map hides relationships and
important steps. The decision of the scale of the tree is not
irrevocable. The tree is only intended to be useful, and as it is
used, steps can be added or the detail reduced until it becomes
manageable and useful in understanding the process. Clearly,
the whole radiotherapy team needs to be involved in deciding
the key steps to be included in the process tree.

4219

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4219

F. 2. (a) An IMRT process tree, (b) magnified view of the initial treatment planning directive branch. The red numbers indicate (hazard ranking) the most
hazardous 20%–25% of the steps as indicated by high risk priority number values. Steps with high severity hazards are shown in green. [See text and Sec. VIII
(Ref. 64) for details.] A hazard is something that can cause harm. A risk is the chance, high or low, that any hazard will actually cause somebody harm.

could possibly go wrong at each step—how likely a specified
cause and resulting failure is to occur, how likely it is to
be detected, and how severe its consequences might be.
Failure at an individual step may have many potential causes
and each failure may have a variety of consequences. For
example, on the first treatment day, the patient may be
positioned incorrectly relative to isocenter. This may be
caused by potentially avoidable errors such as treatment
machine or simulator laser misalignment, therapist error due
to distraction, poor instructions or setup documentation in
the chart, inadequate immobilization, or by events that are
more difficult for caregivers to control such as organ motion
or anatomical changes. The consequences of this positioning
failure can range from negligible to severe, depending on the
magnitude of the displacement from the planned isocenter, the
treatment technique (stereotactic, conformal, or large fields),
the proximity of critical structures and when in the course of
treatment the error is detected.
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

As mentioned earlier, an FMEA is prospective in that it
includes the predictions of the institution’s experts of events
that have not occurred. In many cases, the frequency of
occurrence and the probability of their detection must be
estimated from local “near events” or anecdotal reports of
events or near events at other institutions. The TG-100 FMEA
was also performed with the assumption that there were no
specific QA/QC measures in place. The rationale for this
concept may be difficult to grasp at first as there are established
QM measures associated with most of the analyzed steps and
it is tempting to estimate likelihood of failure based on an
existing QM program. However, assuming the absence of
these QA/QC measures when performing the FMEA allows
for a systematic, ground-up redesign of a QM program without
possible confusion arising from the presence of existing measures, which may be misplaced or ineffective. Therefore, all
risk probability estimates in this report were performed assuming that there were no specific QA/QC measures in place.

4220

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

There are various steps to complete when performing a
quantitative FMEA. These include the following:
1. Identification of as many potential failure modes as
possible, ways in which a process could fail, for each
process step. Each process step can, and usually does,
have several failure modes.
2. Identification of as many causes as possible for the
potential causes for each failure mode. Each failure
mode can, and usually does, have several causes.
3. Determination of the impact of each failure mode on
the outcome of the process assuming that the situation
in (2) is not detected and corrected during subsequent
steps.
The TG-100 list of all failure modes, potential causes for each
failure mode, and the impact of each failure mode on the
outcome of different steps for the IMRT process is given in
Appendixes C1–C3.141
For each failure mode, the multidisciplinary team performing the FMEA assigns numerical values to three parameters
O, S, and D where
• O (occurrence) describes the likelihood that a particular
cause for the specified failure mode exists.
• S (severity) describes the severity of the effect on the
final process outcome resulting from the failure mode if
it is not detected or corrected.
• D (lack of detectability) describes the likelihood that
the failure will not be detected in time to prevent an
event. While past experience with QC or patient outcome
studies might be available to guide the choice of the value
for D, its selection will rely largely on expert opinion.
These three parameters are multiplied together to obtain a
single quantitative metric called the risk priority number
(RPN): RPN = O·S·D. RPN is a relative surrogate metric for
the risk posed to the patient by undetected failures of the
identified type. It increases monotonically with probability of
undetected occurrence (O·D) and the severity of its effects on
the patient (S). The RPN values direct attention to failures
that are most in need of QM and their component factors (O,
S, D) help us see what features of the failure mode contribute
most to the overall risk associated with it. Appendix A gives
an example of how to perform an FMEA.
TG 100 has developed scales for the O, S, and D
indices that are specifically tied to radiotherapy outcomes
and observations (though other scales can be and have been
used):65
• O ranges from 1 (failure unlikely, <0.01%) to 10 (failure
likelihood is substantial, more than 5% of the time).
• S ranges from 1 (no danger, minimal disturbance of
clinical routine) to 10 (catastrophic, whether from a
single event or accumulated events)
• D ranges from 1 (very detectable: 0.01% or fewer of the
events go undetected throughout treatment) to 10 (very
hard to detect, >20% of the failures persist through the
treatment course).
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4220

A given process step may fail in several different ways,
each with a different O and D. For example, the patient
may be treated in the wrong location relative to isocenter because of hardware failure (e.g., incorrectly aligned
lasers) or human factors (e.g., distracted or inadequately
trained personnel). But these different failure modes have
the same S, since the consequence for the patient is the
same.
Table I describes the TG-100 terminology relating to
severity. This severity scale is very specifically tuned to the
needs of the radiotherapy environment. Note also that failures
are relative to a practice standard or expectation that specifies
the desired or expected outcome. For example, a prescription
mistake or error is a significant deviation from a practice
guideline, physician consensus, or equivalent. For failures
downstream of prescription, the reference is the physician’s
directive.
Setting boundaries between the different levels of severity
adopted by TG 100 was necessary but is necessarily imprecise.
Table I suggests reasonable locations in dose and space for
where these boundaries might be set. While specific volume
and dose tolerances were considered, the wide variety of
clinical situations to be considered made rigid specifications
very difficult to use.
The terms wrong volume, wrong dose distribution, etc.
defined in Table I have considerable overlap in many cases.
For example, a treatment with the isocenter at an incorrect
location, in addition to delivering the dose to the wrong
volume, could be considered to deliver the wrong dose
distribution or the wrong absolute dose. However, the sense
of this failure would be best captured as wrong volume. For
most of the failures, the actual terminology for the effect is
not critical for its quantification.
Table II describes the numerical categorization of O, S,
and D agreed upon by the TG 100 members and used in the
subsequent FMEA analysis examples.66 Using these scales,
the RPN associated with a particular failure mode can range
from 1 to 1000. It is worth noting that the individual O, S,
and D scales are not linear but tend to be more logarithmic.
These scales are able to deal with the wide range of severity,
occurrence frequencies, and undetectability that must be
accounted for in radiotherapy.
One of the challenging aspects of the RPN scoring system
is the determination of an effective and usable severity score
(S). After a great deal of work, the TG arrived at the current
severity scale. While perhaps somewhat subjective, the TG
found that making the S descriptions too specific made them
harder to use. There are many failures that usually have
medium severity (wrong) but can, in extreme cases, have
S = 10 (very wrong); often the medium S situations have
higher O’s and D’s than the very high S situations. By
distinguishing between degrees of severity, evaluators are less
likely to get hung up on the very high severities and this helps
them focus on the more clinically relevant failure modes. This
approach proved to be very useful to the task group, and is the
one that is recommended.
In performing FMEA for IMRT, the TG members tried to
identify all possible failure modes and the potential causes for

4221

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4221

T I. Terminology relating to severity as used in the TG-100 FMEA.
Severity term

S values

Description

Wrong dose distribution

5–8

A failure in the delivery accuracy of the dose distribution that would be expected to increase adverse clinical
outcomes (e.g., reduced tumor control or increased likelihood of moderate grade late toxicities) to a level that is
statistically detectable in a large patient population. For definitive radiotherapy a variation in the dose to the
target or organs at risk of 5%–10% from the practice standard is suggested

Very wrong dose distribution

9–10

A failure in the delivery accuracy of the dose distribution to an individual patient that is highly likely to cause a
serious adverse clinical outcome (e.g., tumor recurrence or grade III/V late toxicity) in that individual patient.
For definitive radiotherapy, a threshold of about 10%–20% from the practice standard is suggested, depending
on biological sensitivities for the tissues under consideration

Wrong absolute dose

5–8

A specific type of wrong dose delivery error in which the relative dose distribution is correctly delivered but the
entire dose distribution is incorrectly scaled, due to variation in dose to the prescription point or isodose line,
e.g., caused by faulty machine calibration or MU calculation error. For definitive radiotherapy, a variation in the
dose of 5%–10% is suggested

Very wrong absolute dose

9–10

A specific type of very wrong dose delivery error in which the relative dose distribution is correctly delivered but
the entire dose distribution is incorrectly scaled, due to variation in dose to the prescription point or isodose line,
e.g., caused by faulty machine calibration or MU calculation error. For definitive high dose therapy, a threshold
of about 10%–20% is suggested

Wrong location for dose

5–8

A failure in delivering the dose to the correct location that would be expected to increase adverse clinical
outcomes (e.g., reduced tumor control or increased likelihood of moderate grade late toxicities) to a level that is
statistically detectable in a large patient population. The size of the difference in positioning that constitutes such
a failure depends on the anatomy of the target and organs at risk and the defined margins, but, generally,
differences of 3–5 mm between the locations of the reference and treated volumes is realistic for standard
fractionation treatment

Very wrong location for dose

9–10

A failure in delivering the dose to the correct location in an individual patient that is highly likely to cause a
serious adverse clinical outcome (e.g., tumor recurrence or grade III/V late toxicity) in that individual patient.
The size of the difference in positioning that constitutes such a failure depends on the anatomy of the target and
organs at risk, but, generally, differences of more than 5 mm between the locations of the reference and treated
volumes or inclusion of excessive normal tissue in the treated volume would be classified as “very wrong
location”

Wrong volume

5–8

A failure in delivering the dose to the correct target volume that would be expected to increase adverse clinical
outcomes (e.g., reduced tumor control or increased likelihood of moderate grade late toxicities) to a level that is
statistically detectable in a large patient population. Volume differences that constitute such a failure depend on
the anatomy of the target and organs at risk, and correspond to a marginal miss of the target volume or partial
irradiation of an OAR to a sufficiently high dose that statistically detectable increases in complications are likely

Very wrong volume

9–10

A failure in delivering the dose to the correct target volume in an individual patient that is highly likely to cause
a serious adverse clinical outcome (e.g., tumor recurrence or grade III/V late toxicity) in that individual patient.
Volume differences that constitute such a failure depend on the anatomy of the target and organs at risk, and
correspond to a geographical miss of the target volume or irradiation of an OAR to a dose sufficient to cause a
complication or treatment failure in the patients

Suboptimal plan

4

A treatment plan with characteristics unlikely to achieve the stated goals

Non-radiation-related
physical injury

5–10

Injury resulting from causes other than radiation, for example, from physical trauma

Inconvenience-patient

2–3

Failures that inconvenience the patient, for example, requiring an otherwise unexpected trip to the radiotherapy
facility

Inconvenience-staff or
increased cost

1–2

Failures that inconvenience the staff, creating extra work, and cost of treatment or increasing stress

each failure mode (given in Appendixes C1–C3).141 Among
the most frequent causes identified by the TG are human
failures, lack of standardized procedures, inadequate training,
inadequate communication, hardware and software failures,
inadequate resources, inadequate design specifications, and
inadequate commissioning. All of these are also systems
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

failures, some very directly, such as the lack of standardized
procedures and inadequate training, while others, such as
the human failures, propagate to events because of lack
of safety barriers in the process. Even equipment failures
often result from lack of commissioning, QA, or preventive
maintenance.

4222

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4222

T II. Descriptions of the O, S, and D values used in the TG-100 FMEA.
Occurrence (O)

Rank

Qualitative
1
2
3
4

Failure
unlikely
Relatively
few failures

5
6

Severity (S)
Frequency
in %
0.01
0.02

No effect

0.1

Minor dosimetric
error

Suboptimal plan or
treatment

<0.2

Limited toxicity or tumor
underdose

9

Repeated
failures

<2

10

Failures inevitable

>5

<1

<5

Potentially serious toxicity or
tumor underdose
Possible very serious toxicity
or tumor underdose
Catastrophic

5.C. Fault tree analysis

Fault trees complement process trees. A fault tree, as shown
in Figs. 1 and 3, begins on the left with something that could go
wrong (one of the failure modes). Figure 1 shows a schematic
of a very simplified version of a fault tree. The entire fault
tree that complements the IMRT process tree presented in
Fig. 2 is given in Appendix E.141 Figure 3 shows a segment
of the entire fault tree and describes what could go wrong
in pretreatment imaging for target localization. The analyst
asks what actions or events during the imaging process could
directly cause incorrect localization. Possible failures that
contribute to this include incorrect interpretation of images
(e.g., incorrect windowing for FDG-PET), or scans not made
accessible for radiation therapy planning in a timely fashion,
incorrect patient positioning for imaging, or error in advising
patients about special requirements such as fasting before
FDG-PET, etc. A logical  gate joins the boxes representing
these possibilities (called nodes) since any of these situations
results in an erroneous or suboptimal treatment. From each
of these boxes, the tree proceeds to the right asking what
could cause a failure at the node. The questions keep probing
the actions further upstream until at some point the causes
for a node fall outside of the control of the department or
facility. Some boxes could be joined by a logical  gate,
indicating that the actions in all the input boxes to the gate
must fail to result in the failure at the gate’s output. Such
 gate connections often are results of a QM program. If
an action is checked for correctness, then in order for an
error in the action to propagate to the left, there must also
be a concomitant failure in the associated check. Thus, 
gates provide protection, while  gates open opportunities
for error propagation. Studying the fault tree for a process or
subprocess illustrates the paths that could lead to failures. To
ensure error prevention, between each failure mode on the
left side in Fig. 3 and the progenitor causes on the right
side, there should be a quality management measure that
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

Estimated Probability of failure
going undetected in %
0.01

Inconvenience

<0.5

8

Categorization

Inconvenience

0.05

Occasional
failures

7

Qualitative

Detectability (D)

0.2
0.5
1.0
2.0

Wrong dose, dose
distribution,
location, or volume

5.0
10
15

Very wrong dose,
dose distribution,
location, or volume

20
>20

would prevent that failure mode from propagating through the
process. Typical QM measures include improving training,
establishing policies and procedures, developing protocols,
improving communication, and continued managerial support
for these procedural matters. Well-designed commissioning
procedures and more robust software and hardware would also
be necessary. Additionally, the entire step would be followed
by QA (typically peer review of the target and OAR volumes
for the step illustrated in Fig. 3).
The FMEA helps lay out the fault tree, and the fault tree
provides a visual overview for an individual or department
to see which steps in their practice are not covered by QM.
The RPN and S values direct attention to the failures most
in need of remedy. Looking at the trees it becomes clear
that, although not every step needs QM in parallel, every
step needs some QM to block the effects of failures from
affecting the patient. In general, it is not a good idea to
rely on a single QM step to interrupt the flow of failures.
Although it is tempting to insert a QA step as an efficiency
measure to block the propagation of errors from many steps
combined, failure of that one QA step would leave the
procedure completely unprotected. In addition, detection of
the problem from that one QA step (1) may happen after
many incorrect steps and much wasted effort, and (2) it may
be hard to identify which of the upstream steps actually
led to the problem, although this must be known in order
to correct the problem. Thus, both QM program efficacy
and overall process efficiency are enhanced by incorporating
multiple QM measures along the way between a possible
fault mode and the final process outcome. These redundant
measures reduce the possibility of an error going undetected
due to a failure in a single QM measure and, as described
earlier, also provide an opportunity for detection of errors
early in the process, thus avoiding wasted time and effort.
Evaluation of the added QA/QC processes into the FMEA
may help ensure that the checks will actually function
appropriately.

4223

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4223

F. 3. Example of a fault tree for determining what could go wrong in pretreatment imaging for CTV localization. (See text for details.)

6. TG-100 METHODOLOGY FOR DESIGNING
QUALITY MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS IN
RADIATION THERAPY
This section provides guidance for designing a quality
management program for radiation oncology. No set of
suggested QM programs fits all practices equally well and
each QM program should be assessed in light of the risk
assessment of the individual practice.

6.A. Establishing the goals of the QM program

A simplified goal for the QM program would be to deliver
the correct dose to the correct location safely. To be useful,
this goal requires more specific statements. Reasonable aims
could be: (1) that the dose to all of the CTV be within 5%
of that required for treatment of the given disease; (2) that
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

the doses to critical organs remain below the specified limits
for the treatment (realistically, the doses cannot always be
held below tolerances for all toxicity); and (3) that the patient
suffers no avoidable injury or toxicity. A secondary aim may
be that no treatment leads to administrative problems, such as
violating regulations.
The process of ranking the possible treatment failure modes
during the FMEA often focuses attention on catastrophic
failures, particularly on those with very high severity values.
This need not be the case in general. Consider an example
of errors along a continuous distribution (the error magnitude
can take on values along a continuum, such as a dosimetric
miscalibration). Figure 4 plots the values for the O, S, and
D as a function of the percent error for this parameter in a
hypothetical situation in which the frequency of occurrence
and nondetection decrease systematically with increasing
error magnitude and event severity. The figure also shows the

4224

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4224

resources for analysis. Working down the list, at some point
it may be judged that the resource implications of addressing
potential failures outweigh the benefit, but at what level that
occurs is often difficult to determine without first addressing
the higher ranked concerns. The interventions designed for
the high-ranking steps often address or modify many of the
low-ranking steps.
6.C. Marking the riskiest and most severe steps
in the process

F. 4. A plot of the hypothetical situation of various percentage errors in the
FMEA parameters as described in the text. The RPN value has been divided
by 100 to match the scale.

RPN values, divided by 10 to fit in the same ordinate scale. The
greatest risk occurs not for the greatest percentage error but
in the midrange of the percentage error. If “error” is assumed
to mean any deviation from the desired value, small errors
may occur routinely, but have such low severities, that the
associated “events” may not even be noticed. The treatment
may produce toxicities within the range to be expected from
the treatment; therefore the scale of S values was extended
to include zero in the plot. As the error (i.e., deviation
from desired value) increases, its probability of occurrence
decreases, the severity increases, as does its likelihood of
detection, which causes D to decrease. For example, if a dose
distribution on a plan gives poor target coverage then the worse
the coverage the more likely it is that someone will notice. An
O value for the delivery of such a plan is taken as low since
these occurrences are rare in good practice. Similarly the D
value is taken as low because poor coverage is likely to be
detected before the plan continues to treatment.
In principle, for any outcome that can be modeled as
a continuous random variable, such a function relating the
RPN and percent error would be developed, at least in an
approximate manner, as input into the FMEA. Unfortunately,
there is little hard data for most treatment parameters and no
information of this nature was available to the Task Group. TG
100 recommends research in developing such relationships.
It is hoped that the national event-learning systems55,56 will
provide enough data to support the needed research.
6.B. Prioritizing the potential failure modes based on
RPN and severity functions

Sorting the entries in the FMEA facilitates the QM design
process as it helps prioritize the riskiest and/or most severe
failure modes. Starting with two copies of the FMEA, sort
one by RPN values and the second by S ranking because
this helps focus attention on the most hazardous and severe
steps. Both sorted lists are used in an identical manner so it
makes no difference which one is used first. Prioritization of
the most hazardous steps informs an efficient allocation of
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

This approach employs both the RPN and severity ranking
in identifying the most hazardous steps in the clinical process.
An effective method is to mark on the process tree the most
hazardous steps, for example, the steps with the 20%–25%
highest ranked RPN values (Fig. 2). Irrespective of the RPN
values, the steps with high severity rankings should also be
marked. For example, TG 100 chose a severity value of 8 for
this cut-off. For process-tree steps with many highly ranked
potential failures, the quality management design team should
consider redesigning the process to eliminate or reduce the
risk, with subsequent risk reanalysis. If redesign is impractical
or would not reduce the risk, then further controls should be
put in place.
6.D. Marking the same highest ranked steps on the
fault tree

The same highest ranked steps can be indicated on the fault
tree. As with the process map representation, this marking will
assist in focusing attention on clusters of highest hazard.
6.E. Selecting QM intervention placement

Starting with the most highly ranked hazards, either by
RPN or severity ranking, consideration is then given as to
where to place QM interventions to address each failure mode.
During this process, it is not necessary to correct all the
upstream causes of the failure; however, whenever possible
it is ideal to take corrective measures to reduce the probability
of these causes. Further corrective actions might be taken to
interrupt the propagation of that failure to prevent effects on
the patient’s treatment. While the goal is to address the most
hazardous steps first so resources are used most efficiently
and effectively, when addressing a high-ranking step, it most
often saves time to consider the other steps along the branch
together since the actions used to address the highly ranked
step may cover some of the lesser ranked steps with little
additional cost.
6.F. Selection of appropriate quality management
tools

Several quality management options exist to address an
identified weakness but not all tools for QM are equally
effective in preventing failures. For the quality assurance and
quality control activities, the Institute for Safe Medical Practices (ISMP) ranked possible QM activities by effectiveness
classes. While the original list addresses mostly medication

4225

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4225

T III. Ranking of QM tools based on the effectiveness with examples, in part following the suggestions of
ISMP (Ref. 67). The lower numbers are the most effective.
1. Forcing functions and constraints
5. Rules and policies
• Interlock
• Priority
• Barriers
• Establishing/clarify communication line
• Computerized order entry with feedback • Staffing
• Better scheduling
2. Automation and computerization
• Mandatory pauses
• Bar codes
• Repair
• Automated monitoring
• PMI (preventive maintenance inspection)
• Computerized verification
• Establish and perform QC and QA (hardware and software)
• Computerized order entry
6. Education and information
3. Protocols, standards, and information
• Training
• Check-off forms
• Experience
• Establishing protocol/clarify protocol
• Instruction
• Alarms
• Labels
• Signs
• Reduce similarity
4. Independent double check systems and
other redundancies
• Redundant measurement
• Independent review
• Operational checks
• Comparison with standards
• Increase monitoring
• Add status check
• Acceptance test

errors, Table III gives their listings in a more general form
with examples that might apply to radiation therapy treatment
processes. In the table, the lowest numbers indicate the
strongest tools. The greatest efficacy lies in forcing functions,
such as interlocks and physical barriers that prevent actions
inconsistent with the goals of a process. Automation, for
example, can eliminate errors due to transcription or entry
of out-of-range values in preparing a plan for treatment.
These methods illustrate that the most effective mechanism for
preventing a failure is to redesign machine-operator interfaces
to eliminate situations where the failure could occur. However,
implementation of forcing functions is often not possible or
practical in individual clinics because equipment used to treat
patients is not designed to incorporate every possible forcing
function or automation to prevent incorrect treatment planning
and delivery. A more feasible alternative is to redesign and
simplify procedures, eliminate unnecessary steps, and clarify
communication, thereby eliminating the potential for entire
classes of errors. Part of a redesign includes correcting deficiencies in the environment, such as improvements in lighting
or reduction in the background noise levels. Independent
review of proposed standardized procedures by an experienced
colleague from another institution also constitutes a valuable
part of the design process. Following a redesign, updating the
FMEA becomes necessary since the new process could create
some new unexpected hazards.
The strategies discussed above can be viewed in the context
of Table III which is based on the suggestions of the ISMP.67
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

It should be noted that education, while at the bottom of the
list in Table III, is essential for correct planning and execution
of procedures. However, even with the best training, humans
fail, and relying on education to prevent all failures proves
less effective than the more highly ranked tools. Redundancy,
independent checks, and operational checks (periodic QA)
fall in the middle of the list yet serve important functions
in radiotherapy QM. When possible, the most effective tools
should be used, but resources and practicality often lead to
tools from later in the table. Used judiciously, any of the
tools provide value in controlling quality and preventing the
propagation of failures.
After performing a process for some time, re-evaluation of
the process itself provides a refined picture of the effectiveness
of the quality measures instituted and identifies new hazardous
steps. Input for the re-evaluation comes principally from three
sources:
• Records of events, failures, and near events. Establishing
a reporting system and database for events and capturing information from root-cause analyses can add aposteriori statistical data to the a-priori estimates used
by FMEA.68 Such data can also uncover problems either
not recognized during the FMEA or created by the
quality program. Reports of events focus not on potential
failures but failures that happened, giving much more
power to actions established to prevent future failures.
Near event reports prove extremely valuable. During

4226

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

near events, failures occurred but some actions prevented
the failures from compromising the patient’s treatment.
The actions that saved the situation from affecting the
patient give insights into what actions might be effective in intercepting failures in future cases. Reporting
systems also can be open to receiving information on
hazardous situations noted by the staff before developing
into failures. All three types of information can assist in
refining the quality management program.
• Quality audits. A quality audit consists of having
knowledgeable people such as IROC-Houston or accrediting bodies such as American College of Radiation
Oncology (ACRO), American College of Radiology
(ACR), and ASTRO that accredit radiation oncology
programs review the program (internal audits use people
from the facility, while less frequent external audits use
people from outside). The audits include a “product”
audit, which in a medical setting would consist of
reviewing cases and assessing whether all patients’
care was appropriate and complete, and a process audit
that reviews the standardized procedures and evaluates
whether they function well in the setting. The audits
might also include measurements, either on site or
performed remotely, to assess the accuracy of treatment
unit calibration or other operating parameters.
• Quality improvement. The information from the event
database, the audits and the QA and QC procedures,
serve as input for quality improvement, QI. QI identifies
parts of the quality program that need changes or
enhancement and parts of the process that would benefit
from redesign.
Appendix A provides practical guidelines to assist the
community in implementing the techniques discussed in this
report in a reasonably consistent manner. Appendix B has been
designed and formatted for educational and training purposes.
As such, it is to some extent, self-contained and could be
distributed to graduate students, residents, and colleagues who
wish to be introduced to the practicalities of the techniques.
Section 9 provides an extended example of the risk analysis
methodology described above, designing a comprehensive
QM program for the IMRT treatment process. Since many
institutions offer IMRT, TG 100 hopes that readers will find
this guidance helpful in performing their own risk analyses for
improving the quality and safety of their own IMRT planning
and delivery processes.

7. COMPARISON WITH PREVIOUS WORK
Quality embodies the notion of freedom from harm to
the patient. Prior to and during the period of TG 100’s
deliberations, several publications relevant to the present work
have appeared or are in press. These can be grouped into
those that address quality assurance from a perspective more
familiar to the medical physicist and those which focus on
safety issues in radiation therapy. The former approach has
tended to be device centric while the latter has been biased
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4226

towards the failure of processes. The work of TG 100 can
be seen as being positioned, and to some extent bridging,
between these two groups.
The most up-to-date document on traditional quality
assurance approaches to radiation therapy is the AAPM’s Task
Group 142 report.1 This recently published report has been
developed from the well-known TG-40 document and other
international publications.38,39 In keeping with the approach
of these predecessor documents, TG-142 recommends specific
tests, their tolerances, and frequencies. TG-142 has expanded
on TG-40 through the inclusion of newer technologies and
techniques such as multileaf collimators and IMRT. The
menu-driven approach of TG-142, in which different tolerances and frequencies are recommended for different clinical
activities, e.g., 3D CRT vs IMRT vs stereotactic radiation
therapy, is a welcome innovation. TG-142 acknowledges the
resource implications of their proposed quality assurance
program but recommends that it be adopted until methods such
as those described by TG 100 supersede the TG-142 report.1
Other prescriptive and/or process specific QA documents that
have been published are the reports of TG 148,69 TG 135,70
TG 101,71 and ASTRO white papers.72–76
The alternative and complementary viewpoint is to define
quality as achievement of the goals of the therapy. This is
the perspective adopted by TG 100. The previously published
work closest to that described in this document is that by
Ford and colleagues9 who have performed a failure modes
and effects analysis for the external beam radiation therapy
service in a radiation oncology setting at Johns Hopkins
University. Their effort started with a process map, with 269
different nodes, that was developed by a multidisciplinary
team including medical, scientific, nursing, and technical staff
whose activities impact patient care. Their FMEA scoring
system for O, S, and D was slightly different from that adopted
by TG 100, Table II, although a range from 1 to 10 was used for
each of these quantities. In their work, they found 159 potential
failure modes. The highest risk priority number this group
estimated for any failure mode was 160, considerably lower
than the highest found by TG 100. Ford et al. have provided
examples of how selected failure modes can be used to
improve processes, to reduce O, and enhance quality control,
to reduce D. The paper contains a useful discussion section
describing, amongst other things, the authors’ experience with
conducting a comprehensive FMEA. Other works consistent
with the TG-100 philosophy dealing with RT applications
have been reported in the literature.10–12,14–30
Quality in radiation therapy from a more qualitative
perspective than that of TG 100 has been the subject of
several additional recent publications. A consortium of UK
professional bodies together with the National Patient Safety
Agency has developed a document entitled “Towards Safer
Radiotherapy.”42 The consortium’s approach was to develop
a set of 37 generic recommendations through consensus
of expert opinion. Interestingly, both TG 100, through
the examination of postulated failure modes in the IMRT
process, and the UK document, through a more qualitative
consensus, arrived at similar conclusions regarding high risk
failure modes and causes and proposed similar, specific

4227

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

quality management interventions for addressing them. To
prevent failures in radiation therapy in general (and IMRT
in particular), a QM program should have elements that TG
100 refers to as key core requirements for quality. These core
requirements are:
• Standardized procedures.
• Adequate staff, physical, and IT resources.
• Adequate training of staff.
• Maintenance of hardware and software resources.
• Clear lines of communication among staff.
As pointed out above, safety is a subset of and a
prerequisite for quality. It is therefore not surprising that
the recommendations coming out of the UK group, although
aimed particularly at safety, would, if adopted, concurrently
enhance both the quality and the safety of a clinical radiation
therapy operation.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has recently
published its “Radiotherapy Risk Profile,”43 based on an
evaluation of reported actual and near event radiation therapy
incidents across the globe. From this assessment, the authors
of the WHO document have developed a prioritized list
of interventions and safety processes. Again there is much
overlap between the WHO list and the quality management
steps identified in the TG-100 report. A particularly prominent

4227

strategy in the WHO list is a planning protocol checklist.
And recently, AAPM published a Medical Physics Practice
Guideline to facilitate the development of checklists for
clinical processes.77 TG 100 agrees with both the WHO
document and the MPPG’s general guidance for constructing
checklists. Tables IV–VIII are items that the TG-100 FMEA
analysis indicates should be included in checklists for
particular activities in the IMRT radiation therapy process.
Thus, the contrast between the WHO document and this
report is the focus on specific process steps and failure modes
by TG 100 as compared to the more generic recommendations
of the UK group and WHO group. For information on the
design and effective use of checklists, see Fong de Los Santos
et al.77
Finally, two additional relevant documents are “Preventing
accidental exposures from new external beam radiation therapy technologies” published by the International Commission
on Radiological Protection (ICRP 112)44 and Safety is No
Accident by ASTRO.78 Although ICRP 112 is focused on
new technologies, many of its observations and recommendations are applicable to current technologies. The ICRP 112
examines, in some detail, 11 radiation therapy incidents, many
of which are familiar through the popular media, professional
and scientific publications. Through an analysis similar to root
cause analyses, the authors identified important generalizable

T IV. Example checklist for standardized, site-specific protocol for workup of patient prior to IMRT treatment planning. Example content of a set of
standardized, site-specific procedures that can serve as basis for QM checks of simulation and other imaging used to build patient anatomy model, anatomy
contouring, treatment planning, and the initial planning directive subprocesses. The failure mode steps addressed [see Appendix C1 (Ref. 141), “FMEA by
Process”] are listed after each procedure.
Identify site, stage, histology, etc., and other pretreatment characteristics that define the indications for selecting this protocol. FMs of steps 4 and 14–16
Specify overall clinical treatment plan, including other RT (e.g., brachytherapy) and other treatments (chemotherapy, surgery)
Provide site-specific special clinical instructions (e.g., dental consult for head and neck cancer; implantation of fiducial markers). FMs of steps 13 and 17
Specify patient-specific requirements (pacemaker, contrast allergies, bladder/bowel prep, etc.) FMs of steps 13 and 17
Investigate previous radiation treatment history. FMs of steps 3 and 48
Specify additional required imaging procedures (e.g., MR, PET, 4D CT), with sufficient detail that desired image set can be performed or identified
unambiguously. FMs steps 25–31
Specify simulation instructions: Position, immobilization used, nominal isocenter position, top and bottom of scanning region, and special instructions
(contrast, voiding, fasting, etc.). Note deviations from standard. FMs steps 4–7 and 11–174
Specify procedures for performing multi and unimodality image registration (e.g., primary and secondary image sets, automated or manual registration, and
registration landmarks). FMs steps 25–29, 42, 43, and 57
Specify nomenclature and procedures to be used (RTP contour colors and names) and segmentation procedures. FMs steps 62, 66–69, and 80–86
Provide standard nomenclature and procedures for OAR and targets (e.g., CTV1 = 1 cm expansion of GTV1 and CTV2 = electively treated lymph nodes). FMs
steps 62, 66–69, and 80–86
Specify who (dosimetrists, attending physician, resident physician) is responsible for contouring each structure
1. Special instructions for segmenting GTVs and CTVs, avoidance structures for optimization, OAR for evaluation
Specify uncertainty management techniques, (e.g., IGRT motion management). FMs steps 63–65
Specify PTV margins for all target structures. FMs steps 63–65
Specify total prescribed dose and time-dose-fractionation schedule intended for each of the CTVs to be treated
Specify IMRT class solution (field arrangements, energies, additional avoidance structures, etc.) FMs steps 89–104
Starting planning/optimization constraints and goals (e.g., DVH metrics for optimization) FMs steps 89–104
Specify plan evaluation metrics (e.g., graphic isodoses, DVHs) for targets, OAR, overall distribution. FMs step 127

Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4228

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4228

T V. Example checklist for preparation of patient data set for treatment planning suggested by failure modes
in steps 18–21, 34, 45, 37, and 49–79 of Appendix C1 (Ref. 141).
Image datasets input into the planning process are checked for correct dataset choice (correct study of the correct
patient), documentation, quality, etc.
Documentation of isocenter coordinates, measurements, patient positioning, etc. from the simulator is provided
Images verified for correct orientation
For image registration cases: Primary and secondary datasets (for registration) selected, achieved registration
accuracy noted
Deviations or compromises in the registration are noted
Organs at risk are contoured according to departmental guidelines
Correctness of all 3-D representations (voxel descriptions, surfaces, etc.) is verified
Expansion of GTV to CTV follows site-specific protocols; automated margins worked correctly; variations noted
Expansion of CTV to PTV follows site-specific protocol; automated margins worked properly; variations noted
Boolean structure checks: Input to structures checked, regions created visually reviewed
Image artifacts (e.g., contrast, metal) corrected per department protocols
Patient support devices (e.g., immobilization, skin markers, couches) are correctly included or excluded
Treatment planning instructions are clear and unambiguous
Preliminary prescription written
Optimization goals and limits are specified, and applicable departmental or other protocols are used
Special instructions are written as in the department policy
Initial directive includes statement of previous treatment, review of previous treatments requested; the
prescription accounts for any previous treatments

“lessons learned” and made a series of recommendations
to enhance the safety of radiotherapy. Similar to the UK
and WHO reports, the major structural and environmental
contributing causes of system failure included documentation,
training, and communication. A notable feature of the ICRP
report is a chapter on “Prospective Approaches to Avoiding
Accidental Exposures.” The work of TG 100, of course,
focuses exactly on such approaches. The UK document also
recommends undertaking a risk assessment when a new or
changed treatment technique of process is to be introduced.
The document “Safety is No Accident”78 was designed
to address the specific requirements of a contemporary
radiation oncology facility in terms of structure, personnel,
and technical process in order to ensure a safe environment
for the delivery of radiation therapy.
Complementary to these generic approaches to enhancing
quality and safety there is also literature reflecting specifically
the physician perspective.79
As noted above, there are common themes running through
many if not all of the recent publications42–44 on safety and
quality in radiotherapy. These include training, documentation, communication, and both reactive and prospective
approaches to error management. If we accept these as
prerequisites for a state of the art clinical QM program,
then we need to provide staff with the tools to put them
in place. We should no longer assume that we can all
write clear and unambiguous documentation or that we
are effective and committed communicators or that we can
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

perform risk assessments that benefit the quality and safety
of care. These prerequisites, identified in this document and
those referenced above, need to be incorporated in training
programs for all radiation oncology disciplines as recognition
of their significance as components of a culture of quality and
safety.

8. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR APPLYING RISK
ANALYSES IN RADIATION THERAPY
Implementation of risk-based quality management methodology in radiation therapy recommended by TG 100 will
seem daunting to many. The members of TG 100 had to climb
a significant learning curve during this project. However,
once the basic principles are understood and the process
is completed for one clinical area or process, development
of risk-based QM programs for other clinical applications
becomes significantly more efficient.
8.A. To individual clinics

Dedicating time for a diverse group to learn and put
together an initial risk-based QM program is a significant
resource commitment. However, development of a QM
program without a sound multidisciplinary understanding of
the entire clinical process can lead to an ineffective and/or
inefficient QM program.

4229

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4229

T VI. Example checklist for physics check of treatment plan suggested by FMEA failure modes of steps 81–173, Appendix C1 (Ref. 141).
Dose prescription and planning constraints used for planning/optimization are consistent with site-specific protocol (example checklist 1) or with plan directive
Correct selection of ROIs: Correct use of overlapping and non-overlapping structures in optimization; best choices of beam energies and modalities have been
made
Doses from previous treatments were accounted for in the plan
Optimization goals were achieved or failure understood, discussed with the radiation oncologist and acknowledged  Yes

 No

Dose calculation algorithm and density correction (algorithm, on/off) are correctly chosen
Dose distribution is reasonable for the plan and anatomy
1. PTV coverage consistent with initial planning directive or site-specific protocol (example checklist 1) or deviations discussed with the physician(s)
and formally accepted
 Yes  No
2. The doses to OARs within tolerances (as specified by site-specific protocol) or deviations reviewed with physician(s) and formally accepted
 Yes  No
Plan agrees qualitatively with experience in similar cases
Overall plan includes separate boost or concomitant boost doses per prescription.
Plan accounts for specified immobilization, localization, and positioning methods
Verify documentation of use of bolus, type, and location
Verify that beams are deliverable
1. Deliverable MLC patterns used in the final plan; leaf-sequencing parameters correct
2. Monitor units within deliverable ranges
The plan prescription and treatment plan information have been downloaded to the correct course in the delivery system database
4D plan remains within the reliability limits of the system

• It is recommended that each clinic’s radiation therapy
delivery team, consisting of radiation oncologists, medical physicists, dosimetrists, therapists, nurses, engineers, and IT personnel as appropriate, develop a
comprehensive risk-aware QM program for all clinical
processes, especially in the analysis of steps that are
related to their clinical duties and to the procedure as a

whole. The Task Group recognizes that this would occur
over time and would require additional education and
culture changes in many clinics.
• Once a facility commits to implementing the QM
program as described in this report, it is recommended that they start with small projects to build
experience with the tools, establish communication

T VII. Example checklist for Day 1 QM measures prior to treatment-as suggested by failure modes in steps 174–193, Appendix C1 (Ref. 141).
Patient and treatment plan to be used are identified correctly using two forms of identification check and time-out procedure
The prescription is complete, signed, and unambiguous, both in the chart and treatment delivery system
The delivery system has the correct version of the plan for the correct patient
All treatment parameters are correct in the delivery system computer or paper chart; transmission factors for accessories accounted for per department policy
An independent physics check of the plan has been performed and acceptance criteria satisfied per department policy
Patient set-up is clearly specified in the electronic and/or paper record
All immobilization, positioning, or motion management used are used correctly
Planned shifts from simulation marks made correctly
Other set-up instructions, such as bladder filling and bolus, are correctly documented and followed
Other set-up specifications are noted in the computer and paper records
The order of fields in the delivery system computer, and freedom (or not) to allow automated delivery is handled as required by department policy or machine
limitations
The localization images or other image guidance parameters obtained during setup match the planned images or values within the tolerances (from site-specific
protocol)
Localization images and final localization information checked and approved by the physician
Shifts from this imaging are carried out and clearly recorded

Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4230

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4230

T VIII. Example checklist for dosimetric and treatment delivery chart checks for IMRT patients suggested by the FMEA for Day N steps, Appendix C1
(Ref. 141). These items, at least, should be checked regularly during the patient treatment course. For standard fractionation (1.8–2 Gy/fraction, for 5–6 weeks
of treatment), weekly checks are typically necessary. For compressed treatment schedules, these checks must happen more often; for short courses, checking
before each treatment might be necessary. The checks required are as follows.
Confirm that the patient delivery script information or files are unchanged through the course of treatment, unless planned changes are implemented
If changes are requested, confirm that they were correctly implemented, and are reasonable and justified to satisfy the overall prescription for the treatment
Verify that all treatments are correctly documented and recorded
Comparison of dose to date with the prescription and planned end of treatment
Review of treatment delivery system interlocks, overrides and problems, determination of the reason for these problems, and analysis of the need for
corrections or other responses
For standard fractionation: Patient’s weight (therapist or nurse)
Review of recorded patient setup position, positioning shifts, image guidance decisions, and review of table position overrides and other indicators of shifted
position
Use of all noninterlocked accessories (blocks, compensators, bolus, etc.) correctly documented on a daily basis

patterns with the QM team, and gain confidence.
Working through a facility’s procedures in a series
of small projects avoids feeling overwhelmed and the
discouragement of having the project drag on for a long
time.
• Many QM measures indicated by the risk-based analysis
will enhance, not deviate from, safe practice. These
may change workloads, processes, and thus require
convincing and educating personnel. Examples include
developing written procedures and educating staff to
follow them, and implementing “contouring rounds”
for physicians. For a major change, such as drastic
changes in machine QA schedules, the TG advises
extreme caution. Any differences in the quality assurance program between what comes from the TG-100
methodology and the conventional QA as recommended
by task group reports or other guidance documents
that would lead to deletion of QA steps needs to
be very carefully considered and supported, and discussed with experts familiar with both the conventional QA and the TG-100 methodology. Compliance
with regulation must be maintained regardless of any
analysis.
• Start with a small project. Doing so serves several
purposes.
First, it gives an opportunity to become accustomed
to the techniques on a manageable scale.
⃝ Second, a small project has a higher chance of
being completed while all involved are enthusiastic, and a successful completion of the first
project will engender greater support for future
projects.
⃝ Third, a small beginning project can provide experience that can help select subsequent projects. For
many facilities, there never has to be a large project,
just a series of small projects.
⃝ Fourth, processes are dynamic, changing over time.
Over the duration of a large project the process under
review may change.
⃝

Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

• Critical facets of treatment should have redundancy.
Redundancy gives protection against errors creeping into
one of the systems.
• Risk-based QM is likely used in other parts of a hospital
or clinic. The quality department may be able to provide
assistance with early projects.
The AAPM recognizes that development and adoption of
risk-based, individualized QM programs would be a significant paradigm shift and that large-scale implementation is a
long term process that will require close cooperation among
individual physicists and physicians; healthcare managers
and executives; societies such as ASTRO, AAPM, ACR,
and ACRO, SROA, and regulators. As a first step towards
implementation, the Task Group recommends that representative personnel (radiation oncologist, physicist, therapist, etc.)
undergo training and orientation either from their own riskmanagement department or at one of the sponsored workshops, e.g., modeled after the aforementioned 2013 AAPM
Summer School. As indicated in our second recommendation,
working through FMEA and FTA analyses of a small-scale,
limited clinical process is the next logical step. The AAPM
also recognizes that large-scale implementation requires the
AAPM and other organizations to successfully act on the
recommendations presented in Sec. 8.B.
Testing of effectiveness of the QM program can be
accomplished in various ways. One way is for a clinic to
form an FMEA committee and have the committee review
information on failures in their own institution to estimate
values for O and D. After putting in place some of the
QM initiatives suggested by their FMEA/FTA, the FMEA
committee analyzes the data in their incident reporting
database for a certain length of time (for example, for a
year) for observable changes or occurrences of new incidents.
Are there observable changes? Results of such an analysis
will yield valuable information about the effectiveness of the
implemented QM program.
The above recommendations would be an ultimate application of the recommendations presented in this report.

4231

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

Practically, there will be two distinct considerations—one
for the existing and established clinical procedures and a
second one for the new technologies and associated clinical
procedures that are introduced into the clinic. We expect this
report to provide the foundation with respect to the approach
and definitions. Analysis of existing clinical practices may
identify safety gaps and inefficiencies in current resource or
effort allocations. For new technologies, the initial FMEA
and QM program will have to be based on limited experience
and will probably undergo more frequent revisions and be
periodically updated. But all processes can benefit from
systematic analysis and redesign and eventually, all clinical
procedures should go through an FMEA to optimize the design
of the associated QM procedures.
IMRT is high-risk, high severity, and resource-intensive
and the example in Sec. 9 of this report provides a valuable
learning tool and an opportunity to decrease the initial inhouse effort. An initial step for small clinics could be to adapt
the TG-100 FMEA and FTA for IMRT to the local clinical
process. The basic premise behind the recommendations of
this task group is that FMEA, and a subsequently developed
QM program will allow better utilization of clinical resources,
thus rewarding the initial time investment. This is an essential
point to note when approaching individual clinical groups and
organizing the analysis process. Other procedures appropriate
for early application of the risk-based methods will vary by
individual institutions, but eventual analyses of all procedures
and clinical areas are a desirable goal.
• It is recommended that the scheduling priority for riskbased effort should be given to high-risk procedures,
high severity procedures, new procedures, and those that
are resource intensive.
Modern radiation oncology practices are dynamic environments where upgrading of current technologies or installation
of new technologies is a continuous process. The only way
to maintain a highly effective and efficient QM program is
through continuous process analysis, redesign, and resource
allocation. Regardless of the approach taken, maintaining
and modifying the QM process and resource allocation is an
enormous effort. FMEA is an approach that uses logic rather
than brute force. Ultimately, individual institutions will have
to determine the frequency of FMEA reanalysis and process
readjustments for particular clinical processes, in an ongoing
effort.
• It is recommended that the risk-based methodology be
adopted as an ongoing activity aimed toward continuous
process improvement.
Both the complexities of the QM program and the available
resources for risk-based QM will vary with the individual
institution’s clinical activity, methods, expertise, and size.
This relationship is not linear since the basic analysis has
to be performed regardless of an institution’s size, so there
may be hesitation to embark on development of a risk-based
approach in smaller clinics with fewer staff. At least one aspect
of the problem is easier for a small clinic, since individual
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4231

staff members know more about the overall process. However,
smaller clinics can potentially realize the greatest benefit from
the improved allocation of their resources that can result from
understanding their clinical process limitations.
Some hospitals have industrial engineers and safety experts
on staff in the quality improvement department, and these can
also be a great resource when first undertaking an analysis
of an individual department or process. Qualified outside
consultants can provide valuable guidance and insight into this
process, as well as independence from the current situation.
These consultants typically do not have an understanding of
radiation oncology clinical processes but they have knowledge
and expertise in system design and process analysis.
• It is recommended that qualified outside resources be
used whenever available for development of risk-based
QM.
8.B. To AAPM and other organizations

• It is recommended that future AAPM task groups
dealing with QM integrate as appropriate the risk-based
techniques. This could include risk-based analyses of
important clinical processes as the basis of their generic
or clinic-specific QM recommendations regarding radiation therapy procedures and technologies.
Such analyses will be valuable tools in guiding clinical
practitioners toward efficient and effective adoption of new
technology. The graphical and tabular presentation formats
used within the FMEA process lend themselves to effective communication methods for organization of procedures
and technological considerations, and will help facilitate
understanding and earlier adoption of the relevant QM
recommendations. The task group recommends that:
• The AAPM establish a website with model process maps,
FMEAs, FTAs, and the resultant quality management
program for various procedures as those analyses are
developed. The AAPM should also develop web based
training tools to train the medical physics community
on an ongoing basis on use of the newly developed
process maps, FMEAs, FTAs, and the resultant quality
management program for various procedures.
• The AAPM should establish a task group which will draft
guidelines for selecting RPN value thresholds.
To assist the community in adoption of these techniques, the
task group recommends that:
• The AAPM establish a working group to help guide the
community during the transition to risk-based QM.
• The AAPM should reach out to our sister societies to
establish joint working groups to coordinate efforts in
familiarizing the community with risk-based QM.
• The AAPM provide speakers knowledgeable and experienced in the risk analysis techniques to chapter meetings,
at the annual meeting of the Association and, where
appropriate, to meetings of our sister societies.

4232

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

• The AAPM should generate a document for regulators
giving guidance for evaluating quality management
programs in radiotherapy facilities. This document
should be written by a panel including members of TG
100 and the Conference of Radiation Control Program
Directors (CRCPD).
• The AAPM should give in-depth educational presentations on the new methodology for regulators at meetings
of the CRCPD and of the Organization of Agreement
States.
• The AAPM should discuss with the American Board of
Radiology how patient safety and quality in medicine
could be incorporated into the Maintenance of Certificate program.
Additionally,
• The AAPM should establish a repository on its website
for sample quality management programs that regulators
could use to become familiar with what such programs
would look like.
8.C. Future research and development

The experience of TG 100 in applying FMEA and FTA
to a generic model of the IMRT process flow has highlighted
the need for additional scientific research, engineering innovation, clinical studies, and additional guidance by advisory
organizations such as the AAPM and ASTRO. Areas requiring
further investigation and development are highlighted below.
8.C.1. Assessment of FMEA/FTA generality and
optimal implementation in individual clinics

A major issue for the practical implementation of the TG100 recommendations is the extent to which an individual
clinic can benefit from the specific process tree, FMEA,
and fault-tree analyses reported in this document without
having to formulate process trees and downstream analyses for
their specific clinical program and applications. The TG-100
results can be helpful in shaping the general emphasis of an
institution-specific QM program. First, the TG-100 analysis
provides a concrete demonstration of how to supplement the
TG-40 and TG-142 device-centered QA approach with a more
comprehensive and process-centered approach that considers
the interactions between the network of devices, staff, and
processes that are required to perform radiation therapy.80
The TG-100 analysis also provides specific guidance as
to where in the radiation therapy planning and delivery
processes the highest risk events (in terms of potential for high
severity and undetected scenarios to be propagated through
treatment delivery) are located. Many of these high risk
events involve erroneous specification of process inputs that
are essential for driving the downstream planning process.
These include physician-related failures such as selection of
the wrong imaging study for delineating anatomy, incorrect
image interpretation, grossly erroneous CTV delineation, and
erroneous treatment directives, and also more directly physics
related failures such as poor commissioning of the planning
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4232

system or equipment, incorrect use of Boolean structures,
incorrect interpretation of previous treatment doses. On the
other hand, application of an exact duplication of TG-100
risk analysis at the institutional level should be avoided
or made with much caution because the specific TG-100
prioritization of risk scenarios may not apply to that clinic.
The risk of occurrence (O) of “Transfer images and other
DICOM Data,” which depends heavily on the interface
between imaging and planning software and processes such as
software that requires user selection of files and destinations
and has few automated consistency and completeness checks,
can result in different kinds and rates of error than more
automated software interfaces. In using TG-100 risk scenario
prioritizations, the reader should also bear in mind the
important limitation that the input for populating process trees
and the FMEA analysis was provided primarily by medical
physicists (the authors of this report) resulting in a reasonable
FMEA. Had equivalent input from radiation oncologists,
dosimetrists, therapists, and nurses been included, additional
error pathways and different risk evaluations may have been
identified. Ford et al.,9 who recently reported on one of the
first radiation therapy FMEAs concluded that involving the
entire radiation therapy delivery team in the time consuming
analysis process yielded many benefits above and beyond the
FMEA, including improved team cohesiveness and safety
consciousness, established open lines of communication, a
shared awareness of system weaknesses and strengths, and
numerous suggestions for improving process flow. As is often
the case with commissioning and acceptance testing, benefit
derives from taking the journey together rather than arriving
at the destination from different directions.
Further research is needed to evaluate what combination
of customized, institution-specific analyses and applications
of generic risk analyses provides the most cost-effective
approach to engineering safe and robust radiation therapy
processes. It is recommended that:
• The AAPM, in collaboration with other organizations,
organizes and funds a series of process-design demonstrations, each of which involves leading a selected
clinical practice, such as SBRT, through the processes
of risk assessment and QM system design under the
guidance of project trainers. By identifying differences
and similarities from the various clinical practices, the
appropriate balance between generic and customized
analysis could be identified.
8.C.2. Sensitivity, error propagation, and process
control studies

The major focus of TG 100 is improving patient safety
and the quality of treatments, with concentration on the
causes of failure modes and the detection and mitigation
of failure modes, which, if propagated through the clinical
process, could result in the inappropriate delivery of a
therapeutic dose of radiation that could cause harm to the
patient. With a few exceptions,81–83 this approach differs
significantly from previous AAPM task group reports that

4233

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

focus mostly on QA tests of devices and planning systems
to ensure they achieve and maintain acceptable accuracy in
the planning and administration of radiation therapy. From
the TG-100 perspective, device-centered QA protocols are
essential measures for preventing random device failures
and/or systematic device misunderstandings from propagating through the system. FMEA and FTA techniques are
applicable to dose delivery errors that have the capability
of compromising patient outcomes on a statistical basis.
Some of the results presented in Sec. 9 provide a simplified
model for rationally assigning device test frequencies or
action thresholds, although this model requires much new
data and analysis and a better understanding of how device
performance influences dose delivery accuracy. The detailed
understanding of how to utilize this information may be
improved by use of evaluation tools like “confidence-weighted
dose distributions”84 and equivalent uniform dose (EUD) as
a surrogate for assessing sensitivity of clinical outcomes to
setup and device performance uncertainties.85,86 Additional
experience applying this approach to a broader array of device
performance endpoints and clinical cases is needed.
Another dimension of the problem is determining action
levels and test frequencies when the various device parameters to be controlled exhibit both random fluctuations and
underlying time trends or systematic problems. Examples
that have been studied include IMRT plan verification by
means of isocenter dose measurements in a hybrid phantom87
and daily Linac output measurements.88 The goal of QM
test development is to devise a protocol that controls the
target parameter within the limits specified by the appropriate sensitivity study with minimum effort, e.g., repeated
output measurements and interventions such as changing the
Linac monitor chamber sensitivity. Statistical process control
techniques89,90 can be helpful in identifying underlying trends
(systematic offsets) in settings where the QA measurements
have random fluctuations comparable to the desired clinical
performance level so that action levels for intervening in the
process can be set rationally. More conventional statistical
modeling approaches89 can be used to estimate both QA test
sampling intervals and action levels needed to reduce the
probability of a device failure, e.g., reduce to an acceptable
level the probability that systematic drift in calibration would
result in a dose delivery error exceeding some predetermined
value. An even more difficult challenge is to apply these
kinds of process control techniques to nondevice procedural
problems and behavior.
More research is needed in these areas, including collection
of more data documenting the statistical profile of device performance characteristics; more systematic sensitivity
studies; and the development of standardized approaches to
defining device performance tolerances, action levels, and
sampling frequencies.
8.C.3. Observational studies and risk analysis
validation

In contrast to many industrial applications of FMEA and
FTA, a major limitation of the efforts of TG 100 and others91,92
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4233

to apply risk analysis techniques to radiation therapy processes
is the lack of measured data on occurrence and detection
probabilities. All of these studies are forced to rely upon
expert consensus opinion to subjectively estimate the required
probability data. While several studies report overall error
rates in radiation therapy93,94 using a variety of data collection
methodologies and error taxonomies, few studies address error
and detection rates of common component subtasks of the
radiotherapy process. Barthelemy-Brichant95 reported an error
rate of 0.46% in transcribing field setup parameters from paper
records into a treatment unit’s computer system. Fraass et al.96
reported error rates for many of the components involved in
the treatment delivery process both for manual and computercontrolled delivery methods. Studies addressing error rates
and underlying causes of common planning and delivery
subtasks would be of great value in reducing the subjectivity
characteristic of currently available radiotherapy risk analyses.
• TG 100 recognizes that designers and manufacturers of
treatment planning systems, treatment delivery systems,
and other devices used in radiation therapy perform
extensive pre-release risk analysis of their product with
regard to its robustness and mechanical, electrical and
dosimetric reliability. It is further recommended that they
undertake a similar approach to testing and improving
the clinical usability of their products, perhaps in
collaboration with beta test sites to determine the
error rates and underlying causes of failure modes in
common planning and delivery subtasks and make these
studies available to the radiation oncology community.
Where appropriate, the manufacturers might want to use
the TG-100 definitions in performing their FMEA/FTA
analysis.
• It is also recommended that the radiation oncology
community gather data for occurrences and detectability
for various clinical processes in a systematic approach
so that models can be developed for them.
Eventually, validation of the benefit of using a riskbased QM approach should be performed at the local clinic.
Probabilistic risk analysis is one method that can be used to
semiquantitatively validate risk analyses based on subjectively
estimated component error rates. An example of this type of
effort is the study of Ekaette et al.,97 who developed a fault-tree
analysis of their clinic’s radiation therapy delivery process,
populated the fault tree with probabilities solicited from expert
reviewers, and compared the overall rate of treatment delivery
errors predicted by the probabilistic fault tree analysis (0.4%)
with the observed error rate (0.1%–0.7%).
8.C.4. Incident reporting and taxonomic analyses

As noted above, there is little hard observational data
available for populating FMEAs or FTAs with occurrence
and detection probabilities. Most radiotherapy risk analyses
are prospective models of planning and delivery based on
the experience, expert knowledge, and expectations of the
treatment team members who participate in the analyses.
The major connections between prospectively constructed

4234

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

risk analyses and empirical reality are observed error rates,
near events, and reports of large/catastrophic incidents.
Medical error taxonomies, of which two have been developed
specifically for radiation therapy,68,98 are intended primarily
to support root cause analysis. However, with the advent of
prospective approaches to quality and safety as discussed
in this document, there is an opportunity to explore the
possibility of informing FMEA and FTA using actual clinical
data.
• During the writing of the TG-100 report the Work
Group on Prevention of Errors in Radiation Oncology of
the AAPM published a document50 entitled “Consensus
recommendations for incident learning database structures in radiation oncology.” The group has provided
consensus recommendations in five key areas: definitions, process maps, severity scales, causality taxonomy,
and data elements. For consistency, the terminology
and data elements comprising these recommendations
should be examined for applicability to prospective
quality management strategies.
• The experience of the airline industry99 demonstrates
the value of comprehensive adverse-event reporting and
root-cause analysis as tools for improving system and
process safety. However, the utility of these tools extends
beyond just retrospective analysis. The European ROSIS
system,45 the ASTRO-AAPM initiated RO-ILS systems,55
and the Center for the Assessment of Radiological
Sciences’ Radiotherapy Incident Reporting and Analysis
System56 are all examples of databases in radiotherapy
that can be used to inform an FMEA.

9. EXAMPLE APPLICATION OF TG-100
METHODOLOGY TO IMRT
9.A. Introduction

To illustrate the application of the risk analysis methodologies described in Secs. 4–8 and to demonstrate its value
to clinical physicists, TG 100 performed the design, process
mapping, FMEA, and FTA of a generic, but clinically realistic
IMRT process. To get the most out of this exercise, it is
necessary to first read at least the Preface to the report and
preferably Secs. 4–6.
Section 9.B presents the methodology and results of
the FMEA and FTA analysis. Section 9.C and Appendixes
C1–C3 and E–G set out an example QM program derived
by consensus based on these results, Sec. 9.E and the
Appendix G summarize the resulting quality management
recommendations and summary and conclusions are given
in Sec. 9.F.141
The QM program consists of recommendations that
encompass the planning and delivery subprocesses. These
include clinical process changes, documentation, and training
requirements and culture changes as well as traditional
device- and process-oriented QA and QC checks. The
recommendations in this report are not to be viewed as
prescriptive practice guidelines or universally applicable
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4234

recommendations; this document cannot be used like TG-40,2
TG-142 (Ref. 1) and similar prescriptive guidance documents.
These recommendations, and the risk analyses upon which
they are based, are first and foremost pedagogic devices
intended to illustrate to the reader how to develop risk analyses
for their own clinical processes and how to use the results
for designing and formulating their own QM and decisionmaking processes for IMRT and other advanced-technology
treatment procedures. The operational recommendations of
this report may serve as a starting point for readers who would
like to adapt the TG-100 IMRT analysis to their own IMRT
clinical process without performing their own clinic-specific
FMEA and FTA from scratch. TG 100 emphasizes that the
operational recommendations presented in Secs.9.C and 9.E
and Appendix G (Ref. 141) are based on the prioritization of
risk of a generic IMRT process that represents the consensus
of ten senior physicists and one physician, and is limited to
the system vulnerabilities identified by this group. The TG
members sought input from other members of the IMRT team
from their respective clinics.
One limitation of the TG-100 analysis is that it is a physicsbased task group which included only one physician and
no dosimetrists, therapists, nurses, or administrative support
personnel. The TG has tried to include enough examples of
the methodology so that more inclusive groups can develop
QM based on FMEA and FTA for their department’s specific
processes and methods, but such groups should strive for
representative input from all involved institutional personnel.
It is notable that the analytical FMEA approach led TG 100
to propose many recommendations that are consistent with the
recommendations and checklists of the ASTRO white paper.72
As well, several FMEAs for large-scale radiation therapy
processes have been published. Among these, two are singleinstitution analyses,9,16 one is for a hospital network,15 one for
electron beam IORT.100 In common with the TG-100 analysis,
these emphasize that FMEA is a valuable tool although the
analysis requires dedication and a multidisciplinary team
approach. The TG-100 report also proposes that FMEA will be
helpful in identifying high-risk features as new technology is
introduced and several FMEAs dealing with specific radiation
therapy equipment have been published.11,101,102
9.B. TG-100 risk analysis of a generic IMRT clinical
process

In this section, the risk analysis of a generic IMRT process
is described. As previously explained, this consists of (1)
mapping the process (Sec. 9.B.1), failure modes and effects
analysis (Sec. 9.B.2), and (2) fault tree analysis (Sec. 9.B.3).
9.B.1. IMRT process mapping

Because IMRT as performed at each TG member’s
institution followed a unique pattern especially with respect to
the order in which steps were performed, specific equipment
used and staff responsibilities assigned, a specific example
process (based loosely on one institution’s process) was
selected. This choice is not an endorsement of that particular

4235

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4235

T IX. Identified steps and failure modes for example FMEA of IMRT.
Process number

Process description

No. of steps in process

No. of failure modes

1
2
3
4
5
6

Patient database information entered
Immobilization and positioning
CT simulation
Other pretreatment imaging
Transfer images and other DICOM data
Initial treatment planning directive
(from MD)
RTP anatomy contouring
Treatment planning
Plan approval
Plan preparation
Initial treatment (Day 1)
Subsequent treatments (Day N )

1
4
10
6
3
9

3
7
14
7
8
9

15
14
2
11
7
9

31
53
11
30
20
23

7
8
9
10
11
12

process although interestingly, the TG members ended up
agreeing on the overall QM guidelines that emerged. The
TG agreed that the twelve subprocesses listed in Table IX and
shown in Fig. 5 are the main branches of the IMRT process tree
that fall within the purview of therapeutic medical physicists.
Other branches, including “imaging and diagnosis” and
“consultation and decision to treat” are dominated by diagnostic radiology staff, physicians, or others and were considered to be outside the scope of the task group. Clinics

undertaking FMEA for IMRT are encouraged to examine their
own practices, although the TG-100 example may be general
enough to include the workflow in many clinics.
Because an important goal of the FMEA is to develop
the most effective QM program without assuming the use
of customary QM procedures, several familiar subprocesses
that are purely quality management steps were omitted from
the present FMEA. Omitted steps include pretreatment chart
checks, routine Linac and IMRT QA, physician review, and

F. 5. Process map for IMRT in the absence of any quality management. The black arrows show the normal flow of the process, proceeding from left to right
on the largest scale and from outward to inward within a given step. The red numbers indicate (hazard ranking) the most hazardous 20%–25% of the steps as
indicated by high risk priority number values. For example, a number of 8 next to a step indicates that that step is the 8th most hazardous step within the 20%
most risky categories. A step with several numbers indicates the ranking of that step within the top 20% most risky steps for different failure modes. Green
text denotes failure modes with S ≥ 8, regardless of whether they were in top 20% most risky categories. The colored arrows show the flow of information or
actual physical material between one subprocess and another. Specifically, the purple arrows show how immobilization and positioning impact on steps further
downstream; the light blue arrows show the downstream flow of anatomic information, the dark green the transfer of initial images. Green circles represent a
congregation of high severity steps. Red circles are drawn around those steps with a high concentration of identified hazardous steps. A red circle drawn around
a green circle indicates a congregation of steps that are both hazardous and severe. QM measures in the earlier step would prevent errors from entering the later
step.
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4236

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

weekly chart checks, since including those steps would bias
the results. The expectation is that those QA steps that were
truly necessary would find their way back into the QM
program as a result of the FMEA/FTA.
9.B.2. IMRT failure modes and effects analysis

To create the FMEA, the TG reached a consensus on the
steps within each subprocess and identified as many failure
modes for each step as they could imagine. Based on its
collective experience, the TG listed possible causes for each
failure mode and described clinical situations where they felt
the failure could occur. During the later analysis, additional
failure modes were discovered that were not initially included
in the FMEA. This is a common experience, and the TG
recommends that failure modes discovered later should simply
be added to the analysis and/or addressed at that time. The
FMEA serves as a tool toward improved safety and quality
and is not an end in itself.
A total of 216 FMs were eventually included in the analysis.
The distribution of these FMs between the different boughs of
the process tree (Fig. 5) is presented in Table IX. The entire
FMEA analysis is shown in Appendix C1 listed in order of
process, Appendix C2 listed in order of decreasing average
RPN, and Appendix C3 listed in order of decreasing severity
score (S, as defined in Sec. 5.B).141 The previously described
consensus nomenclature for severity (Table I) and scales for
occurrence, severity, and lack of detectability (Table II) were
used in the analysis. Details of the creation of the example
FMEA are described in Secs. 9.B.2.a–9.B.2.c.
9.B.2.a. Assignment of O, S, and D values. A spreadsheet
(Appendix C1)141 was created listing each process step, each
step’s FMs and the potential causes of failure associated
with each FM. O, S, and D values were then assigned for
the combination of each FM and its corresponding causes.
Initially, the TG worked through the FMs as a group,
attempting to determine O, S, and D values by consensus.
Given the diverse and geographically dispersed membership,
this was inefficient. Thus, the TG decided to work through the
spreadsheet independently, and then evaluate the consistency
with which O, S, D, and RPN (O × S × D) values were
determined. This was accomplished by nine members. Each
supplied an individual estimate of O, S, and D, for each
combination of FM and cause, based on their individual
experiences. The entire group discussed the evaluations and
then pooled them as described in Sec. 9.B.2.b. A similar
process of individual evaluation followed by group consensus
is described in relation to departmental FMEAs (Refs. 9,
15, and 16) where geographic separation was not an issue.
In general, the group average O, S, and D assignments
should not be applied without careful consideration of local
conditions.
As previously described, the FMEA was performed assuming no deliberate QA or QC measures, such as those
recommended by TG-40 for the entire radiation therapy
process or TG-142 for Linac QA. Thus estimates of O and
D were based entirely on checks that are inherent in routine
clinical processes downstream. Despite the lack of specific
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4236

QA and QC checks, there are opportunities to detect failures
such as faulty immobilization, which causes problems with
patient set-up at “Day 1” or “Day N” treatment, leading to a
medium value for lack of detectability D. On the other hand,
without conventional Linac QA, incorrect dose calibration
would be very difficult to detect during an individual patient’s
treatment, leading to a high D value for this FM. As will be
seen in Sec. 9.C, Appendix G,141 and the checklists (Tables
IV–VIII) many conventional QM steps find their way back into
the process. Of note, although TG members assigned O and
D as if no QA were in place (allowing failures to be detected
only through normal procedural steps further downstream),
the evaluators’ individual experiences and biases undoubtedly
influenced their O and D values in the hypothetical absence
of traditional QA.
9.B.2.b. Method of analysis. Several methods of analysis
of the nine sets of O, S, D, and RPN values for the individual
FMEA results were performed in an attempt to identify
the highest risk steps in the process, with the intention of
concentrating analysis and quality management program work
in these areas. While several approaches to the consensus
determination of the most and least hazardous steps can be
envisaged, the TG chose the following two methods.
First, the median, average, and standard deviation of the
O, S, D, and RPN values were calculated for each step.
RPN values assigned to the 216 failure modes by individual
evaluators ranged from 2 to 720, and the median RPN values
ranged from 8 to 441. In the first method, the median RPNs
for all steps were ordered and thresholds for the highest
10% and 20% (HM10 and HM20) and lowest 10% and 20%
(LM10 and LM20) median RPNs were determined. A process
step was included in the 20% (10%) most hazardous group
if at least five evaluators assigned it an RPN above HM20
(HM10), and a similar analysis was used for the lowest priority
steps. Analysis of HM10, HM20, LM10, and LM20 showed
good interevaluator agreement that these FMs were highly
or minimally hazardous, even though the quantitative risk
estimates (RPNs) differed.
A second method identified the most and least hazardous
steps according to the highest (or lowest) average values of
RPN. Average RPN values ranged from 19 to 388. Process
steps with the highest ranked 20% FMs were marked on
the process tree (Fig. 5) with their ranking numbers in red
(see Fig. 5). This visually highlights particularly hazardous
branches and boughs of the process map. Steps which occur
before or after the highest ranked 20% failure modes were
also shown in Fig. 5 to show where the high-risk steps lie
in the overall process. Process steps with a ranking close to
the highest ranked 20% failure modes were also marked in
Fig. 5 because many steps at the 20 percentile level had almost
equivalent RPN scores and addressing them was considered
of equal importance. Additionally, the steps where failure
was judged to result in a high severity (average S ≥ 8) were
given special attention even if their overall RPN was not high.
The rationale is that prevention of these failures should have
high priority without regard to the TG members’ estimates of
their likelihood of occurrence or detection. These steps were
marked on the process tree in green.

4237

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

To gain further insight, each evaluator’s O, S, D, and RPN
values were plotted individually for selected high and low risk
steps and the correlation between the scores assigned by two
different evaluators and between an evaluator’s scores and the
median values were examined. This analysis illustrated that
individual evaluators were in qualitative agreement as to the
most and least hazardous steps, despite frequent quantitative
differences in their individual RPN values (see Appendix D for
further discussion).141 Such statistical methods would not be
necessary in a single-institution FMEA of its own process,
although there would likely be some individual scoring
differences requiring averaging, discussion, or negotiation
(FMEA).9,15,16 Ford et al.9 note that the rank order of the
failures is more important than the absolute scale of the RPN
values, so it would be of interest to know if risk-rankings
of single-institution FMEAs of the IMRT process are very
different from those of TG 100 and, if so, to understand why.
The next step in the process was to use the entire FMEA
together with FTA to develop a risk-based QM program. In
clinical use, the resulting program would be adopted for a
trial period and then re-evaluated using the department’s errorreporting mechanisms. For some steps, a successful program
would lead to a decrease in the RPN values of previously highranked failure modes, due to reduced O or D values. Persistent
high-risk or high S failure modes and newly realized failure
modes would prompt new QM efforts.
9.B.2.c. Results. Table X shows the ten most hazardous
steps evaluated according to the highest average RPN values.
Standard-of-practice physics QA (independent checks of
treatment plans and both physical and electronic charts, Linac
QA, rigorous commissioning of treatment planning systems,
etc.) would substantially lower the RPN value for only a few
of these failure modes, primarily due to reduction in lack of
detectability (D). Human factors, not device performance failures, were the most commonly cited causes of the highest risk
failures. This is consistent with observations in other studies
of patient safety in radiation therapy.91,103 Factors noted
included inadequate training, intra and interdepartmental
miscommunication, lack of consistent procedural guidelines,
and loss of attention by people performing a task. A somewhat
less frequently cited cause was time pressure. Physicians are
deeply involved in seven of these highly hazardous steps,
emphasizing the necessity of a fully interdisciplinary approach
to radiation therapy QM.
The distribution over the process tree of the failure modes
in the 20% most hazardous categories shown in Fig. 5 suggests
the following observations:
1. Several gross tumor volume (GTV) and clinical target
volume (CTV) delineation steps, which can lead to a
geographic miss, emerged as high-risk failure modes.
Target structures are usually defined by a physician
and QM measures, such as physician peer-review, are
required to keep such failures from propagating through
the process to affect patient treatment. Planning target
volume (PTV) delineation was judged less hazardous,
perhaps because the PTV is derived from the GTV and
CTV and because the PTV is in fact a QM measure
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4237

aimed at reducing the impact of setup and localization
errors.
2. The “initial treatment planning directive” is the physician’s instructions to the planner regarding the planning
goals and constraints. Most initial treatment-planning
directive steps carry high risk, high severity, or both.
Although physicists can take limited QM measures on
their own, such as establishing standardized procedures
and ensuring adequate dosimetry staff training, physician peer review may be the most direct and effective
QA measure for this subprocess.
3. Treatment planning provides many opportunities for
failure, especially since nearly all treatment planning
failures become systematic treatment failures if not
found. The FMEA supports the traditional concentration of physics QM efforts in the area of treatment
planning and indicates the necessity of these efforts.
Many of the riskiest steps are concerned with specifying
anatomical regions of interest. Dose calculation, image
transfer, and conversion of contoured regions of interest
to 3D structures for plan optimization and evaluation
were identified as hazardous steps. Conventional QM
strategies, including planning-system commissioning
and routine planning QA procedures, can reduce the
risk of many of these FMs.
4. Failures at many steps in the plan approval and plan
preparation subprocesses may have serious consequences because of their high S scores (10 of 11 failures
in plan approval and 13 of 30 failures in plan preparation
have average S ≥ 8).
5. Treatment delivery steps are critical. Most of the
individual treatment delivery steps do not have the
very highest RPNs, since there are many opportunities to detect treatment-related errors before they
affect a complete treatment course, unlike treatment
preparation errors which typically introduce systematic
errors affecting the entire treatment course. However,
treatment delivery does include a number of failures
that are within the top 20% of hazardous categories.
This is another check on the FMEA as it confirms that
it is reasonable to subject treatment delivery processes
to strong QM measures. Linac hardware failure in the
absence of normal device QA practices was rated in the
upper 10% of risk.
6. The high RPNs associated with motion management
may reflect the fact that respiratory and other motion
management methods are relatively new and unfamiliar
to many institutions, that routine planning and delivery
processes have not been fully modified to address
these issues, and that the sensitivity of overall dosedelivery accuracy to execution errors and uncertainties
of motion-management has not yet been determined.
7. Several high-risk failures in the treatment delivery steps
are related to failure to act, wrong actions or actions
carried out at the wrong times. As is often the case when
something in a complex process happens incorrectly, the
reaction to that problem can cause new and potentially
worse errors downstream.

Subprocess
#_description

Potential effects of
failure

Avg.
O

Avg.
S

Avg.
D

Avg.
RPN

1 (#31)

Wrong volume

6.5

7.4

8.0

388

Lack of standardized procedures, hardware failure
Very wrong dose
(defective materials/tools/equipment), inadequate
distributions, very
design specification, inadequate programming, human wrong volumes
failure (inadequate assessment of operational
capabilities), human failure (inattention), human failure
(failure to review work), lack of staff (rushed process,
lack of time, fatigue)

5.3

8.4

7.9

366

LINAC hardware failures/wrong dose
per MU; MLC leaf motions
inaccurate, flatness/symmetry,
energy—all the things that standard
physical QA is meant to prevent

Poor design (hardware), inadequate maintenance,
software failure, lack of standardized procedures (weak
physics QA process), human failure (incorrectly used
procedure/practice), standard Linac performance QM
failure (not further considered here), inadequate
training

Wrong dose, wrong
dose distribution,
wrong location,
wrong volume

5.4

8.2

7.2

354

6—Initial treatment
planning directive
(from MD)

Retreatment, previous Wrong summary of other treatments.
treatment, brachy etc. Other treatments not documented

Wrong dose

5.3

8.6

7.3

333

5 (#59)

7—RTP anatomy

Delineate GTV/CTV
(MD) and other
structures for
planning and
optimization

2—Excessive delineation errors
resulting in <3*sigma segmentation
errors

Lack of staff (rushed process, lack of time, fatigue),
human failure (inattention), lack of communication,
human failure (reconstructing previous treatment),
human failure (wrong info obtained), information not
available
Lack of standardized procedures, availability of
defective materials/tools/equipment, human failure
(materials/tools/equipment used incorrectly), human
failure (inadequate assessment of materials/tools/
equipment for task), inadequate design specification,
inadequate programming, inadequate training, human
failure (inadequate assessment of operational
capabilities), human failure (inattention), human failure
(failure to review work), lack of staff (rushed process,
lack of time, fatigue)

Wrong dose
distribution, wrong
volumes

5.9

6.6

8.0

326

6 (#65)

7—RTP anatomy

PTV construction

3—Margin width protocol for PTV
construction is inconsistent with
actual distribution of patient setup
errors

Wrong dose
distribution, wrong
volumes or
suboptimal plan

7.3

5.4

7.9

316

Step description

Potential failure modes

Potential causes of failure

4—Other
pretreatment imaging
for CTV localization

6—Images correctly
interpreted (e.g.,
windowing for FDG
PET)

Incorrect interpretation of tumor or
normal tissue

Inadequate training (user not familiar with modality),
lack of communication (inter-disciplinary)

2 (#58)

7—RTP anatomy

Delineate GTV/CTV
(MD) and other
structures for
planning and
optimization

1—>3*sigma error contouring
errors: Wrong organ, wrong site,
wrong expansions

3 (#204)

12—Day N
treatment

Treatment delivered

4 (#48)

Lack of standardized procedures, lack of
communication, inadequate training, human failure
(inattention), human failure (failure to review work),
lack of staff (rushed process, lack of time, fatigue)

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

Rank (process
tree step#)

4238

Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

T X. The ten highest average RPN steps and the corresponding potential failure modes, potential causes of failure, and potential effects of failure from the TG100 FMEA.

4238

303
7.1
5.6
1—Inadequate evaluation

Wrong dose, wrong
dose distribution
Human failure (not enough time/effort spent),
inadequate training poor evaluation strategy, human
failure (incorrect final prescription)

7.0

306
6.5
8.8
5.3
Lack of standardized procedures (documentation), lack Non-radiation
of staff (rushed process, lack of time, fatigue), human
related injury
failure (inattention), lack of communication, human
failure (wrong or inadequate information obtained)
Special instructions not given wrong
special instruction (e.g., allergy,
pacemaker)

Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

8—Treatment
planning
10 (#126)

6—Initial treatment
planning directive
(from MD)
9 (#46)

Specify special
instructions, viz.
pacemaker, allergies,
voiding, bowel prep,
etc.
13—Evaluate plan
(DVH, isodose, dose
tables, etc.)

310
7.11
6.7
6.2
Wrong dose, wrong
dose distribution,
wrong location,
wrong volume
Special motion management methods Poor design (software), poor design (hardware),
(e.g., gating, breath-hold) not applied inadequate training human failure (operator not
or incorrectly applied
observing counterintuitive patterns on screen)
12—Day N
treatment
8 (#200)

Set treatment
parameters 2

7.9
8.0
4.9
Very wrong dose,
very wrong dose
distribution, very
wrong volume
Lack of communication, human failure (inattention),
lack of standardized procedures, human failure
(incorrectly used procedure/practice), inadequate
training
3—Bad plan approved
9—Plan approval

1—Plan OK to go to
treatment

4239

7 (#136)

Avg.
D
Avg.
S
Avg.
O
Potential effects of
failure
Potential causes of failure
Potential failure modes
Step description
Subprocess
#_description
Rank (process
tree step#)

T X. (Continued).

313

Huq et al.: TG 100 report
Avg.
RPN

4239

9.B.3. IMRT Fault Tree Analysis (FTA)

9.B.3.a. General features of the fault tree derived from
the TG-100 FMEA. After the FMEA analysis (above) was
performed, a FTA as described in Sec. 5.C, was also
performed, based on the failure modes identified earlier. FTA
is a tool that allows one to visualize potential locations for
effective and/or efficient QM measures, since the propagation
of FMs through the process is more visually illustrated in the
FTA than in the FMEA spreadsheets. Appendix E shows a
complete fault tree for the entire IMRT process. Each failure
mode is shown as a box with its associated RPN near its upper
right corner; red RPNs indicate modes in the most hazardous
20%.141 Appendix F is a portion of the fault tree with the
addition of QM actions that block propagation of a FM to
patient treatment.141 The overall fault tree exhibits several
interesting characteristics:

1. Unlike most industrial FTAs, this fault tree is not very
deep (i.e., no extensive branching into substeps). Its
dimensions are unusual, being relatively tall (many
separate failures) and shallow. Although this may be
an artifact of the generic IMRT process used, similar
features have been observed in FTAs of other medical
processes.
2. Another unusual feature here is that most FMs have a
large number of inputs into that FM, seen as  gates
in the FTA. Such a pattern implies a very high level of
hazard since a failure in any of the unprotected inputs
would produce an overall failure.
3. The progenitor causes, the events on the far right of
the fault tree that initiate each of the failure pathways,
are mostly latent errors or conditions, i.e., persistent,
organizational failures or deficiencies that increase the
likelihood that staff members will make active errors,
e.g., fail to execute process steps correctly. Finding and
correcting latent conditions help reduce the probability
of occurrence of entire classes of problems, since
latent errors are more likely than active errors to
cause failures along many diverse branches of the fault
tree.
4. A particular latent condition (e.g., lack of a particular
procedure) found at one location in the process may not
be the same progenitor condition at other locations, even
though both are described as “lack of procedure” since
the different procedures could be lacking at different
process steps. Thus, fixing each particular lack of
procedure by developing a written procedure specific
to that activity would only have a local effect. However,
the fact that the cause lack of procedure, occurs
many times may imply a common latent condition—
for example, departmental management does not sufficiently emphasize rationalization and formalization of
clinical processes. A common finding in risk analysis is
that procedures define a reference level or set of process
outcome expectations that can be used to identify
outcomes that vary from the norm.

4240

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4240

T XI. Most common classifications for the possible causes for the failure
shown in the IMRT fault tree analysis in Appendix E (Ref. 141).
Category
Human failures
Lack of standardized procedures
Inadequate training
Inadequate communication
Hardware/software failure
Hardware
Software
Hardware or software
Lack of staff
Inadequate design specifications
Inadequate commissioning
Use of defective materials/tool/equipment

Occasions
230
99
97
67
58
9
44
5
37
32
18
12

5. Table XI lists the most common progenitor causes for
the failure modes graphically portrayed by the FTA.
The dominant category is human failure. In the FMEA, TG
members suggested various forms and underlying causes of
human failure; interestingly, poor employee performance was
rarely cited as a major cause. Human errors have many causes:
e.g., loss of attention, biased expectations, distractions due to
multiple demands, bad judgment in the face of a deviation
from the normal process, and fatigue or overwork. Human
failure rates can be most efficiently reduced by “forcing
functions.” A forcing function is defined as something that
prevents a failure-causing behavior from continuing until the
problem has been corrected; Linac interlocks are familiar
examples104 which often prevent an error from being made in
the first place. Unfortunately, forcing functions often require
highly technical solutions and are often works-in-progress
rather than immediate solutions. Close collaboration between
clinicians and vendors is important in this regard. Human
failure rates can also be reduced by strategies that address
underlying causes by providing, for example, properly lighted
and distraction-free environments, good ergometric design
of computer and device graphic user interfaces (GUIs), and
efficient and orderly flow of information. These strategies,
along with good supervision and training in the establishment
of a safety culture can reduce, but never completely eliminate,
human failures. Published studies85,105–113 reporting radiation
therapy computational and transcription task error rates
suggest failure rates of the order of 0.5%–1%. This likely
represents the best that can be achieved under optimal
conditions. The brief sample event scenarios in column L of
Appendixes C1–C3 are highly generic. Individual clinics are
advised to examine the relevance of these scenarios to their
own practices.141
The next two most common categories, lack of standardized procedures and inadequate training, along with the lack of
communications and information problems, all reflect latent
organizational flaws. These problems cannot be addressed
efficiently by adding more QA or QC checks, but rather
requires redesign or at least improved documentation of
the current process. Establishing standard procedures and
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

protocols, assuring personnel are trained appropriately (with
exams for verification), and designing clearly understood
lines of communication and information flow create an
environment that reduces the likelihood of occurrence of many
potential paths for failures. Standard procedures and protocols
suggested by the TG-100 analyses are given in the example
checklists of Tables IV–VIII. It is also very important for
department managers to provide a work environment that is
free of clutter, interruption, and distractions.
Most of the causes grouped under lack of staff result
from administrative decisions. As an example scenario, if
an experienced dosimetrist is not available to plan IMRT,
the physicist often both generates the treatment plan for
IMRT and performs the pretreatment plan check. This is a
dangerous situation, since an error is more readily detected by
an independent check than by the person who made the error
in the first place. Inadequate staffing levels can also produce
a rushed environment or fatigue, leading to user errors. In
general, such problems cannot be addressed merely by process
design, documentation initiatives, or by adding QA checks but
can only be solved through administrative decisions that are
informed by current staffing studies.114–116
The large number of potential failures attributed to
hardware and software failures and to design failures illustrates how highly dependent radiation therapy quality is
on robust and accurate equipment performance. Preventing
device failures from propagating into events requires: (1)
careful specification of device performance characteristics
during purchase, including reliability and safety features; (2)
comprehensive commissioning, in the context of the process
to be used, to assure proper operation of equipment, (3)
training of personnel on how to recognize and respond to
machine failures, and (4) appropriate periodic equipment QA
that monitors its operation.
Comprehensive commissioning identifies inadequacies in
both equipment and procedures before beginning patient
treatment. The commissioning not only checks the operation
of equipment and provides the information necessary for
its use but also establishes the limits of reliable operation
for equipment and systems. Commissioning of procedures
entails coordination between all involved personnel as tested
by walking them through trial runs. Time spent during
commissioning can save time and increase reliability during
routine operation. Commissioning provides a detailed and
real-world understanding of a device’s features, providing the
basis for rationally integrating it into the department’s clinical
practice. It is very important that hospital administrators
and department leaders allow adequate time and personnel
resources for commissioning tasks. This is an area where
“haste makes waste.”
9.B.3.b. Simple example of FTA guidance in QM design.
As seen in the discussion above, many failure causes cannot
be addressed through conventional, device-performance QA
or physics chart checks, but rather require system redesign,
administrative changes, or a broader type of commissioning.
For example, the annotated fault tree for the high-risk
radiation treatment planning (RTP) anatomy failure mode
(Fig. 6 and Appendix F) indicates the general type of QM

4241

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4241

F. 6. (A) A portion of the fault tree for the step RTP anatomy failure involving the failure mode of >3 sigma contouring errors; this failure is in a red-edged
box with its RPN (366) at its upper right corner. The black numbers are line numbers from the full FTA (Appendix E) (Ref. 141). (B) The fault tree shown in
Fig. 6(A) with the inclusion of quality management.

methodology required to mitigate the principal progenitor
causes.141
Failure modes with green diagonal lines through them
indicate potential failures in older IMRT planning or delivery
systems. The red diagonal lines indicate causes best addressed
by more complete training, establishing clear communication
modalities (including forms and checklists), and establishing
protocols, policies, procedures, and expected outcomes. Those
with red arrows reflect causes that could be eliminated by
providing appropriate resources for the facility (administrative
decisions) and those with green arrows by comprehensive
commissioning. Of the 156 causes that may give rise to
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

an undetected RTP anatomy failure, 133 can be at least
partially addressed by the measures described above. The
remaining 23 causes, mostly user errors, may be addressed
by peer review of the contoured structures at the end of the
subprocess.
9.B.3.c. Suggested use of FTA. While much of the analysis and many of the resultant QM measures discussed in
Secs. 9.C and 9.D and Appendix G (Ref. 141) could be derived
from the FMEA alone, the FTA graphically illustrates the
propagation of errors from one process step to another, helping
to identify what structural changes to make to the process and
the optimal placement of QC and QA interventions.

4242

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

To achieve maximum efficiency, it is desirable to consolidate proposed QM steps if possible. Searching the fault
tree for multiple occurrences of a progenitor cause can
provide economy in establishing QC. For example, the
step “Dosimetrist/MD preplanning contour review” shown
in Fig. 6(B) could be generalized to encompass review of
the outputs of both the Initial treatment planning directive
and “RTP anatomy contouring.” Positioning a check prior
to planning will avoid wasted planning effort based on
erroneous imaging datasets, incorrect contours, or unrealistic
treatment goals. Another example is the progenitor cause
of “defective equipment” which can be addressed by a
department-wide preventive maintenance program that covers
all clinical hardware and software. If a failure at a single
step feeds to different downstream failures, preventing the
common failure reduces the likelihood of the several resultant
failures. One can also examine the fault tree and process
map to look for junctions where QA activities could cover
multiple potential failures. A third example is discussed in
detail in Sec. 9.C, where QM measures that address the
second ranked FM are seen to also mitigate lower ranked
though still significant FMs; other examples are shown in
Appendix G.141

9.C. Risk-informed design of IMRT QM programs
9.C.1. Discussion of top ranked failure modes

The next step in the overall plan to improve quality
and safety is to use the FTA and FMEA risk and processoriented information to design a QM program for the process
being investigated. In this section, significant parts of a QM
program for IMRT, developed on the basis of the risk analysis
using the TG-100 FMEA and FTA, are described in detail
below, following the procedures outlined in Sec. 6 of this
report.
The TG addressed the 216 failure modes in descending
order of RPN risk score in Appendix G, where each FMspecific subsection describes relevant QM intervention(s)
along with a discussion indicating the reasons for the
interventions.141 When a QM strategy for a given FM also
addresses lower-risk FMs, we refer back to the higher risk
FM subsection, making Appendix G less formidable than it
may appear at first glance.141
However, to help readers understand the methodology of
risk-based QM program design, we present example analyses
for eight of the 216 FMs in Subsections 9.C.2–9.C.4 and
9.D.1–9.D.5. The goal of this section and of Appendix G is to
illustrate the way a department might design QA and QC tasks
to mitigate the various FMs.141 The individual interventions
described below and in the Appendix are examples of what
a clinical department might do but are not prescriptive
recommendations that clinical departments should or must
do. Even a department that wishes to adopt the TG-100 QM
program should analyze its own technologies and clinical
processes to customize the risk-based QM process to its own
situation.
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4242

9.C.2. Failure mode #1
Rank RPN Step#
#1

388

31

Process

Step

4. Other pre-treatment imaging
for CTV localization

6. Images correctly
interpreted

FM: Incorrect interpretation of tumor or normal tissue

The highest ranking hazard involves incorrect interpretation of a pretreatment diagnostic imaging (e.g., PET,
MR) study for defining the GTV, CTV, or a dose-limiting
normal tissue. Progenitor causes listed in the FTA include
inadequate training of the study reader or poor interdisciplinary communications. For example, suppose that the
radiologist reports that a patient’s PET-FDG study reveals a
positive para-aortic lymph node, but the radiation oncologist
incorrectly identifies this lymph node with a region of high
intensity signal caused by a benign inflammatory condition
and therefore places the GTV adjacent to the wrong vertebral
body.
Consideration of this failure mode, as with many top
ranked failure modes, illustrates a very important fact: it is not
possible to establish a complete QM program involving solely
medical physicists. Effective QM requires a team approach
with members of each specialty participating and making
recommendations, particularly for potential failures relating
to their expertise. Full application of the method described
in this report requires the involvement of everyone who
participates in the radiation oncology process. The reader
should remember that the task group writing this report had
only one physician serving, with the rest of the panel consisting
of radiotherapy physicists and an industrial engineer.
This particular failure mode illustrates a number of general
characteristics of physician-driven actions and decisions:
(i) They are often critical drivers of downstream planning
activities, which, if performed inaccurately, have a
high potential for causing systematic error;
(ii) physics, technical, and nursing support staff often lack
expertise in physician-driven processes—in this case,
image interpretation or even access to the imaging
studies—and therefore are in no position to intercept
or detect such errors; and
(iii) in the traditional physician-dominated control-andcommand model, support staff had little institutional
support or standing to challenge physician decisions.
As more departments revamp their practices to
emphasize a safety culture, this situation is likely to
improve.117
If a medical physicist or dosimetrist recognizes an occurrence of this failure mode and the departmental culture allows,
he or she should, of course, bring it to the attention of
the radiation oncologist. However, the main remedy for this
failure mode lies with the physician community.
There are at least three broad avenues for intercepting
image interpretation errors.

4243

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4243

a. Peer review. Directly addressing this failure mode requires physician-based checks somewhere in the process.
The FTA demonstrates that a QA check of the target
volumes defined by the prescribing physician, before
significant planning effort takes place, is likely the most
efficient way to prevent this failure mode (included in
example checklist of Table V). Meaningful peer review
of target delineation requires display of imaging studies
on which target volume delineation is based, along with
the treatment plan and the CT images from simulation.
The considerable effort required in order to organize
and implement such peer-review is warranted by the
extremely high RPN value of this failure mode, since
these errors are likely to be virtually undetectable otherwise.
b. Adequate physician training for interpretation of diagnostic imaging studies. Table XI identifies inadequate
training as the third most likely progenitor cause of all
failures identified. However, the person interpreting the
images may think that she or he has the appropriate
knowledge. Assuring training in clinical procedures is
often problematic, so an institutional policy requiring
experts in a given imaging modality to advise new staff
on all reading of such images may be beneficial. Important components that can help reduce the risk of this failure mode include physician education through training
courses offered by ASTRO and other professional or
educational organizations, and intradepartmental peer
review based on evaluation of actual cases.
c. Improved interdepartmental communication. A potential cause of this failure mode is failure of the radiology
report or reading to address the radiation oncologist’s
need for quantitative tumor localization (in addition
to diagnosis and staging). By communicating these
needs to the radiologist, the radiation oncologist can
mitigate errors and enhance the value of these imaging
procedures to the RT process. In addition, good
communication with the radiologist is a low-cost and
efficient avenue for the radiation oncologist to become
educated in the interpretation of more specialized
functional or molecular images.
9.C.3. Failure mode #2
Rank

RPN

Step#

#2

366

58

Process

Step

7. RTP anatomy Delineate GTV/CTV (MD) and
other structures

FM: >3σ contouring error, wrong organ, site, or expansions

The second ranked failure mode is very large contouring
errors (in excess of three times the expected interoperator
delineation error) which will be used to illustrate the
evaluation and analysis which can be used to create QM
procedures based on review of the fault tree. Figure 6(A)
is a section of the IMRT fault tree (from Appendix E)141 for
the step “Delineate GTV/CTV (MD) and other structures” for
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

which failures can lead to planning or optimization failure.
This figure shows only the dominant intermediate and basic
events that cause “>3σ error contouring errors: wrong organ,
wrong site, wrong expansions” events.
As with the first-ranked FM, radiation oncologists are the
only personnel with the specialized knowledge needed to
define the contouring protocols for most radiotherapy targets
and other critical structures, and should take the lead in
developing QM for this step. However, as the FTA [Fig. 6(A)]
shows, many failure modes contribute to this type of failure,
which means there are a number of different approaches to
avoiding or mitigating this error.
In Fig. 6(B), the QM steps at the most effective locations
in the fault tree of Fig. 6(A) are indicated by lines or arrows
(the key is in the upper-left of the figures). These QM steps
are described below.
1. Peer review. As in the rank 1 failure mode, a peer review
of all structure delineations is the most effective method
for intercepting such failures. There are several ways to
implement such reviews:
a. At facilities with resident training programs, having
the attending physician review and edit contours
drawn by the resident physician focuses the attending physician’s attention on how well the contours
match the “standard of care” definitions.
b. The larger radiation oncology community could
provide assistance to radiation oncologists in small
or solo practices through some form of internetbased peer-review system.
c. Peer-review systems have been developed for formal
protocols used by clinical trial groups [e.g., radiation
therapy oncology group (RTOG)], and ASTRO has
developed educational programs, such as the special
contouring sessions which are organized during ASTRO meetings. Departments should also encourage
the training of dosimetrists and physicists involved
in treatment planning, both through in-house efforts (senior dosimetrists training juniors, physicians
training physics personnel) and participation in
workshops given by professional organizations. This
expands the pool of individuals equipped to detect
and prevent large contouring errors.
d. The medical physicist and dosimetrist should make
sure that radiation oncologists are trained in the
correct use of contouring software, and may, in
the future, assist in implementing new technologies
such as automatic segmentation programs, that may
reduce the probabilities for errors. These programs,
while in their infancy, already show promise and
will likely improve. While the use of such programs
may reduce the likelihood of contouring errors, and
improve the detection of errant contours, they may
also open pathways for new failure modes.
However, given the large number of failure modes and
potential causes of this failure, relying on a single check
may leave the process at high risk unless upstream
causes of failure are also addressed. Furthermore, peer

4244

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

review may not always be a cost-effective or sufficiently
robust approach when contouring errors are relatively
frequent. Therefore, the following QM steps are also
recommended.
2. Standardized procedures. The lack of uniform procedures and training can dramatically increase interobserver segmentation variability, i.e., delineation error,
beyond the level inherent to the imaging modality. For
example, an early study of prostate boundary delineation
error on CT (Ref. 16) revealed extremely large physicianto-physician variability (10%–20% standard deviations
in prostate volume). However, when consensus among
observers is reached on fundamental issues such as “are
we contouring just the prostate or margins for extracapsular extension?”; “How do we identify prostatic
apex and other boundaries not visible on CT?”; etc., and
when observers have an opportunity to be corrected on
training cases, much smaller (2%–4%) variations are
observed.118 The EORTC/RTOG guidelines for contouring electively treated lymph-node CTVs in head and neck
cancer119 is an example of a published guideline that can
be used as the basis of an institutional consensus-derived
segmentation process and associated training. Written
departmental guidance on segmenting anatomic and
target structures should be developed as part of the sitespecific protocol (example checklist of Table IV). Such
guidelines can also be used as the basis for empowering
physics and dosimetry staff to intercept large contouring
errors.
3. Elimination of hardware failure/inadequate design/
inadequate programming. These potential causes are
best detected and compensated for during commissioning of planning or other contouring software or, in the
cases of a transient hardware/software failure, through
periodic QA and preventive maintenance of the system. Adequate commissioning not only assures that the
equipment operates as described in the manufacturer’s
specifications but determines how the equipment functions over the range of expected use, particularly outside
the normal and intended range. Commissioning must
determine the limits of reliable operation and the types of
errors that occur with misuse. Commissioning also provides an opportunity to compensate for software design
deficiencies, through changes in the clinical process. For
example, if the planning system’s manual segmentation
software is so slow as to challenge physician patience
and willingness to review work, using different software
(e.g., CT-simulator virtual simulation software) to contour or assign certain segmentation tasks to dosimetrists
might be appropriate.
4. Prevention of human failures (inattention, incorrect
operational assessment, failure to review own work).
Minimizing the probability of human failures compromising a patient’s treatment (i.e., random execution
errors that occur despite training and well defined procedures) often requires redundant QC or QA checks that
operate on the inputs or outputs of the process by adding
parallel activities. For example, the “Failure to review
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4244

own work” could be ameliorated by independent review
of the contours at input through use of an automated
anatomic contouring program. In Fig. 6(B), an auto
contouring program120 could be used to check the physician’s contour by flagging a large discrepancy as an
“” gate in parallel with the dosimetrist’s contour
review or with MD peer review, thus intercepting downstream propagation of human (>3σ) contouring errors.
Trying to prevent human failures from compromising
clinical care, however, requires considerable resources,
and human creativity often finds new ways to fail in
ways which were unthought-of at the time the QC was
put in place. Peer review of contours is optimal, but a
knowledgeable dosimetrist or physicist can often check
the consistency of contours and flag many types of
potential problems (e.g., contour overlap, accuracy of
normal structures). Physicists and dosimetrists should
be encouraged to ask questions about structure sets that
differ from those they have seen in similar cases.
5. Avoiding rushed process/inadequate facilities. A rushed
process may result from poor organization on the
operator’s part or from managerial decisions leading
to inadequate staffing or lead-time before treatment.
Minimizing the possibility of such failures requires a
commitment on the part of management and medical
staff to provide adequate time and resources for the
facility to achieve its mission. Given such commitment,
all personnel have the responsibility to complete their
tasks in a timely fashion.
Failures to utilize correct Boolean combinations of delineated structures (ranks #29, #46, #59, and #104 with RPN
values of 230, 219, 205, and 168) are also handled by the
FM rank #2 QM measures. FM #104 is related to software
failure, but the others are all related to human errors where
the wrong structures are combined, the Boolean combination
is ambiguously or incorrectly defined, or the wrong Boolean
operator(s) are used. Since these errors can happen in any kind
of case, the best way to prevent these failures is to include
the process of Boolean combination, including standardized
structure creation, in the example checklist for standardized
site-specific protocols for workup of patient prior to IMRT
treatment planning (example checklist in Table IV). The QA
check to intercept these errors can be incorporated into the
dosimetrist/attending physician preplanning contour check
[see Fig. 6(B)].
9.C.4. Failure mode #3
Rank

RPN

Step#

Process

Step

#3

354

209

12. Day N Tx

Tx delivered

FM: LINAC hardware failures; wrong dose/MU; MLC
leaf motions inaccurate, flatness/symmetry, energy, etc.

Radiological and geometric delivery errors associated
with treatment machine failures comprise the third highest

4245

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

risk failure mode (remember that the FMEA assessed risk
assuming no specific QA procedures were performed). Since
any hardware delivery error is essentially undetectable in this
scenario, a very high RPN number result, underscoring the
importance of periodic QA to reduce the risk of machine
hardware failures. The discussion below is a brief summary
of the more complete text contained in Appendix G.141
Most current machine QA guidance [e.g., the recommendations of TG-142 (Ref. 1)] is loosely based on the goal that the
total cumulative dose-distribution delivery uncertainty should
not exceed 5% or 5 mm when all contributing geometric and
dosimetric tolerances are summed in quadrature. However,
most such recommendations are based on TG member
consensus and not formal error propagation analyses or
endpoint-specific rationales. Of note, reports (e.g., TG-40)
do not always specify whether the stated uncertainty refers
to 1 or 2 standard deviations (k = 1 or 2). Given the wide
variety of techniques currently applied for patient treatment,
a single set of QC tolerances and test frequencies may be
neither necessary nor sufficient to protect the patient from
“wrong dose” or “wrong location” errors or to evaluate risks
appropriately. Two brief examples illustrate the issues:
(1) Suppose daily online image guided radiation therapy
(IGRT) is used for all patients on a given machine. For
this situation the need for traditional (within ± 2 mm)
localization optical distance indicator (ODI), light
field, and cross hairs may be decreased, and current
TG-142 recommendations for QA for these parameters
may be too strong, inefficiently using QA resources.
(2) On the other hand, current TG-142 recommendations
that MLC leaf positioning error be assessed monthly
may be too lax for treatments delivered in few fractions
because MLC errors could be missed for this entire
treatment course.
TG 100 envisions that ultimately QM for Linac failure modes be designed to minimize the risk of a Linac
performance deficit resulting in a patient treatment course
exceeding the allowed cumulative positional and dosedelivery tolerances. Here we describe an approach to the
determination of test frequencies and tolerances for Linac
QA, using dose output (Gy/MU, in reference geometry)
as an example, followed by very brief comments on other
parameters. The approach is discussed in more detail in
Appendix G.141
9.C.4.a. Example method for determination of tolerances
and frequencies for QA tests of Linac output.
1. Define the QM goal. The overall dose-delivery or
positional accuracy for the target must be consistent
with the department’s vision of acceptable quality or
the accepted standard of care. In the following example
the goal is “no patient’s total dose-delivery uncertainty
should exceed 5%” (consistent with TG-40 and TG142).
2. Determine the sensitivity of the QM goals to the performance parameter. In the case of dose/MU sensitivity,
some dose errors are linearly related to the error in a
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4245

given parameter, such as errors due to miscalibration
of the dose/MU control. Such a relationship is said to
have a sensitivity of 1. However, other errors require
nontrivial sensitivity analyses (e.g., output constancy
and linearity as functions of dose rate, gantry angle, and
MU/segment). These parameters can affect total dose
delivery accuracy but their dosimetric impact depends
on the distribution of gantry angles, the functional relationship between output and gantry angle, MU/segment,
and dose rates characteristic of typical plans.85,90
3. Determine the maximum error in the Linac performance
endpoint for which the machine remains operable. Linac
interlocks, which prohibit operation when parameters
go out of tolerance, are important. Recent failures of
symmetry interlocks however, highlight the difficulty in
relying on such systems. Most accelerator interlocks can
be rendered useless if someone, such as a service person
or physicist, adjust the baseline they use to determine
operational limits. In this example we will consider two
situations: a typical modern scenario where machine
interlocks are triggered by dose output errors exceeding
5% and an extreme situation where transient and
persistent dose output errors up to 40% are possible
without triggering machine interlocks. Although the
interlocks of some accelerator models do not allow
such a large error, a 40% error has been reported
following service when a pot was misadjusted and the
interlocks reset to new values. Therefore, this large
but not impossible value is chosen for demonstration
purposes.
4. Determine the monitoring frequency needed to achieve
the uncertainty goal. In a treatment of N fractions, a
patient can receive up to n fractions with dose output
error per fraction of q%, without exceeding an A% dose
accuracy limit if all the other treatments are perfect and
n ≤ AN/q.

(1)

Figure 7 is a plot of the number of allowed fractions
with output error vs the error in (n vs q) for 35, 10, and
5 fraction courses (N = 35, 10, and 5) for A = 5% and
1.6%.
The choice of A = 5% is a loose tolerance, since dose
output is not the only source of error in a treatment;
the tighter tolerance of 1.6% is a more realistic
goal which acknowledges other sources of dosimetric
uncertainty, as discussed in more detail in Appendix
G.141 Radiobiological effects were not considered in this
example. Within this simplified example, if the shortest
course treated on a particular machine is 35 fractions,
output checks every four days suffice to meet the goal of
dose accuracy of at worst 5% if weak machine interlocks
permit up to a 40% output error. Shorter treatment
courses demand more frequent output measurements;
for a typical palliative course of ten treatments daily
checks are needed and, strictly speaking, for fewer
than eight treatments, even daily checks are insufficient
to assure that no patient experience a dose output
error exceeding 5%. Of course if machine interlocks

4246

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

F. 7. The number of fractions that can be delivered with a given error
plotted as a function of the percentage error in dose per erroneous fraction, for
total allowed dose errors of 5% and 1.6% in treatment courses of 35, 10, and
5 fractions. The purple and dark blue vertical lines indicate the two interlocks
discussed in the text: a weak interlock where output errors up to 40% can be
delivered and a modern interlock which cuts off delivery if the output error
exceeds 5%. The red horizontal line is at 2 fractions: for situations that fall
below this line, the simple model calls for daily or even more frequent output
checks.

prevent treatments with dose output error of 5%—
and if one believes these interlocks are infallibleoutput checks would be unnecessary. However, if output
dose error must be smaller (e.g., 1.6% to allow for
other sources of treatment uncertainty), our simplified
model predicts that daily or more frequent output
checks are needed for short treatment courses (e.g.,
less than 5 fraction) even if machine interlocks prevent
delivery of treatments with output errors exceeding
5%. Appendix G provides further discussions of this
point.141
5. Establishing action levels and thresholds. The above
analysis is a simplified model of how one could protect
the average patient against “outliers” that embody
worst-case scenarios, regardless of how unlikely these
scenarios might be. However, QM should also seek
to minimize overall mean uncertainty of dose delivery
by selection of an action level (e.g., the error above
which the parameter is readjusted) based on a probability distribution of machine variability. For Linac
parameters that exhibit significant random variability,
but below the fixed threshold levels, process control
charts90 and other statistical techniques121 could be
used to distinguish underlying trends from day-to-day
statistical fluctuations.
9.C.4.b. Other dosimetric and geometric performance
endpoints.
1. Energy and beam flatness/symmetry. Selection of a
sampling frequency requires both sensitivity analysis
and assessment of how much deviation from flatness
or energy an operable LINAC could exhibit. For many
machines, it is unlikely that energy or symmetry errors
>10% could occur without concomitant failure of machine output or a sustained effort to retune the machine
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4246

to operate at the wrong energy. A typical interlock
limit for symmetry is 4%. Because the symmetry is the
difference between the dose on one side of the field and
that on the opposite, a symmetry value of 4% implies
that the dose on either side is about 2% off from baseline,
or that the symmetry has a sensitivity of 0.5 in dose.
Monthly monitoring often means that checks fall within
each month, not that checks are performed with no more
than 30 days between. This permits a patient who starts
treatment soon after one monthly check to receive a full
treatment of, for example, 35 fractions, with the unit
operating with the 4% symmetry error. However, the
dose would only be in error by 2%. One potentially
serious failure mode is matching a shift in beam energy
with a well-intended (but misguided) effort to retune
the Linac so it operates without triggering interlocks.
Such actions, which have happened at several facilities,
can lead to significant dose errors. A similar failure
can occur if steering is accidentally changed, creating
a badly asymmetric beam with the ratio of the currents
from each side of the dose monitor chamber set as a
new baseline. Thus, any intervention involving beam
retuning or steering should trigger independent checks
of beam-characteristics before returning the Linac to
clinical use.
Simple, nonspecific tests can be very useful for
checking such failure modes; verifying constancy of
a large field shallow depth beam profiles is a highly
sensitive check of all beam characteristics sensitive to
beam energy, including depth dose.122
2. MLC and jaw calibration and operation. Geometric
miss of the target or overexposure of a normal tissue due
to MLC problems is potentially a more significant clinical error than a shift in machine output. The common
practice of relying on time-consuming measurements
for patient-pattern specific MLC verification does not
appropriately mitigate all risks of dose delivery errors
due to machine performance (see details in Appendix
G).141 If such measurements are made, they should
be combined with periodic MLC QA tests designed
to span the range of clinical practice comprehensively
and performed at a rationally designed frequency. These
difficult issues are further discussed in connection with
FM Rank #153 in Appendix G.141
Establishing a risk-based, generic MLC QA program
requires knowledge of QM goals in relation to the wide
variety of possible MLC failure modes such as random
positioning errors (leaf-specific), systematic shifts (for
the entire leaf carriage), calibration errors, component
wear, prescribed intensity variations which drive the
MLC to or beyond its mechanical limits or capabilities,
and problems compensating for gravity or gantry angle
effects. Though random leaf errors have small effects,
systematic leaf gap calibration or carriage-positioning
errors (affecting an entire leaf bank) can influence
delivery accuracy significantly.123–125 It has been shown
that 1-mm systematic errors can give rise to dose errors
of 5% or more for both dMLC (Refs. 126 and 127)

4247

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

and static MLC (sMLC).128 Using the methodology
that led to Fig. 7, it is possible to determine how often
one would perform tests to maintain the 1-mm MLC
positioning tolerance. Note that the details of appropriate MLC QA tests vary by manufacturer and system
design.123–127
3. Other parameters. Other machine operating parameters,
e.g., radiation vs mechanical isocenter coincidence and
excursion, can be analyzed in a similar fashion.
9.D. Additional observations from the TG-100 analysis

• Appendix G contains a more detailed discussion on this
topic.141
• Table XII provides an illustrative example of the
outcome of the TG-100 process with respect to frequencies for various QA tests compatible with the IMRT
analysis in this report.
• It is crucial to develop the capability to actively monitor
treatment delivery in addition to performing periodic
QA. Automated checks of dosimetry, MLC motion,
patient setup, and motion, and other issues during each
fraction would help maintain accurate delivery, though
this capability is lacking in most equipment (an area
that deserves significant developmental effort). Several
academic institutions have developed in-house monitoring software, so such capabilities are technologically
very feasible and should be made a high priority item
for commercial development by Linac and treatment
management system vendors.105–110
• Many delivery errors can be efficiently detected if
therapists carefully monitor treatment while in progress.
The ACR (42) recommends staffing of two RTTs per
treatment unit under “a standard schedule” and states
that additional RTTs may be needed for longer hours
or heavy patient load. The newly published ASTRO
document78 states (p. 14) that “It is recommended that a
minimum of two qualified individuals be present for
any routine external beam patient treatment.” These
recommendations should be taken seriously by administrators. Situations where monitoring by an alert therapist
can prevent machine performance from jeopardizing
patient safety include verifying MLC motion during
IMRT treatment, either between sMLC segments or
dynamically during dMLC deliveries, acting promptly
on clearly anomalous machine behavior and notifying
the physicist about all peculiar or unusual machine
behavior. It is incumbent upon the physicist to take such
reports seriously, respond when called, and investigate
the reported problem. Because attention to the treatment
is a major function of the therapists, the console area,
workflow, and department policies should be designed to
minimize distractions and other pathways for attention
lapses.
The following gives a discussion of the additional five top
ranked failure modes.
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4247

9.D.1. Failure mode #11
Rank

RPN

Step#

Process

Step

#11

283

40

6. Initial Tx
plan directive

Specify images for target
and structure delineation

FM: Specify incorrect image set (viz. Wrong phase of
4D CT, wrong MR, etc.)

Specifying image sets to be used for target delineation,
particularly when they are obtained outside a radiation
oncology department, is a serious potential source of difficultto-detect (high D) errors in the planning process. In many
centers, this process consists of the attending physician or
resident reviewing the patient’s imaging studies using the radiology PACS system. The desired image set is then identified
and its study number is passed to dosimetrists who contact the
appropriate radiologic technologist and request them to export
the desired DICOM dataset into the RTP file server. There are
many potential sources of error, including propagation of an
incorrect ID number, miscommunication (between therapist,
dosimetrist, physician, and radiology technologist), and the
possibility that the radiology technologist will export an
incorrect image set. Because of the growing number and
variety of MR and PET imaging studies that are used for
planning, the dosimetrist and physicist cannot, on their own,
verify the correctness of the secondary image sets imported
into the planning system. Only if the physician notices that
an incorrect dataset has been selected will the error be
detected.
Ways to change the process to decrease the likelihood of
this failure mode include:
1. Obtain a modern PACS system which allows the
physician to directly download the desired studies when
they are viewed. This part of the solution requires a
high-level managerial decision, but, if implemented,
eliminates opportunities for miscommunication.
2. Expand the site-specific protocol for workup of a patient
prior to IMRT planning [example checklist of Table
IV to include the technique factors (e.g., MR pulse
sequence, contrast, patient position, volume)] to be used
for each major clinical site and presentation. This will
provide a basis for verifying the image datasets selected
for planning.
3. Develop, and require the physician to complete, an
online form that not only identifies PACS study ID, but
also the date of the procedure and imaging technique
desired.
4. Require the dosimetrist to verify that the imported
secondary dataset is consistent with items 2 and 3.
As illustrated by the FTA, a QC check placed prior to
importing DICOM images from the PACS server (where
full technique information is available) to the RTP (where
full DICOM header information is not reviewable in the
model for the facility considered) reduces the probability of
error.

4248

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4248

T XII. Accelerator QA checks suggested by the TG-100 analysis for the example IMRT process. This table is an illustrative example of the potential
outcomes of implementing the TG-100 analysis for the example IMRT process. The TG-100 risk-based approach implies that once commissioning measurements
are done and independently verified, certain tests that are now performed annually become unnecessary. That independent verification of the commissioning
likely should include performing the measurements at some time after the initial set of measurements and independent verification as an evaluation of stability
as well as a reconsideration of procedures.

Treatment unit parameter

Frequency of testing TG 100

Frequency of testing per
TG 142

Example test

Unit output
Dosimetric constancy

At least every 3 or 4 days (for normal fractionation).
Daily for few fraction treatments
Commissioning or after major repairs (see part 1 on
commissioning) with at least one, preferably
independent, repeat verification
Commissioning or after major repairs, at least one,
preferably independent, repeat verification

Daily

Commissioning, check after repair on bending
magnet or beam alignment; at least one, preferably
independent, repeat verification
Commissioning or after major repairs, at least one,
preferably independent, repeat verification. Also
limiting the use to range of stable no. of MU, check
after major beam tuning

Annually

Commissioning, then performed together with output
constancy check using measurement device with
off-axis detectors
Commissioning, then performed with the output
constancy check using flatness

Monthly

Positioning and calibration
of MLC

Daily operational checks, at least weekly picket
fence or similar IMRT-related tests

Consistency of MLC with
gantry orientation

Commissioning, and QA check with frequency
dependent on sensitivity determined at
commissioning
Commissioning, then routine confirmation of speed
and delivery accuracy. Frequency required by
risk-based analysis not clear yet
Commissioning, then observation with the output
checks

Weekly picket fence;
monthly non-IMRT patterns
and IMRT leaf position
accuracy
Monthly

Dose linearity with respect
to number of monitor units
Dosimetric constancy as a
function of dose rate
Dosimetric constancy with
respect to gantry angle
Stabilization for small
monitor-unit settings

Annually

Monthly

Detector measurement in phantom at
depth
Detector measurement in phantom at
depth, IMRT vs normal delivery
Detector measurement in phantom at
depth to assess dosimetric constancy
at all dose rates used
Periodically perform the dosimetric
consistency test with lateral beams or
under the table
Detector measurement in phantom at
depth

Beam characterization
Flatness and symmetry
(beam profile)
Beam energy

Annually (monthly for
electrons)

1-D or 2-D detector measurement in
phantom at depth; for checks, one
off-axis point for each axis
1-D or 2-D detector measurement in
phantom at depth; for checks, one
off-axis point for each axis

Collimation

Speed of MLC movement
(if relevant to IMRT
delivery method)
Accuracy of the secondary
collimators

Preferably image-based checks. Use
light field with template if imaging is
unavailable
Preferably image-based checks or
light field (if accuracy validated)

Monthly

Preferably image-based checks or
light field (if accuracy validated)

Daily

Shadow of jaws compared with a
template using the light field for
large and small fields

Monthly

Light field consistency with marks
on wall and floor or bubble level

Beam positioning
Accuracy of gantry angle

Accuracy of collimator
angle
Accuracy/consistency of the
couch position

Laser accuracy

For simple isocentric treatments, monthly is probably
adequate. For off-axis or VMAT-type IMRT
deliveries, weekly or daily may be necessary
For complex IMRT and VMAT deliveries, weekly or
even daily checks are important
Insufficient information to specify, depends on type
of setup used. Based on history and usage for a
particular facility and whether IGRT is being used

Daily if laser setup used. Study clinical use to
determine frequency if all setup is done with IGRT

Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

Annual couch rotation,
couch translation not
addressed

Daily

Consistency with marks on floor or
bubble level
Consistency of readouts with the
couch positioned placing the cross
hairs (gantry pointing down)
sequentially on two marks on the
table and with two settings on the
ODI
Consistency marks on wall and floor

4249

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

A review of the FTA indicates that many of the initial
planning directive error pathways can be managed by the
same strategy: a dosimetrist performs QC checks of the inputs
into the planning process by comparison against the treatment
protocol, while the more comprehensive downstream physics
checks of the plan use the same information for the final QA
check. For example, to make an error in the secondary-toprimary image registration more detectable (FMEA step 43,
rank 23), the treatment protocol documents should specify
the standard registration process to be used for the given
clinical site (which image set is primary, type of registration
used, e.g., manual vs automated, which landmarks to align,
etc.) This places the onus on the attending physician to
request and document variances from the standard procedure
where medically indicated. It should be noted that primary
image set selection errors are not limited to cases where
additional secondary imaging studies must be imported. It
is not uncommon to have multiple CT simulation datasets
(e.g., repeat exams for changing medical condition, adaptive
replanning or to correct a simulation error). Other errors
that can be intercepted with this strategy include incorrect
specification of goals and constraints (FMEA step 22, rank
140) and treatment planning approach/parameters (FMEA
step 45, rank 84). The treatment protocol can be implemented
as a patient-specific form to be inserted in the patient’s
chart. Default or standard choices (e.g., DVH planning
or evaluation constraints) would be printed in the form,
so if the physician wants to modify these values, the
default number is crossed out and the physician-specified
number written by hand. This eliminates transcription error characteristic of a form with simple blanks. On the
other hand, it introduces the potential failure of using the
default in error because the physician neglected to make a
change.91

9.D.2. Failure mode #14
Rank

RPN Step# Process

Step

#14

278

Motion and uncertainty management
(includes PTV and PRV)

44

6. Initial plan
directive

FM: Specify wrong motion-compensated Tx protocol, specified
margin size inconsistent with motion management technique,
specified duty cycle and breathing phase inconsistent with margin
for gating

For institutions that take a sophisticated approach to
respiratory motion management, a detailed and comprehensive policy on 4D motion management is an example of a
clinical procedure that should be well documented in the
appropriate lung or upper abdominal tumor site specific
protocol (example checklist of Table IV). This protocol
should include indications for 4D vs 3D planning CT,
indications for using specific respiration sensors or surrogate
breathing motion markers, criteria for gated vs free breathing
treatment, and which images (MIPS, slow CT, breathing phase
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4249

CT closest to average) are to be used for internal target
volume (ITV) creation, dose calculation, and for generation
of reference digitally reconstructed radiographs (DRR).129
Without specific policies, there is no way to assure that
correct methods are being used. Numerous issues are directly
involved in registering 4D images, e.g., which landmarks are
to be used by therapists in performing online registration of
daily gated radiographs and reference DRRs, the accuracy
which is to be expected or demanded, and what to do when
expectations are not achievable. All these should be addressed
in this protocol. An explicit check of the registration used
for planning, at the end of the RTP anatomy step is an
important QA step, and is part of example checklist of Table V,
“Preparation of patient data set for treatment planning.”
Review of the FTA and FMEA potential failure rank #14,
step 44, “Specify wrong motion-compensated Tx protocol”
reveals four different error scenarios for failures involving
motion compensation:
1. The physician specifies an incorrect approach to uncertainty management (e.g., failing to order intrafractional
imaging for a frameless SRS treatment).
2. The motion management protocol is correctly selected,
but planning specifications (e.g., PTV margin) are
inconsistent with the protocol.
3. The physician correctly specifies the motion management technique and consistently specifies other planning/treatment directions, but, downstream physics,
dosimetry, or therapist actions are not consistent with
policies underlying the written directive (e.g., the
wrong CT image set is used to generate the reference
DRRs).
4. Motion management, all associated planning directives,
and all subsequent technical actions are consistent
with procedures but the motion management technique
is inadequate or overly conservative compared to
the actual geometric uncertainty characteristics of the
patient or relevant population of patients.
Intercepting errors arising from scenarios 1–3 can be
accomplished by written procedures as part of those described
above and in example checklists of Tables IV and V that
clearly identify indications for gated treatment including
immobilization, setup, intrafraction motion monitoring, and
planning procedures. The treatment protocol allows the
dosimetrist to perform QC on the inputs to treatment
planning and subsequent steps. This check should detect
variances from established policies and provide a mechanism for negotiating either compliance or a documented
variance with the attending physician. The Task Group also
recommends incorporating review of motion and uncertainty
management techniques into the physicist review of treatment
plans.
Scenario (4) arises not from a random procedural error or
mistake but systematic errors due to inadequate commissioning of the motion management process. Reducing incidence
of motion management failures is discussed in relation to the
step 205 (rank 8) in Appendix G.141

4250

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4250

9.D.3. Failure mode #24
Rank

RPN

FMEA#

#24

240

189

Process

Step

11. Day 1 Tx

Set treatment
parameters

FM: Wrong Tx accessories (missing/incorrect
bolus, blocks)

Rank 24 is the first FM to appear for the initial treatment
session (Day-1 treatment). Day 1 includes the first day of
planned changes within a single course of treatment: examples
include cone-downs, field changes done in response to peer
review or patient changes, and the introduction of a new
treatment site concurrent with an on-going treatment. As the
adaptive radiation therapy paradigm becomes more prevalent,
the number of Day-1 sessions per patient is likely to increase.
As with several earlier FMs, it makes sense to look at the whole
Day 1 part of the process tree (Steps 174–189 in the FMEA
spreadsheet) and the associated fault tree together. Note that
failures that can occur on other treatment days are considered
in the “Day N Treatment” FMs.
The major concern for the Day-1 treatment is establishing
or verifying the treatment parameters that will be duplicated
through the entire treatment course, since errors that are not
detected at Day 1 may become systematic errors that will
affect many or all of the treatments. There are many issues that
must be handled within the QM program associated with Day1 treatment, including the following. Many of these issues
are addressed in the Day-1 treatment checklist described in
example checklist of Table VII.
• Parameters (e.g., couch positions, shifts from patient
reference marks) and treatment accessories (e.g., bolus)
may be defined or added to the plan during the first day’s
treatment in a way that circumvents the standard flow and
checks of the treatment preparation process. The Day1 QM must verify the correctness of these additions,
and assure that they are correctly continued through the
treatment course.
• A QM check of the entire treatment delivery script before
treatment is crucial. The “when, how, and who” for the
performance of these checks depends on the details of
the process used for preparation, plan download, and
Day-1 setup and verification. In all cases, though, the
QM system must ensure that all parts of the plan are
validated before treatment.
• It is essential to confirm that the correct patient and
the correct treatment plan have been selected, endpoints
addressed by the time-out process required by the Joint
Commission. Although there is no specific guidance
that a time out should be required for each treatment
session, it is a good idea. During the time out, the
patient’s identity and treatment site, especially laterality,
are confirmed and any changes in patient condition that
have bearing on the treatment are noted and conveyed to
the physician. It is also confirmed that the correct files
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

have been opened in the delivery system and the correct
instructions in the paper or electronic record, and that
prescribed changes in treatment have been addressed
(with proper signatures in place). Especially at Day 1,
radiation oncologist participation in the time-out process
is a guard against deviations from physician intent.
• The entire Day-1 treatment process should be structured
by written departmental procedures that clearly identify
the parameters to be validated before treatment, and
should be part of the training for all new physicians,
physicists, dosimetrists, and therapists. All staff involved
should understand the patient’s treatment plan and
associated treatment parameter tolerances. Individuals
associated with each patient’s treatment should be
clearly identified.
• The initial imaging session and resultant marking of
the patient or accessories may set the standard for the
patient’s position for the whole treatment course. Each
facility should develop a policy describing the process
for Day-1 imaging, setup, and verification of patient
position and treatment isocenter(s). Patient-positioning
errors need to be corrected via the appropriate image
guidance strategy. For some disease sites, this refers to
traditional weekly portal and orthogonal field imaging.
With proper training and protocols, daily positioning
corrections implemented by therapists based on image
guidance with off-line review by the radiation oncologist
can improve setup accuracy. However, if an incorrect
isocenter placement remains uncorrected over much
of the treatment, or if anatomy is misidentified or
misinterpreted during the Day-1 procedure, a high
severity treatment failure may result, indicating the
need for QM procedures to mitigate this risk. One
pragmatic approach defines classes of treatments with
set tolerances, for example, a hypothetical protocol
may allow prostate patients, as a class, up to 2-mm
discrepancies between the DRR and beam image, while
lung patients may be allowed up to 5 mm. Defining such
classes of patient beforehand removes ambiguity and
possible errors at the time of imaging.
• Depending on departmental policy, the monitor-unit
setting per segment (or the equivalent for other forms
of IMRT) is validated prior to the first treatment by a
second, independent calculation program or by measurements. Assuming that the validation methodology had
been thoroughly commissioned, at or before Day 1, the
medical physicist need only review that the independent
check fell within department-specified tolerances.
• For both Day 1 and Day N treatments, the human
factor of “inattention” was frequently identified as
a cause of failure. Treatment sessions can become
repetitive exercises for therapists and it is difficult for any
individual to remain alert at all times. Training, policies,
and managerial actions (sufficient staffing to allow for
short breaks, rotating therapists between machines to
keep them fresh) are partial solutions, but an additional
layer of technical protection would be a much stronger
and more effective approach. The TG recommends

4251

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4251

that manufacturers develop techniques to address such
verification, such as a method of comparing records of
the MLC positions in real-time through the treatment to
the pattern in the treatment plan.
Many of these issues are addressed in example checklist of
Table VIII which suggests QM checks for an initial treatment
day. See also the QM suggested for Day-N treatment failure
modes, since those types of failures can also happen on the
first day of treatment.
9.D.4. Failure mode #32
Rank

RPN

Step#

Process

Step

#32

229

207

12. Day N Tx

Tx machine and peripheral
hardware setup for Tx

FM: Changed prescription dose (and MU) occurring after initial
Tx and not entered into chart and/or treatment unit computer

This FM is illustrative of issues that arise at the boundary
of human and technological systems. In addition to this
FM, there are a number of other FMs for Day-N Tx that
have high RPN numbers including step 208 rank 34, step
202 rank 40, step 206 rank 42, step 204 rank 63, step 203
rank 152. The higher ranking failures involve incorrect data
being used for treatment; changes made but not entered
correctly or not entered at all into the delivery system
computer, or changes made inappropriately. The lower ranked
failures involve software or hardware failures. Many of the
human failures have the same causes: lack of standardized
procedures, inattention, inadequate training, and lack of
communication.
Prevention of these types of problems requires QM using
both technological and human factors methods. The following
list gives some recommended QM measures:
• Independent checks of all delivery-system treatmentplan parameters against those originally approved for
use. A QA check of all this information is critical, and
some kind of check has long been part of the weekly
physics check, though weekly checks are clearly inadequate for some hypofractionated treatments. Modern
treatments contain very many treatment parameters, so
developing robust automated checks of this information
is crucial.
• Methods to flag changes in delivery parameters and
prevent further treatment until review and approval
are performed. Such a feature exists in at least one
modern treatment management system with regard to
major delivery parameters: it should become a universal
feature.
• Procedures to assure the consistency of daily treatment
with the approved prescription(s) and plan(s) are crucial.
Typically, this has been an important part of the weekly
chart review (see example checklist Table VIII) by the
medical physicist and/or dosimetrist and separate weekly
review by a therapist, both of which should include
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

checking the consistency of the daily treatment record(s)
with the most current physician prescription(s). This
check should also verify that all treatments have been
correctly recorded in the official record, whether paper,
electronic, or a combination.
• Methods to draw attention to unplanned changes, as well
as expected changes that do not show up. Detecting
unfulfilled change orders is often difficult if the orders
are verbal or poorly documented. Especially in a
combined electronic and paper environment, such issues
can be relatively common if there is no established
and uniform procedure. For any system, electronic,
paper, or combination thereof, the process for making
changes and triggering the appropriate QA checks of
the change must be rigidly designed and followed.
Though the common QA practice (also tied to billing
and the recommendations of TG-40) of weekly paper
and/or electronic chart checks helps detect some of these
failures, this check is not adequate for many clinical
scenarios.
• Dissemination of warnings about nonstandard behavior
of the treatment system or involving the patient to
appropriate staff for timely investigation; an anomalous
condition should not be allowed to persist long enough
to adversely affect any patient.
• Policies that establish electronic and procedural “permissions,” so that change approvals are performed by
appropriate staff.
Lower ranked failures include the treatment unit computer
not loading the patient’s file correctly (after having done
so on Day 1) or file corruption. Assuming that the file
corruption does not bring the treatment to a halt or trigger
software messages, such failures can be extremely difficult
to detect. Therapist monitoring might detect incorrect MLC
movement, but many cases would not be apparent. Much
of the ability to detect or prevent such problems relies on
good software design. For example, use of file checksums to
confirm validity of files can increase the detectability of such
problems, and should be encouraged. Other developments
involving automatic monitoring (see “Real time QA during
treatment delivery” in rank 3) would also address this FM.
9.D.5. Failure mode #153
Rank

RPN

Step#

Process

Step

#153

130

203

12. Day N Tx

Tx machine and peripheral
hardware setup for Tx

FM: MLC files (leaf motion) corrupted

Our final example addresses a much lower rank failure
mode. This issue, though ranked 153rd, is a high severity
failure mode that involves corruption of an MLC file used
to control MLC leaf motions required to deliver an IMRT
plan. Such a corruption might present as an unreadable file,
which might prevent a failure at this step, or it could present

4252

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

as an empty file that might be used for treatment. The most
hazardous situation involves plan revision on Day N, as in a
recently reported case40 in which the MLC trajectories were
lost during transfer of a revised plan. Since the MLC trajectory
information was missing, open fields were treated with the
IMRT MU, resulting in severe overdoses to the patient. There
are also anecdotal (but undocumented) reports of incorrect
leaf motions in previously treated but unchanged plans. For
this failure to occur, the file must be accepted by the machine
as valid, but contain an incorrect set of leaf sequences. While
the likelihood of occurrence may be low, such errors clearly
can occur, even though their true frequency is unknown.
Because of its high severity ranking, the QM program should
address this FM. Testing all fluence patterns to confirm their
correct behavior and resulting intensity distributions before
any clinical use is crucial. While some institutions have
substituted calculational checks for a physical plan delivery,
such checks must be accompanied by strict QA of the generic
performance of the MLC. Even with these, it is incumbent
on the institution to verify that this combination of checks
can really confirm the correctness of a delivery based on a
given MLC description. In the absence of such verification
methods, physical deliveries of any new fluence pattern and
confirmation of their correctness, when delivered on the
machine, is recommended by this task group. We also note
that pretreatment verification does not address potential Day
N delivery problems. Checking the leaf pattern daily could
provide protection from the most serious effects on the patient,
but for a facility with even a third of the patients under IMRT
treatments at any given time, this check would consume a
great deal of time and be clinically unfeasible. The TG urges
vendors to provide automated tools to avoid this daily problem
(e.g., use of checksums or other automated checks, automated
comparison of EPID dose or dose back-calculated from MLC
log-files with corresponding calculations from the TPS or
with pretreatment data), that might demonstrate the MLC
descriptions were identical and unchanged day to day.130–135
Similar automated checks for all files related to a patient’s
treatment are also necessary. At present, there is no widely
available procedure to prevent this potential failure.
9.E. Quality management program components

Design and implementation of a quality management
program based on all the information generated in an FMEA
or FTA analysis of this scope is a large and complex task, the
details of which are highly dependent on how the planning
and delivery processes are implemented in the institution, as
well as on the types of treatments administered. Thus, a QM
program should be individualized to the relevant processes,
case mix, methods, and equipment used in each center, and
it is not expected that one standard set of QM guidelines and
methods will be appropriate for each clinic.
However, the analysis presented in this work highlights
a general set of QM requirements and needs. To efficiently
encompass the QM tasks which have been identified, it
has become clear that collecting appropriate quality assurance, quality control, and procedural tasks into a set of
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4252

recommendations will help organize the QM to help increase
safety and the quality of treatment for patients treated with
IMRT (and other similar techniques).
Note: These checks are proposed as a starting point, for
consideration and incorporation into the QM program defined
by each institution. These recommendations are not complete,
nor appropriate for all situations.
Most of the items in the following tables are found in
other guidance documents.1,2,72,136–139 However, the TG feels
it is useful to collect these items in list form and in the
order in which they might occur in a typical clinical process.
For TG 100, this served as a welcome reality check both on
our process and on the intuition and experience that informs
current community best practices.
One of the general results of the FMEA and associated
FTA is the clear need to define site-specific treatment
planning and delivery protocols that serve as the basis for
simulation, planning, and treatment delivery expectations,
methods, and QM procedures. This general standardization
and documentation of the methods to be used addresses
many of the most common failure modes for many of the
most critical steps in the planning and delivery process, and
are a crucial way to avoid training and procedure lapses.
Example checklist of Table IV summarizes issues, procedures,
decisions and QM that should be defined for each clinical
site-specific pretreatment workup protocol.
Many of the QM procedures suggested by FMEA and FTA
have been grouped into sets of checks that occur at key points
in the process; example checklists have been created for these
sets.
Example checklist of Table V deals with issues related to
preparation of the patient dataset for planning that is suggested
by the TG-100 FMEA. These items should be confirmed or
verified before moving from the anatomy definition task to
treatment planning. This relatively new and uncommon set of
checks is sometimes incorporated in the final planning check
or is addressed by an even further downstream peer review
session (for example, chart rounds) after the first week of
treatment. IMRT makes this check crucial, since problems in
the patient anatomical model or the initial directive can lead to
major errors in IMRT planning, and correction of those errors
at the end of the IMRT planning process is very inefficient,
and often unlikely, since a great deal of work must be redone.
It is even more crucial for hypofractionated treatments, which
may be completed before the next chart rounds. All anatomy
definitions and preliminary planning instructions should be
checked, mostly by the physician but also by the planner,
to assure that an accurate model of the patient is used for
planning.
The next logical checkpoint in the planning/and delivery
process occurs at the end of treatment planning, as the
plan is approved, finalized, and prepared for treatment.
The treatment-plan check has been a staple of standard
QM programs and a recommendation endorsed by TG 100.
Example checklist of Table VI presents many of the issues
to be confirmed or verified as part of the plan check. It
is important to note that this involves much more than a
simple check of the mechanics of the plan (MUs, gantry

4253

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

angles, etc.). The ability of the plan to satisfy the goals of
the treatment-plan directive and the ability of the plan to be
delivered safely must be reviewed by someone, typically the
physicist, independently of the physician who approves the
plan for use and the planner who generates the plan. Guidance
for the physician’s review, evaluation, and approval of the
plan for clinical use is also a crucial part of any good QM
process.
In the days of paper charts and manual treatment setup,
assuring that the correct treatment planning information was
written in the chart was adequate preparation for the start
of the patient’s treatment. However, in modern radiotherapy
there are many steps in the process that occur between the
evaluation and approval of the plan for treatment, and the
actual delivery of that plan to the patient on Day 1. Preparation
of the detailed treatment prescriptions, transfer (and perhaps
transformation) of the planning-system information onto the
treatment-management system and then to the computerdriven treatment-delivery system all occur before the patient
arrives. There is also a complex process involved with setting
the patient up for their first treatment, including confirmation
of setup, and often the use of image guidance to position the
patient, and document the correctness of the patient’s position
and treatment plan. Example checklist of Table VII describes
issues that must be incorporated, in some fashion, into the
Day-1 treatment process.
Finally, routine checks of treatment progress are necessary
throughout the patient’s treatment course. Though this often is
called the “weekly chart check,” this check involves more than
the chart, electronic, or paper. The accuracy of patient setup,
delivery, dosimetric recording of the treatment information,
documentation and correctness of image guidance decisions,
all must be confirmed regularly during the treatment course
or significant errors can continue or propagate throughout the
treatment, causing unrecoverable harm. A number of issues
to be confirmed are described in example checklist of Table
VIII though certainly a much broader array of items can be
appropriately included in these checks for specific treatment
protocols. For example, for patients treated with motion
management, such as gating, or breathing control or implanted
transponders, additional checks not listed in example checklist
of Table VIII are needed. The frequency of all Day N checks
is also crucial. A 10 Gy/fraction hypofractionated treatment
needs checks at each treatment, since many errors occurring
more than once could lead to significant and unrecoverable
toxicity. It is also important to note that the methodology for
these checks needs a great deal of new development, since
accomplishing these checks efficiently and effectively with
current treatment management systems is often quite timeconsuming and difficult. Many new features and techniques
are necessary here to make these checks as complete and
efficient as they need to be.
9.F. Summary and conclusions: IMRT example

The creation and maintenance of a complete quality
management program for clinical use of any complex technology, such as IMRT, requires detailed analysis, continual
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4253

improvement, development of increasingly more effective
QM measures, and continuous attention to both details and
the overall goal of achieving safe and effective patient
treatment.
In Sec. 9 and in Appendix G (Ref. 141) we have used
failure modes and effects analysis and fault tree analysis
methods to study a generic planning and delivery process
for IMRT to illustrate how to apply these general tools
to a complex radiotherapy technology and formulate a
more comprehensive IMRT quality management program
that more effectively promotes quality with more efficient use of available resources. The generic nature of the
analyses and the task group mechanism do not make it
possible to give complete guidance for any single specific
clinical implementation. However, the recommendations of
the task group should be a guide to individual institutions as they apply these techniques to their individual
processes.
The FMEA and FTA methodologies described in Sec. 6
were used to determine the most likely points of failure and to
construct a model QM program for one example generic IMRT
treatment process. Analysis of the types and causes of failures
and their relative severity (S), likelihood of occurrence (O),
and lack of detectability (D) assigned by the TG members was
used to order failure modes by risk and severity. This ranked
list of failure modes was then analyzed to determine, or at
least identify, quality management steps that would mitigate
those failure modes.
Aside from the many QM recommendations produced
by the analysis, a number of “key core components” for
quality were identified. Their absence in the QM program
significantly increases the likelihood that a large fraction of
the failure modes identified will actually occur. The key core
components that any safe and high quality IMRT program
must include are:
• Standardized procedures.
• Adequate training of staff.
• Clear lines of communication among staff.
In addition to these, other components essential for quality
treatments include:
• Maintenance of hardware and software resources.
• Adequate staff, physical and computer resources.
Regardless of a department’s treatment process or methods,
the TG expects that individual physicists will identify various
individual potential failure modes that are not considered in
this work, from their own experience of incidents or near
events. These issues must be included in future analyses,
so that the QM program for IMRT (and other techniques)
continues to become more successful at preventing safety
and quality problems. It is essential that all members of the
radiation therapy team continue to enhance the quality of the
QM program, and to continually update and enhance the QM
suggested by TG 100 for their own IMRT practice, as well as
extending the methodology to other types of external-beam
and brachytherapy treatments.

4254

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

10. CONCLUSIONS
Modern-day radiation therapy techniques enable the delivery of highly conformal radiation dose distributions to clinical
target volume(s) while sparing the surrounding normal tissues.
However, this improvement comes with increased complexity,
price, and potentially risk. A major component of the increased
price and risk lies in the complexity of advanced technology
radiotherapy planning, delivery, and clinical workflow and the
resultant expenditure of time and resources for QM. It is clear
from the published literature and from the work reported here
that there are many sources of error that contribute to dose
uncertainties which can potentially harm a patient or negate
the treatment benefits.
The complexity of modern day radiotherapy planning
and its accurate and safe delivery arises from many factors,
including (a) the fact that radiation therapy consists of many
complex subprocesses, each with its own uncertainties and
risks, and which must be accurately executed and safely
handed off to prevent error propagation; (b) modern dose
delivery techniques (e.g., IMRT, SRS, SBRT) have many
more degrees of freedom (e.g., leaf sequences) to manipulate
the dose distribution than corresponding techniques of earlier
eras (e.g., three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy), greatly
increasing device complexity and the number of potential
error pathways; and (c) modern treatments are planned on
the basis of a 3D anatomical model derived from medical
images, making the treatment delivery accuracy highly
dependent on image quality and the correct interpretation
and use of the imaging information. The probability of
severe target underdose or normal tissue injury increases with
increasing demand for dose conformality and normal-tissue
avoidance. Mitigating the risk of actualizing these potential
error pathways and thereby adversely impacting treatment
quality or injuring patients can only be achieved by carefully
designed and documented clinical workflow that encompasses
not only physicists but the entire team of professionals
consisting of physicians, dosimetrists, therapists, nurses, and
administrators, and a quality management program that takes
as its goals the correct operation of devices and correct
execution of the planning and delivery processes.
TG 100 concurs with previously published QA guidance and community consensus that quality assurance test
procedures and tolerance limits for the performance of
radiotherapy planning and delivery systems should be dictated
by the requirement to reduce overall uncertainty (random and
systematic) in delivered radiation dose to a patient to less
than 5%.140 One motivation for the work of TG 100 is that
current QA guidance typically does not expend sufficient effort
on preventing low probability “catastrophic” events39,41–43
which pose very high risks to individual patients (random or
sporadic events) or to groups of patients (systematic events).
Sporadic catastrophic events, e.g., treatment of IMRT fields
without movement of the MLC leaves, can entail interactions
between users and device interfaces and often may be caused
by upstream user errors that lead very wrong input data to
be propagated through the planning/delivery process, rather
than by erroneous functioning of one device itself. The
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4254

process-oriented QM proposed in this report attempts to
make avoidance and detection of such events an important
priority, in the tradition of several recent AAPM task groups
(TG-59, process-oriented sections of TG-56, and TG-135)
which address treatment safety. Continued development and
application of the risk-based quality management methods
discussed in this report to clinical radiotherapy processes
should help improve the overall safety and quality of
the radiotherapy process, and make possible more efficient
methods for the mitigation of safety hazards and quality
limitations throughout the RT process.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Members of TG 100 would like to express their sincere
gratitude to Paul Medin for making many contributions during
the early phase of the activities of the Task Group. The authors
would also like to thank Li Zeng, Silas Bernardoni, Andrew
Dolan, and Bo Zhao for their help with the FMEA and fault
tree analysis presented in this report. Special thanks also to
all the reviewers from the Quality Assurance Subcommittee,
Therapy Physics Committee, Science Council, Professional
Council, Ad Hoc Committee for the implementation of TG
100 report, and many others who performed a review of the
document in confidence.
APPENDIX A: PRACTICAL GUIDES
TO PERFORMING FMEA, FTA
1. Guidelines for applying risk assessment, industrial
quality management tools, and techniques
a. Performing a process analysis and risk assessment

1. Define the process
• Assemble a crossfunctional team from the organization
to select a process. Choose a process that can be
improved significantly through the analysis. Choose a
process that is problematic, complex, difficult, and new,
that is potentially hazardous, etc.
• Assemble a crossfunctional team familiar with the
process. All individuals who participate in the process
should be invited to be a member of the team. Getting
as many different perspectives of the process as possible
is important.
• Develop a process map, flow chart, or process tree of the
process.
A visual representation or “picture” showing the entire process
can be very useful. People involved in the analysis (and the
process) can see how what they do fits into the overall process
and gain an understanding of what is done upstream and
downstream from their part of the process. That knowledge
and insight often results in creative process improvement
ideas.
2. Perform a risk assessment of the process using FMEA
• Ideally, the same crossfunctional team that developed
the process tree, flow chart, or process map should

4255

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4255

F. 8. Traditional failure modes and effects analysis worksheet.

participate in the FMEA. Each FMEA team should have
a facilitator, preferably someone not intimately involved
in the process under review.
• Figure 8 shows a conventional FMEA form. Most
organizations use this form or a modified version of
this form to guide their FMEA efforts.
Steps in performing an FMEA.
Step 1. List each process step defined in the process
tree/flow chart/process map.
Step 2. Identify each potential failure mode for each
process step. A failure mode is defined as the way
a failure occurs, is observed or the way in which a
process step can fail to meet its intended purpose.
Each step in the process could and usually does
have several different failure modes.
Step 3. Identify the potential causes of each failure mode.
Each failure mode can and usually does have
several potential causes. The use of root cause
analysis tools such as fish bone diagrams or affinity
diagrams can be helpful in completing this step.
Step 4. Identify the potential effects or results for each
failure mode if it were to occur and not be detected.
Normally there are three levels of effects for each
failure mode.
• Local effect—the effect of the failure mode at
the process step level.
• Down stream effect—the effect of the failure
mode on the next step downstream from the
process step being analyzed.
• End effect—the effect of the failure mode at end
point of the overall process being analyzed.
Note. The prescribed method for defining the
effects of a failure mode requires identifying three
different levels of effects. Many organizations,
however, only identify the end effect. This is
an acceptable alternative practice and can be
less confusing than the prescribed method of
identifying three levels of effects.
Step 5. Identify current process controls. There are three
basic categories of process controls, actions that
have been taken that will:
• Prevent the occurrence of the cause of a failure
mode.
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

• Detect the failure mode before it produces the
end effect.
• Moderate the severity of the results if a failure
mode occurs.
Examples of process controls include inspection
and other quality control measures, training, work
instructions, and performance monitoring.
If the intent is to evaluate the utility of the current
control, the FMEA should be performed ignoring
the controls and seeing if the analysis indicates
they should be used.
Step 6. Determine the likelihood that the process step will
fail and result in some problem. Two independent
factors that contribute to this likelihood are used
to make this determination.
• Occurrence—the likelihood that the cause of a
failure mode will occur and result in the failure
mode.
• Detection—the likelihood that a failure mode
will not be detected, when it occurs, before
causing any significant or serious end effects.
Determine the seriousness of the end effect resulting from the failure mode.
• Severity—the severity of the end effect for a
specific failure mode, given that the failure
mode did occur.
Each of the three factors is ranked on a scale
from one to ten, with ten being the worst case
scenario. TG 100 developed customized ranking
scales relevant to their processes (see Table II).
Step 7. Calculate the RPN for each failure mode, cause,
and effect combination. The RPN is the product
of the three factors, occurrence, detection, and
severity. High RPNs indicate process weakness or
potentially hazardous process steps.
Step 8. Identify the process steps with the highest RPNs
and severity values. There is no standard convention for this step.
Process step, failure mode combinations that
have a high severity ranking also require corrective
actions even though their individual RPN might be
relatively low. A process step with a serious end
effect needs to be evaluated for potential corrective
action regardless of its likelihood of occurrence or
its detectability. Even though the probability of the

4256

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

failure mode occurring and the likelihood of it not
being detected might be low, there is always a small
chance that it might occur and not be detected thus
resulting in a serious end effect.
Step 9. Develop and implement additional process controls for those process steps, failure mode, and
cause combinations that have the highest RPNs or
high severity rankings. These new process controls
should focus on what can be done to:
• Reduce or eliminate the causes of failure modes.
• Increase the probability that the failure mode
will be detected before a serious end effect
occurs.
• Moderate the severity of an end effect if a failure
mode does occur.
A fault tree of the process helps the team appreciate the
propagation of errors. The fault tree should be linked to the
FMEA. Each end effect from the FMEA becomes an undesired
event at the top of the fault tree. Each failure mode is then
listed at the next lower level of the tree, and the FMEA causes
are listed in the next lower level of the tree. The RPNs for each
failure mode, cause and effect combination from the FMEA
should be identified on the fault tree (at the lowest level of the
tree). This fault tree/FMEA combination diagram provides
a visual representation of the FMEA analysis. It allows the
group completing the analysis to see critical nodes in the fault
tree where corrective measures can prevent the propagation
failure modes leading to undesirable events or end effects.
This fault tree/FMEA diagram also makes it easier to see the
most frequently occurring causes across failure modes, which
might indicate an organizational weakness. For example, if
there is a preponderance of causes with high RPNs related to
inadequate training, the organization should consider making
significant improvements to their training program.

4256

Step 2: Form a group and identify a team leader. Normally
we would include a representative from all professional groups
involved, but in the context of this exercise, this is not
possible.
Step 3: Create an initial process map. It is often useful to
make a first draft that does not attempt to capture the entire
process in detail but rather the workflow at a more general
level.
Step 4: Iterative mapping. Refine the process map, adding
levels of detail as necessary.
Step 5: Use the process map as the basis of the FTA and
FMEA exercises.
Tips for creating useful process maps.
1. It is often useful to look at processes from the patient’s
perspective.
2. For clinical processes, a multiprofessional team is
necessary for the development of a valid map.
3. The number of subprocesses identified should be the
smallest number to meet the objective.
4. The users of the map should have the same understanding of the meaning of the subprocesses.
5. Choose the right level of detail. A map that is too general
loses its utility, while one that is too detailed becomes
unmanageable and staff members lose the big picture.
6. Do not get hung up on fancy graphics. There is value in
the process of creating the map.

2. Failure modes and effects analysis
a. Exercise objectives

After this exercise, the team should be able to perform a
basic failure mode and effects analysis and identify risks or
hazards for a given process (Fig. 9).
b. Exercise overview

APPENDIX B: AN INTRODUCTORY EXERCISE FOR
PROCESS MAPPING, FMEA, FTA, AND QM DESIGN
FOR IMRT TREATMENT PLANNING
1. Process mapping

The team will complete a FMEA for a step(s) identified in
the process tree segment for intensity modulated radiation
therapy below (Fig. 10). “Evaluate Plan” will be used to
generate FMEA and FTA examples.

a. Learning objective

The goal of this exercise is to develop a simple process
map for IMRT treatment planning, from the time the
dosimetrist receives the final region-of-interest contours from
the physician to the time the plan is ready to be treated.
b. Exercise

Below is a rough guide that can be used as an outline for
this exercise, as well as some tips for creating useful process
maps.
Step 1: Decide what process to map. The scale of the
process is an important concern here. Mapping the entire
external beam radiation oncology process, for example, is
a large project that could take many weeks.
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

F. 9. Example of process maps.

4257

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4257

F. 10. Treatment planning segment from a process tree describing IMRT
process.

Steps:
1. Form a team. Teams familiar with the process being
analyzed always produce a higher quality FMEA than
an individual.
2. Select one of the steps from the treatment planning
process tree segment and use the table below to perform
a FMEA on that step.
3. Performing the FMEA (Fig. 11)
a. List the process step your team selected.
b. Identify ways in which the process step can fail (failure modes). List at least four. In order to minimize
confusion, your team should use a consistent process
for identifying failure modes, such as always define
failure modes in terms of specific process failures.
For example, for delivering a specific prescribed
dose of radiation failure modes should include dose
delivered to the wrong location, too little radiation
delivered, and too much radiation delivered.
c. For one of the failure modes you identified, list
several causes that could result in that failure mode.
It is important that you list causes that could occur
and not limit the analysis to causes of failure modes
that your team thinks are likely to occur. Typical
causes of failure modes include but are not limited
to the following:
• Lack of formal and written procedures, work
instructions, or work methods.

• Inadequate training.
• Insufficient time to complete a task due to other
tasks requiring attention.
• Equipment or software malfunction.
• Stressful work environments leading to mistakes.
d. Identify the potential effects that could result when
the failure mode occurs. It is important to identify
the worst possible outcome of a failure mode. Your
team should not consider how likely an effect is to
occur. Very serious effects could occur as a result of
many failure modes in radiation therapy.
e. List all process controls currently in place and being
used. There are three categories of process controls:
• Controls that reduce the likelihood of specific
causes of failure modes occurring. Examples
include but are not limited to:
1. Operator training or certification.
2. Written procedures and work instructions.
3. Process checklists.
4. Statistical process control (SPC).
• Controls that detect failure modes prior to serious
effects resulting. All types of in process inspection
are the most commonly used detection controls.
Examples include but are not limited to:
1. Peer review of process decisions.
2. Down stream process checks.
• Controls that will moderate the severity of effects
that could result from a failure mode. This
category of control is typically difficult to execute
in radiation therapy. The time between a failure
mode occurring and the resulting, potentially very
serious, effects is very short and damage is often
inevitable once a failure mode occurs.
f. Judge the effectiveness of the current controls by
• Defining the likelihood that a specific cause of a
failure mode will occur.
• Defining the probability that the current controls
will detect the failure mode before any serious
effects result.
• Specify the seriousness of the effects resulting
from the failure mode.
• Use the TG-100 table (Table II) to assign values
for occurrence of a cause, detection of a failure
mode, and seriousness of effect

F. 11. FMEA table.
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4258

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

g. Calculate the RPN by multiplying the occurrence,
detection, and severity rankings.
h. Identify and list new process controls that will
improve the
• Likelihood of preventing specific causes of failure
modes from occurring, and
• probability of detecting a failure mode before any
serious effects occur.
i. Estimate the improvements resulting from the recommended actions in terms of:
• Reducing the occurrence of the cause.
• Improving the detection of the failure mode.
• Calculate the new RPN by multiplying the estimated occurrence, detection rankings resulting
from the recommended actions, and carry over
severity rankings.

4258

f. Add the RPN and severity scores to the branches of
the tree.
From this fault tree, the team will now be able to see how
failures propagate and can potentially cause harm to the
patient.
4. Quality management design
a. Exercise objectives

After this exercise, the team will:
1. Understand how to address potential failures and causes
of failure identified during FMEA and FTA, and
2. understand how to establish a quality management
program.

3. Fault tree analysis

b. Exercise overview

a. Exercise objectives

In this exercise the team will address the potential failure
modes and causes identified for the procedural step, Evaluate
Plan from the FMEA and FTA created in the example exercise
above. The team may also may need the process map created
above in the example exercise.
Steps:

After this exercise, the team should be able to:
1. Construct a fault tree from an FMEA, and
2. perform basic FTA.
b. Exercise overview

In this exercise the team will complete an FTA for a step,
Evaluate Plan from the FMEA constructed above.
Steps:
1. Form a team; team composed of members who were
involved in the development of the process tree and
performing the FMEA for various steps of the process
tree tend to produce a higher quality fault tree than a
single individual.
2. Performing the FTA:
a. The failure mode to the far left would be “Treatment
Planning Failure.” There will be many more paths
that will lead to that than the one the team will
construct, but the team will not consider those now.
b. The next box to the right will begin the portion of the
tree that the team will develop, and contain “Failure
in Evaluating the Plan.” When multiple potential
failures could lead to the failure independently,
connect the causes on the right with the failure to
the left with an  gate. If multiple causes have to
happen simultaneously, connect them to the failure
with an  gate.
c. Working to the right, from each box, continue to add
boxes for potential causes that could directly lead to
each failure.
d. Remember to stop a pathway when it reaches the
end of the facility’s control.
e. As the team works on the fault tree, one may uncover
potential failure modes that were overlooked on the
FMEA. Add those to the tree.
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

1. Scan through the potential causes for failures on the
right of the FTA. Identify those causes that might
indicate inadequate resource allocation to perform the
task. These should be addressed by recommendations
to increase support. Be specific as to what resources
would be requested.
2. Identify those causes that result from the lack of any
of the key core components (training, procedures and
policies, and communications). Even if these are low
scoring causes because, potentially, they may indicate
a general problem in the facility that needs to be
addressed. List recommended actions to mitigate the
causes.
3. Again, scan through the potential failure modes and
causes, paying particular attention to those with the
higher RPN or severity values. Is there any redesign of
the process that would eliminate these potential failures
or reduce their RPN values? (Nothing will reduce the
severity.) If a redesign looks appropriate, would that
lead to new potential failures or increase the RPN values
for those previously identified?
4. For the remaining potential failure modes and causes,
begin with the box with the highest-ranking RPN value.
a. Would thorough commissioning eliminate this
potential failure mode?
b. If not, at this point it must be addressed through quality management: quality assurance, quality control,
or a combination of the two.
• Most likely, quality control would be associated
with the particular step, entering the fault tree as
a “Failure in QC” in parallel with the cause and

4259

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

joined through an  gate going to the resulting
potential failure mode.
• Quality assurance would work downstream, after
the cause. It is efficient to design QA such that
it may cover several causes or potential failure
modes.
Add the QM steps to the fault tree and:
• Specify the recommended tool and methodology,
and note the strength of the tool according to the
ranking of the Institute for Safe Medical Practice,
and
• for QA steps, estimate how frequently the tests
should be performed.
5. Continue the exercise as in step 4 for the box with the
next highest-ranking PRN value. Continue addressing
boxes until the RPN and S values are so low that it
would not be worth using resources to prevent their
effects. However, make sure all potential failures with
severity values of four or greater are addressed.
a)Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Electronic mail:

HUQS@UPMC.EDU; Telephone: 412-647-1813; Fax: 412-647-1161.
1E. E. Klein, J. Hanley, J. Bayouth, F. F. Yin, W. Simon, S. Dresser, C.

Serago, F. Aguirre, L. Ma, B. Arjomandy, C. Liu, C. Sandin, and T. Holmes,
“Task Group 142 report: Quality assurance of medical accelerators,” Med.
Phys. 36, 4197–4212 (2009).
2G. J. Kutcher et al., “Comprehensive QA for radiation oncology: Report
of AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 40,” Med. Phys. 21,
581–618 (1994).
3R. Nath, L. L. Anderson, G. Luxton, K. A. Weaver, J. F. Williamson, and A.
S. Meigooni, “Dosimetry of interstitial brachytherapy sources: Recommendations of the AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 43.
American Association of Physicists in Medicine,” Med. Phys. 22, 209–234
(1995).
4B. Fraass, K. Doppke, M. Hunt, G. Kutcher, G. Starkschall, R. Stern, and
J. Van Dyke, “American Association of Physicists in Medicine Radiation
Therapy Committee Task Group 53: Quality assurance for clinical radiotherapy treatment planning,” Med. Phys. 25, 1773–1829 (1998).
5R. Nath, L. L. Anderson, J. A. Meli, A. J. Olch, J. A. Stitt, and J. F.
Williamson, “Code of practice for brachytherapy physics: Report of the
AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 56. American Association of Physicists in Medicine,” Med. Phys. 24, 1557–1598 (1997).
6P. R. Almond, P. J. Biggs, B. M. Coursey, W. F. Hanson, M. S. Huq, R.
Nath, and D. W. Rogers, “AAPM’s TG-51 protocol for clinical reference
dosimetry of high-energy photon and electron beams,” Med. Phys. 26,
1847–1870 (1999).
7R. Nath, P. J. Biggs, F. J. Bova, C. C. Ling, J. A. Purdy, J. van de Geijn, and
M. S. Weinhous, “AAPM code of practice for radiotherapy accelerators:
Report of the AAPM Radiation Therapy Task Group No. 45,” Med. Phys.
21, 1093–1121 (1994).
8Quality and Safety in Radiotherapy: Learning the New Approaches in Task
Group 100 and Beyond, edited by B. R. Thomadsen, P. Dunscombe, E.
Ford, M. S. Huq, T. Pawlicki, and S. Sutlief (Medical Physics Publishing,
Madison, WI, 2013).
9E. C. Ford, R. Gaudette, L. Myers, B. Vanderver, L. Engineer, R. Zellars, D.
Y. Song, J. Wong, and T. L. DeWeese, “Evaluation of safety in a radiation
oncology setting using failure mode and effects analysis,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 74, 852–858 (2009).
10E. C. Ford, K. Smith, S. Terezakis, V. Croog, S. Gollamudi, I. Gage, J.
Keck, T. DeWeese, and G. Sibley, “A streamlined failure mode and effects
analysis,” Med. Phys. 41, 061709 (6pp.) (2014).
11A. Sawant, S. Dieterich, M. Svatos, and P. Keall, “Failure mode and effect
analysis-based quality assurance for dynamic MLC tracking systems,”
Med. Phys. 37, 6466–6479 (2010).
12S. A. Terezakis, P. Pronovost, K. Harris, T. Deweese, and E. Ford, “Safety
strategies in an academic radiation oncology department and recommendations for action,” Jt. Comm. J. Qual. Patient Saf. 37, 291–299 (2011).
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4259
13E. C. Ford, K. Smith, K. Harris, and S. Terezakis, “Prevention of a wrong-

location misadministration through the use of an intradepartmental incident
learning system,” Med. Phys. 39, 6968–6971 (2012).
14S. Broggi, M. C. Cantone, A. Chiara, N. Di Muzio, B. Longobardi, P.
Mangili, and I. Veronese, “Application of failure mode and effects analysis
(FMEA) to pretreatment phases in tomotherapy,” J. Appl. Clin. Med. Phys.
14, 265–277 (2013).
15D. S. Denny, D. K. Allen, N. Worthington, and D. Gupta, “The use of
failure mode and effect analysis in a radiation oncology setting: The cancer
treatment centers of America experience,” J. Healthcare Qual. 36, 18–28
(2014).
16J. R. Perks, S. Stanic, R. L. Stern, B. Henk, M. S. Nelson, R. D. Harse, M.
Mathai, J. A. Purdy, R. K. Valicenti, A. D. Siefkin, and A. M. Chen, “Failure
mode and effect analysis for delivery of lung stereotactic body radiation
therapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 83, 1324–1329 (2012).
17C. E. Noel, L. Santanam, P. J. Parikh, and S. Mutic, “Process-based quality
management for clinical implementation of adaptive radiotherapy,” Med.
Phys. 41, 081717 (9pp.) (2014).
18M. Scorsetti, C. Signori, P. Lattuada, G. Urso, M. Bignardi, P. Navarria,
S. Castiglioni, P. Mancosu, and P. Trucco, “Applying failure mode effects
and criticality analysis in radiotherapy: Lessons learned and perspectives
of enhancement,” Radiother. Oncol. 94, 367–374 (2010).
19A. Vlayen, “Evaluation of time- and cost-saving modifications of HFMEA:
An experimental approach in radiotherapy,” J. Patient. Saf. 7, 165–168
(2011).
20M. C. Cantone, M. Ciocca, F. Dionisi, P. Fossati, S. Lorentini, M. Krengli,
S. Molinelli, R. Orecchia, M. Schwarz, I. Veronese, and V. Vitolo, “Application of failure mode and effects analysis to treatment planning in scanned
proton beam radiotherapy,” Radiat. Oncol. 8:127 (2013).
21F. Yang, N. Cao, L. Young, J. Howard, W. Logan, T. Arbuckle, P. Sponseller,
T. Korssjoen, J. Meyer, and E. Ford, “Validating FMEA output against
incident learning data: A study in stereotactic body radiation therapy,” Med.
Phys. 42, 2777–2785 (2015).
22I. Veronese, E. De Martin, A. S. Martinotti, M. L. Fumagalli, C. Vite, I.
Redaelli, T. Malatesta, P. Mancosu, G. Beltramo, L. Fariselli, and M. C.
Cantone, “Multi-institutional application of failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) to CyberKnife stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT),”
Radiat. Oncol. 10:132 (2015).
23R. P. Manger, A. B. Paxton, T. Pawlicki, and G. Y. Kim, “Failure mode
and effects analysis and fault tree analysis of surface image guided cranial
radiosurgery,” Med. Phys. 42, 2449–2461 (2015).
24K. C. Younge, Y. Wang, J. Thompson, J. Giovinazzo, M. Finlay, and R.
Sankreacha, “Practical implementation of failure mode and effects analysis
for safety and efficiency in stereotactic radiosurgery,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 91, 1003–1008 (2015).
25R. T. Jones, L. Handsfield, P. W. Read, D. D. Wilson, R. Van Ausdal, D.
J. Schlesinger, J. V. Siebers, and Q. Chen, “Safety and feasibility of STAT
RAD: Improvement of a novel rapid tomotherapy-based radiation therapy
workflow by failure mode and effects analysis,” Pract. Radiat. Oncol. 5,
106–112 (2015).
26A. L. Damato, L. J. Lee, M. S. Bhagwat, I. Buzurovic, R. A. Cormack, S.
Finucane, J. L. Hansen, D. A. O’Farrell, A. Offiong, U. Randall, S. Friesen,
and A. N. Viswanathan, “Redesign of process map to increase efficiency:
Reducing procedure time in cervical cancer brachytherapy,” Brachytherapy
14, 471–480 (2015).
27E. Sayler, H. Eldredge-Hindy, J. Dinome, V. Lockamy, and A. S. Harrison, “Clinical implementation and failure mode and effects analysis of
HDR skin brachytherapy using Valencia and Leipzig surface applicators,”
Brachytherapy 14, 293–299 (2015).
28M. Giardina, F. Castiglia, and E. Tomarchio, “Risk assessment of component failure modes and human errors using a new FMECA approach:
Application in the safety analysis of HDR brachytherapy,” J. Radiol. Prot.
34, 891–914 (2014).
29J. Lopez-Tarjuelo, A. Bouche-Babiloni, A. Santos-Serra, V. MorilloMacias, F. A. Calvo, Y. Kubyshin, and C. Ferrer-Albiach, “Failure mode
and effect analysis oriented to risk-reduction interventions in intraoperative
electron radiation therapy: The specific impact of patient transportation,
automation, and treatment planning availability,” Radiother. Oncol. 113,
283–289 (2014).
30L. Masini, L. Donis, G. Loi, E. Mones, E. Molina, C. Bolchini, and M.
Krengli, “Application of failure mode and effects analysis to intracranial
stereotactic radiation surgery by linear accelerator,” Pract. Radiat. Oncol.
4, 392–397 (2014).

4260

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

31Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, Compre-

hensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals: The Official Handbook, Standard LD, 5.2. ed., JCAHO, Oakbrook Terrace, IL, 2001.
32Joint Commission Perspectives on Patient Safety, Using FMEA to Assess
and Reduce Risk JCAHO, Oakbrook Terrace, IL, 2001.
33Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, Failure
Modes and Effects Analysis: Proactive Risk Reduction, JCAHO, Oakbrook
Terrace, IL, 2002.
34D. Thwaites, P. Scalliet, J. W. Leer, and J. Overgaard, “Quality assurance in
radiotherapy. European Society for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology
Advisory Report to the Commission of the European Union for the ‘Europe
against cancer programme,”’ Radiother. Oncol. 35, 61–73 (1995).
35European Society for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology, Practical
guidelines for the implementation of a quality system in radiotherapy:
Physics for clinical radiotherapy, Booklet No. 4, ESTRO, Brussels, 1998.
36International Atomic Energy Agency, Quality assurance in radiotherapy,
IAEA-TECDOC-1040, IAEA, Vienna, 1997.
37American College of Medical Physics, Radiation control and quality assurance in radiation oncology: A suggested protocol, ACMP Report Series No.
2, ACMP, Reston, VA, 1986.
38International
Electrotechnical Commission, Medical electrical
equipment—Medical electron accelerators: Functional performance
characteristics, IEC 976, IEC, Geneva, 1989.
39International
Electrotechnical Commission, Medical electrical
equipment—Medical electron accelerators in the range 1 MeV–50
MeV: Guidelines for performance characteristics, IEC 977, IEC, Geneva,
1989.
40W. Bogdanich, Radiation offers new cures and new ways to do harm, New
York Times, 2010.
41J. F. Williamson and B. R. Thomadsen, “Foreword. Symposium ‘quality
assurance of radiation therapy: The challenges of advanced technologies,”’
Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 71, S1 (2008).
42The Royal College of Radiologists, Towards safer radiotherapy, Report
No. BCFO(08)1, London, 2008, https://www.rcr.ac.uk/docs/oncology/pdf/
Towards_saferRT_final.pdf.
43World Health Organization, Radiotherapy Risk Profile—Technical
Manual, Geneva, 2008, http://www.who.int/patientsafety/activities/
technical/radiotherapy_risk_profile.pdf.
44P. Ortiz López, J. M. Cosset, P. Dunscombe, O. Holmberg, J. C. Rosenwald,
L. Pinillos Ashton, J. J. Vilaragut Llanes, and S. Vatnitsky, “A report of
preventing accidental exposures from new external beam radiation therapy
technologies,” ICRP Publication 112 (2009).
45ROSIS, Radiation Oncology Safety Information System, 2007, http://
www.clin.radfys.lu.se.
46ICRU, “Determination of absorbed dose in a patient irradiated by beams of
x- or gamma-rays in radiotherapy procedures,” ICRU Report 74 (International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurement, Bethesda, MD,
1976).
47D. F. Herring and D. H. J. Compton, “The degree of precision in the radiation dose delivered in cancer radiotherapy,” Computers in Radiotherapy,
Br. J. Radiol. Special Report No. 5, pp. 51–58 (1971).
48J. Juran, “Quality,” in Juran’s Quality Control Handbook, edited by F. G.
J. M. Juran (McGraw Hill, New York, NY, 1988), p. 2.6.
49IEC, International Electrotechnical Commission Standard 60601-1, Medical electrical equipment, Part 1—General requirements for basic safety and
essential performance, IEC, Geneva, 2005.
50E. C. Ford, L. Fong de Los Santos, T. Pawlicki, S. Sutlief, and P.
Dunscombe, “Consensus recommendations for incident learning database
structures in radiation oncology,” Med. Phys. 39, 7272–7290 (2012).
51P. H. Halvorsen, I. J. Das, M. Fraser, D. J. Freedman, R. E. Rice III, G. S.
Ibbott, E. I. Parsai, T. T. Robin, Jr., and B. R. Thomadsen, “AAPM Task
Group 103 report on peer review in clinical radiation oncology physics,” J.
Appl. Clin. Med. Phys. 6, 50–64 (2005).
52VA National Center for Patient Safety, http://www.patientsafety.va.gov.
53S. Mutic and S. Brame, in Error and Near Miss Reporting: A View from
North America, edited by T. Pawlicki, P. Dunscombe, A. J. Mundt, and P.
Scalliet (Taylor & Francis, New York, NY, 2010), pp. 85–93.
54A Reference Guide For Learning From Incidents In Radiation Treatment
(HTA Initiative Series #22), http://www.ihe.ca/publications/library/
archived/a-reference-guide-for-learning-from-incidents-in-radiation-treat
ment.
55RO-ILS: Radiation Oncology Incident Learning System, https://www.
astro.org/Clinical-Practice/Patient-Safety/ROILS/Intro.aspx.
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4260
56Center for the assesment of Radiological Sciences (CARS), Madison, WI,

http://www.cars-pso.org.
57International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Case studies in the appli-

cation of probabilistic safety assessment techniques to radiation sources,
Final report of a Coordinated Research Project, 2001-2003 IAEATECDOC-1494, IAEA, Vienna, 2006.
58International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Safety Standards for Protecting People and the Environment, Safety of Radiation Generators and
Sealed Radioactive Sources, Safety Guide No. RS-G-1.10, IAEA, Vienna,
2006.
59International Atomic Energy Agency, International Atomic Energy
Agency, Safety series: Lessons learned from accidental exposures in
radiotherapy, 17, IAEA, Vienna, Austria.
60M. E. Pate-Cornell, L. M. Lakats, D. M. Murphy, and D. M. Gaba, “Anesthesia patient risk: A quantitative approach to organizational factors and
risk management options,” Risk Anal. 17, 511–523 (1997).
61N. Sheridan-Leos, L. Schulmeister, and S. Hartranft, “Failure mode and effect analysis: A technique to prevent chemotherapy errors,” Clin. J. Oncol.
Nurs. 10, 393–398 (2006).
62B. Duwe, B. D. Fuchs, and J. Hansen-Flaschen, “Failure mode and effects
analysis application to critical care medicine,” Crit. Care Clin. 21, 21–30
(2005).
63T. B. Wetterneck, K. A. Skibinski, T. L. Roberts, S. M. Kleppin, M. E.
Schroeder, M. Enloe, S. S. Rough, A. S. Hundt, and P. Carayon, “Using
failure mode and effects analysis to plan implementation of smart i.v. pump
technology,” Am. J. Health-Syst. Pharm. 63, 1528–1538 (2006).
64J. R. Palta, M. S. Huq, and B. Thomadsen, “Application of risk analysis
methods to IMRT quality management,” in Quality and safety in radiotherapy, Learning the new approaches in Task Group 100 and beyond, Medical Physics Monograph no. 36, edited by B. Thomadsen, P. Dunscombe,
E. Ford, S. Huq, T. Pawlicki, and S. Sutlief (2013), pp. 312–349.
65International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Develeopment—Nuclear Energy Agency, INES: The
International Nuclear and Radiological Event Scale User’s Manual, 2008
Edition IAEA, Vienna, 2013.
66Automotive Industry Action Group, FMEA Manual, 4th ed. (AIAG, Southfield, MI, 2008).
67Institute for Safe Medical Practices (ISMP), Medication error prevention “toolbox,” in Medication Safety Alert, 1999, http://www.ismp.org/
msaarticles/toolbox.html.
68E. U. Ekaette, R. C. Lee, D. L. Cooke, K. L. Kelly, and P. B. Dunscombe,
“Risk analysis in radiation treatment: Application of a new taxonomic
structure,” Radiother. Oncol. 80, 282–287 (2006).
69K. M. Langen, N. Papanikolaou, J. Balog, R. Crilly, D. Followill, S. M.
Goddu, W. Grant III, G. Olivera, C. R. Ramsey, and C. Shi, “QA for
helical tomotherapy: Report of the AAPM Task Group 148,” Med. Phys.
37, 4817–4853 (2010).
70S. Dieterich, C. Cavedon, C. F. Chuang, A. B. Cohen, J. A. Garrett, C. L.
Lee, J. R. Lowenstein, M. F. d’Souza, D. D. Taylor, Jr., X. Wu, and C. Yu,
“Report of AAPM TG 135: Quality assurance for robotic radiosurgery,”
Med. Phys. 38, 2914–2936 (2011).
71S. H. Benedict, K. M. Yenice, D. Followill, J. M. Galvin, W. Hinson,
B. Kavanagh, P. Keall, M. Lovelock, S. Meeks, L. Papiez, T. Purdie, R.
Sadagopan, M. C. Schell, B. Salter, D. J. Schlesinger, A. S. Shiu, T. Solberg,
D. Y. Song, V. Stieber, R. Timmerman, W. A. Tome, D. Verellen, L. Wang,
and F. F. Yin, “Stereotactic body radiation therapy: The report of AAPM
Task Group 101,” Med. Phys. 37, 4078–4101 (2010).
72J. M. Moran, M. Dempsey, A. Eisbruch, B. A. Fraass, J. M. Galvin, G.
S. Ibbott, and L. B. Marks, “Safety considerations for IMRT: Executive
summary,” Med. Phys. 38, 5067–5072 (2011).
73T. D. Soleberg, J. M. Balter, S. H. Benedict, B. A. Fraass, B. Kavanagh,
C. Miyamoto, T. Pawlicki, L. Potters, and Y. Yamada, “Quality and safety
considerations in stereotactic radiosurgery and stereotactic body radiation
therapy: Executive summary,” Pract. Radiat. Oncol. 2, 2–9 (2012).
74D. A. Jaffray, K. M. Langen, G. Mageras, L. A. Dawson, D. Yan, R. Adams,
A. J. Mundt, and B. A. Fraass, “Safety considerations for IGRT: Executive
summary,” Pract. Radiat. Oncol. 3, 167–170 (2013).
75B. R. Thomadsen, B. A. Erickson, P. J. Eifel, I. Chow Hsu, R. R. Patel, D.
G. Petereit, B. A. Fraass, and M. J. Rivard, “A review of safety, quality
management, and practice guidelines for high-dose-rate brachytherapy:
Executive summary,” Pract. Radiat. Oncol. 4, 65–70 (2014).
76L. B. Marks, R. A. Adams, T. Pawlicki, A. L. Blumberg, D. Hoopes,
M. D. Brundage, and B. A. Fraass, “Enhancing the role of case-oriented

4261

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

peer review to improve quality and safety in radiation oncology: Executive
summary,” Pract. Radiat. Oncol. 3, 149–156 (2013).
77L. E. Fong de Los Santos, S. Evans, E. C. Ford, J. E. Gaiser, S. E. Hayden,
K. E. Huffman, J. L. Johnson, J. G. Mechalakos, R. L. Stern, S. Terezakis, B.
R. Thomadsen, P. J. Pronovost, and L. A. Fairobent, “Medical Physics Practice Guideline 4.a: Development, implementation, use and maintenance of
safety checklists,” J. Appl. Clin. Med. Phys. 16, 37–59 (2015).
78Safety is No Accident: A Framework for Quality Radiation Oncology
and Care, ASTRO, Fairfax, VA, 2012, https://www.astro.org/upload
edFiles/Main_Site/Clinical_Practice/Patient_Safety/Blue_Book/Safetyisn
oAccident.pdf.
79L. B. Marks, C. M. Rose, J. A. Hayman, and T. R. Williams, “The need for
physician leadership in creating a culture of safety,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 79, 1287–1289 (2011).
80J. F. Williamson, P. B. Dunscombe, M. B. Sharpe, B. R. Thomadsen, J. A.
Purdy, and J. A. Deye, “Quality assurance needs for modern image-based
radiotherapy: Recommendations from 2007 interorganizational symposium on ‘Quality assurance of radiation therapy: Challenges of advanced
technology,”’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 71, S2–S12 (2008).
81H. D. Kubo, G. P. Glasgow, T. D. Pethel, B. R. Thomadsen, and J. F.
Williamson, “High dose-rate brachytherapy treatment delivery: Report of
the AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 59,” Med. Phys.
25, 375–403 (1998).
82T. Pawlicki, P. B. Dunscombe, A. J. Mundt, and P. Scalliet, Quality and
Safety in Radiotherapy (Taylor & Francis, New York, NY, 2010).
83J. A. Purdy et al., “Medical accelerator safety considerations: Report of
AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 35,” Med. Phys.
20, 1261–1275 (1993).
84G. S. Mageras, G. J. Kutcher, S. A. Leibel, M. J. Zelefsky, E. Melian, R. Mohan, and Z. Fuks, “A method of incorporating organ motion uncertainties
into three-dimensional conformal treatment plans,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 35, 333–342 (1996).
85P. B. Dunscombe, S. Iftody, N. Ploquin, E. U. Ekaette, and R. C. Lee,
“The equivalent uniform dose as a severity metric for radiation treatment
incidents,” Radiother. Oncol. 84, 64–66 (2007).
86A. Rangel, N. Ploquin, I. Kay, and P. Dunscombe, “Towards an objective
evaluation of tolerances for beam modeling in a treatment planning system,” Phys. Med. Biol. 52, 6011–6025 (2007).
87D. A. Low, J. M. Moran, J. F. Dempsey, L. Dong, and M. Oldham,
“Dosimetry tools and techniques for IMRT,” Med. Phys. 38, 1313–1338
(2011).
88S. L. Mahan, D. J. Chase, and C. R. Ramsey, “Technical Note: Output and
energy fluctuations of the tomotherapy Hi-Art helical tomotherapy system,”
Med. Phys. 31, 2119–2120 (2004).
89T. Pawlicki, S. Yoo, L. E. Court, S. K. McMillan, R. K. Rice, J. D. Russell, J.
M. Pacyniak, M. K. Woo, P. S. Basran, J. Shoales, and A. L. Boyer, “Moving
from IMRT QA measurements toward independent computer calculations
using control charts,” Radiother. Oncol. 89, 330–337 (2008).
90T. Pawlicki, M. Whitaker, and A. L. Boyer, “Statistical process control for
radiotherapy quality assurance,” Med. Phys. 32, 2777–2786 (2005).
91B. Thomadsen, S. W. Lin, P. Laemmrich, T. Waller, A. Cheng, B. Caldwell,
R. Rankin, and J. Stitt, “Analysis of treatment delivery errors in brachytherapy using formal risk analysis techniques,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol.,
Phys. 57, 1492–1508 (2003).
92P. Ortiz López, “Tools for risk assessment in radiation therapy,” Ann. ICRP
41, 197–207 (2012).
93B. G. Clark, R. J. Brown, J. L. Ploquin, A. L. Kind, and L. Grimard,
“The management of radiation treatment error through incident learning,”
Radiother. Oncol. 95, 344–349 (2010).
94T. K. Yeung, K. Bortolotto, S. Cosby, M. Hoar, and E. Lederer, “Quality
assurance in radiotherapy: Evaluation of errors and incidents recorded over
a 10 year period,” Radiother. Oncol. 74, 283–291 (2005).
95N. Barthelemy-Brichant, J. Sabatier, W. Dewe, A. Albert, and J. M. Deneufbourg, “Evaluation of frequency and type of errors detected by a computerized record and verify system during radiation treatment,” Radiother.
Oncol. 53, 149–154 (1999).
96B. A. Fraass, K. L. Lash, G. M. Matrone, S. K. Volkman, D. L. McShan,
M. L. Kessler, and A. S. Lichter, “The impact of treatment complexity and
computer-control delivery technology on treatment delivery errors,” Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 42, 651–659 (1998).
97E. Ekaette, R. C. Lee, D. L. Cooke, S. Iftody, and P. Craighead, “Probabilistic fault tree analysis of a radiation treatment system,” Risk Anal. 27,
1395–1410 (2007).
Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

4261
98P. B. Dunscombe, E. U. Ekaette, R. C. Lee, and D. L. Cooke, “Taxonometric

applications in radiotherapy incident analysis,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol.,
Phys. 71, S200–S203 (2008).
99T. J. Logan, “Error prevention as developed in airlines,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 71, S178–S181 (2008).
100M. Ciocca, M. C. Cantone, I. Veronese, F. Cattani, G. Pedroli, S. Molinelli,
V. Vitolo, and R. Orecchia, “Application of failure mode and effects analysis
to intraoperative radiation therapy using mobile electron linear accelerators,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 82, e305–e311 (2012).
101P. Novak, E. G. Moros, W. L. Straube, and R. J. Myerson, “Treatment
delivery software for a new clinical grade ultrasound system for thermoradiotherapy,” Med. Phys. 32, 3246–3256 (2005).
102E. W. Israelski and W. H. Muto, “Human factors risk management as a way
to improve medical device safety: A case study of the therac 25 radiation
therapy system,” Jt. Comm. J. Qual. Patient Saf. 30, 689–695 (2004).
103B. G. Clark, R. J. Brown, J. Ploquin, and P. Dunscombe, “Patient safety
improvements in radiation treatment through 5 years of incident learning,”
Pract. Radiat. Oncol. 3, 157–163 (2013).
104NPSF,
http://www.npsf.org/?
Patient
Safety
Dictionary,
page=dictionaryae&terms=.
105N. D’Souza, L. Holden, S. Robson, K. Mah, L. Di Prospero, C. S.
Wong, E. Chow, and J. Spayne, “Modern palliative radiation treatment:
Do complexity and workload contribute to medical errors?,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 84, e43–e48 (2012).
106D. N. Margalit, Y. H. Chen, P. J. Catalano, K. Heckman, T. Vivenzio,
K. Nissen, L. D. Wolfsberger, R. A. Cormack, P. Mauch, and A. K. Ng,
“Technological advancements and error rates in radiation therapy delivery,”
Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 81, e673–e679 (2011).
107A. Arnold, G. P. Delaney, L. Cassapi, and M. Barton, “The use of categorized time-trend reporting of radiation oncology incidents: A proactive
analytical approach to improving quality and safety over time,” Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 78, 1548–1554 (2010).
108J. P. Bissonnette and G. Medlam, “Trend analysis of radiation therapy
incidents over seven years,” Radiother. Oncol. 96, 139–144 (2010).
109G. Huang, G. Medlam, J. Lee, S. Billingsley, J. P. Bissonnette, J. Ringash,
G. Kane, and D. C. Hodgson, “Error in the delivery of radiation therapy:
Results of a quality assurance review,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys.
61, 1590–1595 (2005).
110S. Mutic, R. S. Brame, S. Oddiraju, P. Parikh, M. A. Westfall, M. L.
Hopkins, A. D. Medina, J. C. Danieley, J. M. Michalski, I. M. El Naqa,
D. A. Low, and B. Wu, “Event (error and near-miss) reporting and learning
system for process improvement in radiation oncology,” Med. Phys. 37,
5027–5036 (2010).
111L. B. Marks, K. L. Light, J. L. Hubbs, D. L. Georgas, E. L. Jones, M. C.
Wright, C. G. Willett, and F. F. Yin, “The impact of advanced technologies
on treatment deviations in radiation treatment delivery,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 69, 1579–1586 (2007).
112R. M. Macklis, T. Meier, and M. S. Weinhous, “Error rates in clinical
radiotherapy,” J. Clin. Oncol. 16, 551–556 (1998).
113R. Calandrino, G. M. Cattaneo, C. Fiorino, B. Longobardi, P. Mangili,
and P. Signorotto, “Detection of systematic errors in external radiotherapy
before treatment delivery,” Radiother. Oncol. 45, 271–274 (1997).
114Abt Study of Medical Physicist Work Values for Radiation Oncology
Physics Services: Round II (Final Report) College Park, MD, 2003,
http://aapm.org/pubs/reports/ABTReport.pdf.
115E. E. Klein, “A grid to facilitate physics staffing justification,” J. Appl. Clin.
Med. Phys. 11, 263–273 (2010).
116American College of Radiology (ACR), Radiation Oncology Accreditation
Program Requirements, ACR, Reston, VA, 2012, http://www.acr.org/∼/
media/ACR/Documents/Accreditation/RO/Requirements.pdf.
117B. S. Chera, M. Jackson, L. M. Mazur, R. Adams, S. Chang, K. Deschesne,
T. Cullip, and L. B. Marks, “Improving quality of patient care by improving daily practice in radiation oncology,” Sem. Radiat. Oncol. 22, 77–85
(2012).
118W. R. Lee, M. Roach III, J. Michalski, B. Moran, and D. Beyer, “Interobserver variability leads to significant differences in quantifiers of prostate
implant adequacy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 54, 457–461 (2002).
119V. Gregoire, P. Levendag, K. K. Ang, J. Bernier, M. Braaksma, V. Budach,
C. Chao, E. Coche, J. S. Cooper, G. Cosnard, A. Eisbruch, S. El-Sayed,
B. Emami, C. Grau, M. Hamoir, N. Lee, P. Maingon, K. Muller, and H.
Reychler, “CT-based delineation of lymph node levels and related CTVs in
the node-negative neck: DAHANCA, EORTC, GORTEC, NCIC, RTOG
consensus guidelines,” Radiother. Oncol. 69, 227–236 (2003).

4262

Huq et al.: TG 100 report

4262

120M. R. Kaus, K. K. Brock, V. Pekar, L. A. Dawson, A. M. Nichol, and D.

131D. W. Litzenberg, J. M. Moran, and B. A. Fraass, “Verification of dynamic

A. Jaffray, “Assessment of a model-based deformable image registration
approach for radiation therapy planning,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys.
68, 572–580 (2007).
121M. Kapanen, M. Tenhunen, R. Parkkinen, P. Sipila, and H. Jarvinen, “The
influence of output measurement time interval and tolerance on treatment
dose deviation in photon external beam radiotherapy,” Phys. Med. Biol. 51,
4857–4867 (2006).
122C. Constantinou and E. S. Sternick, “Reduction of the ‘horns’ observed on
the beam profiles of a 6-MV linear accelerator,” Med. Phys. 11, 840–842
(1984).
123A. Rangel and P. Dunscombe, “Tolerances on MLC leaf position accuracy
for IMRT delivery with a dynamic MLC,” Med. Phys. 36, 3304–3309
(2009).
124J. E. Bayouth, “Siemens multileaf collimator characterization and quality
assurance approaches for intensity-modulated radiotherapy,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 71, S93–S97 (2008).
125C. Liu, T. A. Simon, C. Fox, J. Li, and J. R. Palta, “Multileaf collimator
characteristics and reliability requirements for IMRT Elekta system,” Int.
J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 71, S89–S92 (2008).
126T. LoSasso, “IMRT delivery system QA,” in Intensity Modulated Radiation
Therapy: The State of the Art, Medical Physics Monograph Vol. 29, edited
by J. Palta and T. R. Mackie (Medical Physics Publishing, Madison, WI,
2001), pp. 561–591.
127T. LoSasso, C.-S. Chui, and C. C. Ling, “Comprehensive quality assurance
for the delivery of intensity modulated radiotherapy with a multileaf collimator used in the dynamic mode,” Med. Phys. 28, 2209–2219 (2001).
128G. Mu, E. Ludlum, and P. Xia, “Impact of MLC leaf position errors on
simple and complex IMRT plans for head and neck cancer,” Phys. Med.
Biol. 53, 77–88 (2008).
129P. J. Keall, G. S. Mageras, J. M. Balter, R. S. Emery, K. M. Forster, S.
B. Jiang, J. M. Kapatoes, D. A. Low, M. J. Murphy, B. R. Murray, C. R.
Ramsey, M. B. Van Herk, S. S. Vedam, J. W. Wong, and E. Yorke, “The
management of respiratory motion in Radiation Oncology report of AAPM
Task Group 76,” Med. Phys. 33, 3874–3900 (2006).
130W. Luo, J. Li, R. A. Price, Jr., L. Chen, J. Yang, J. Fan, Z. Chen, S.
McNeeley, X. Xu, and C. M. Ma, “Monte Carlo based IMRT dose verification using MLC log files and R/V outputs,” Med. Phys. 33, 2557–2564
(2006).

and segmental IMRT delivery by dynamic log file analysis,” J. Appl. Clin.
Med. Phys. 3, 63–72 (2002).
132R. Prabhakar, J. Cramb, and T. Kron, “A feasibility study of using couchbased real time dosimetric device in external beam radiotherapy,” Med.
Phys. 38, 6539–6552 (2011).
133A. Mans, M. Wendling, L. N. Mcdermott, J. J. Sonke, R. Tielenburg, R.
Vijlbrief, B. Mijnheer, M. van Herk, and J. C. Stroom, “Catching errors
with in vivo EPID dosimetry,” Med. Phys. 37, 2638–2644 (2010).
134A. M. Stell, J. G. Li, O. A. Zeidan, and J. F. Dempsey, “An extensive log-file
analysis of step-and-shoot intensity modulated radiation therapy segment
delivery errors,” Med. Phys. 31, 1593–1602 (2004).
135M. Sabet, P. Rowshanfarzad, P. Vial, F. W. Menk, and P. B. Greer, “Transit
dosimetry in IMRT with an a-Si EPID in direct detection configuration,”
Phys. Med. Biol. 57, N295–N306 (2012).
136European Society for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology, Guidelines for
the Verification of IMRT: Booklet 9, ESTRO, Brussels, 2008.
137A. C. Hartford, M. G. Palisca, T. J. Eichler, D. C. Beyer, V. R. Devineni,
G. S. Ibbott, B. Kavanagh, J. S. Kent, S. A. Rosenthal, C. J. Schultz, P.
Tripuraneni, and L. E. Gaspar, “American Society for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology (ASTRO) and American College of Radiology (ACR)
practice guidelines for intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT),” Int.
J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 73, 9–14 (2009).
138American College of Radiology, ACR—ASTRO Practice Guideline
for Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT), ACR, 2011
http://www.acr.org/Quality-Safety/Standards-Guidelines/Practice-Guidel
ines-by-Modality/Radiation-Oncology.
139G. A. Ezzell, J. M. Galvin, D. Low, J. R. Palta, I. Rosen, M. B. Sharpe,
P. Xia, Y. Xiao, L. Xing, C. X. Yu, IMRT Subcommittee, and AAPM
Radiation Therapy Committee, “Guidance document on delivery, treatment
planning, and clinical implementation of IMRT: Report of the IMRT Subcommittee of the AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee,” Med. Phys. 30,
2089–2115 (2003).
140G. K. Svensson, N. A. Baily, R. Loevinger, and R. J. Morton, Physical
Aspects of Quality Assurance in Radiation Therapy (American Association
of Physicists in Medicine, American Institute of Physics, New York, NY,
1984).
141See supplementary material at http://dx.doi.org/10.1118/1.4947547 for
Appendixes C1–C3 and D–G.

Medical Physics, Vol. 43, No. 7, July 2016

