Task Group 142 report: Quality assurance of medical acceleratorsa…
Eric E. Kleinb兲
Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri

Joseph Hanley
Hackensack University Medical Center, Hackensack, New Jersey

John Bayouth
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa

Fang-Fang Yin
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina

William Simon
Sun Nuclear Corp., Melbourne, Florida

Sean Dresser
Northside Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia

Christopher Serago
Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida

Francisco Aguirre
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

Lijun Ma
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California

Bijan Arjomandy
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

Chihray Liu
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida

Consultants:
Carlos Sandin
Elekta Oncology, Crawley, United Kingdom

Todd Holmes
Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto, California

共Received 24 February 2009; revised 8 July 2009; accepted for publication 8 July 2009;
published 17 August 2009兲
The task group 共TG兲 for quality assurance of medical accelerators was constituted by the American
Association of Physicists in Medicine’s Science Council under the direction of the Radiation
Therapy Committee and the Quality Assurance and Outcome Improvement Subcommittee. The task
group 共TG-142兲 had two main charges. First to update, as needed, recommendations of Table II of
the AAPM TG-40 report on quality assurance and second, to add recommendations for asymmetric
jaws, multileaf collimation 共MLC兲, and dynamic/virtual wedges. The TG accomplished the update
to TG-40, specifying new test and tolerances, and has added recommendations for not only the new
ancillary delivery technologies but also for imaging devices that are part of the linear accelerator.
The imaging devices include x-ray imaging, photon portal imaging, and cone-beam CT. The TG
report was designed to account for the types of treatments delivered with the particular machine.
For example, machines that are used for radiosurgery treatments or intensity-modulated radiotherapy 共IMRT兲 require different tests and/or tolerances. There are specific recommendations for
MLC quality assurance for machines performing IMRT. The report also gives recommendations as
to action levels for the physicists to implement particular actions, whether they are inspection,
scheduled action, or immediate and corrective action. The report is geared to be flexible for the
physicist to customize the QA program depending on clinical utility. There are specific tables
according to daily, monthly, and annual reviews, along with unique tables for wedge systems, MLC,
and imaging checks. The report also gives specific recommendations regarding setup of a QA
program by the physicist in regards to building a QA team, establishing procedures, training of
personnel, documentation, and end-to-end system checks. The tabulated items of this report have
4197

Med. Phys. 36 „9…, September 2009

0094-2405/2009/36„9…/4197/16/$25.00

© 2009 Am. Assoc. Phys. Med.

4197

4198

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

4198

been considerably expanded as compared with the original TG-40 report and the recommended
tolerances accommodate differences in the intended use of the machine functionality 共non-IMRT,
IMRT, and stereotactic delivery兲. © 2009 American Association of Physicists in Medicine.
关DOI: 10.1118/1.3190392兴
Key words: accelerator, QA, quality assurance, radiotherapy
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4198
I.A. Purpose. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4198
I.B. Background. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4198
II. QUALITY ASSURANCE OF MEDICAL
ACCELARATORS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4199
II.A. General. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4199
II.B. Test frequencies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4204
II.C. Guidelines for tolerance values. . . . . . . . . . . . 4204
II.C.1. Acceptance testing procedure standards... 4204
II.C.2. Commissioning baseline values. . . . . . . . . 4204
II.C.3. Tolerances and action levels. . . . . . . . . . . . 4205
II.C.4. Uncertainties, repeatability, and precision.. 4205
II.D. Ancillary treatment devices not in TG-40.... 4206
II.D.1. Asymmetric jaws. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4206
II.D.2. Dynamic/virtual/universal wedge. . . . . . . . 4206
II.D.3. MLC. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4206
II.D.4. TBI/TSET. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4207
II.D.5. Radiographic imaging. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4207
II.D.6. Respiratory gating. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4208
III. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS/
IMPLEMENTATION SCHEME. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4209
I. INTRODUCTION
I.A. Purpose

The AAPM TG-401 report published in 1994 is a widely
used and referenced document which includes recommendations for general quality assurance 共QA兲 tests for medical
linear accelerators. Since the publication of TG-40, several
new technologies have been developed and are now commonly used in clinical practice. These technologies include
multileaf collimation 共MLC兲, asymmetric jaws, dynamic and
virtual wedges, and electronic portal imaging devices
共EPIDs兲. Image guidance devices such as cone-beam CT
共CBCT兲, static kilovoltage 共kV兲 imaging, and respiratory
gating were rarely used in 1994. In addition, TG-40 did not
consider the demands placed on an accelerator by procedures
such as stereotactic radiosurgery 共SRS兲, stereotactic body radiation therapy 共SBRT兲, total body photon irradiation 共TBI兲,
and intensity-modulated radiotherapy 共IMRT兲 treatment.
Also, the quality of linear accelerators in terms of accuracy
and precision has improved in recent years, allowing for procedures such as SRS, SBRT, and IMRT.
The purpose of this report is to build upon the recommendations of TG-40 for QA of medical linear accelerators including the before mentioned technologies 共MLC, newer
wedge systems, asymmetric jaws, imaging systems, and resMedical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

piratory systems兲 and procedures such as SRS, SBRT, TBI,
and IMRT. During the development of this report, investigation of technologies that deliver MLC-based IMRT with simultaneous gantry rotation had just begun, and therefore QA
for these technologies is not included in the report.
The recommendations of this task group are not intended
to be used as regulations. These recommendations are guidelines for QMPs to use and appropriately interpret for their
individual institution and clinical setting. Each institution
may have site-specific or state mandated needs and requirements which may modify their usage of these recommendations.
I.B. Background

The underlying principle behind TG-40 was the International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements2
共ICRU兲 recommendation that the dose delivered to the patient be within ⫾5% of the prescribed dose. Taking into consideration the many steps involved in delivering dose to a
target volume in a patient, each step must be performed with
accuracy better than 5% to achieve this recommendation.
The goal of a QA program for linear accelerators is to
assure that the machine characteristics do not deviate significantly from their baseline values acquired at the time of
acceptance and commissioning.3 There are several publications that describe procedures and conditions for acceptance
testing and commissioning, and the reader is referred to
these: The International Electrotechnical Commission4,5
共IEC兲, American Association of Physicists in Medicine3,6,7
共AAPM兲, and American College of Medical Physics8
共ACMP兲. Many of these baseline values are entered into
treatment planning systems to characterize and/or model the
treatment machine, and therefore can directly affect treatment plans calculated for every patient treated on that machine. Deviation from the baseline values could thus result in
suboptimal treatment of patients. Machine parameters can
deviate from their baseline values as a result of many reasons. There can be unexpected changes in machine performance due to machine malfunction, mechanical breakdown,
physical accidents, or component failure. Major component
replacement 共waveguide, bending magnet, etc.兲 may also alter machine performance from the original parameters. In
addition there can be gradual changes as a result of aging of
the machine components. These patterns of failure must be
considered when establishing a periodic QA program.
It is not the goal of this report to describe the experimental techniques for performing QA tests, as these tests are
described in a number of publications.9–35 We also realize the
increased demands on staff in the current healthcare environ-

4199

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

4199

TABLE I. Daily.
Machine-type tolerance
Procedure

Non-IMRT

IMRT

SRS/SBRT

Dosimetry
X-ray output constancy 共all energies兲
Electron output constancy 共weekly,
except for machines with unique
e-monitoring requiring daily兲

3%

Mechanical
Laser localization
Distance indicator 共ODI兲 @ iso
Collimator size indicator

2 mm
2 mm
2 mm

1.5 mm
2 mm
2 mm

1 mm
2 mm
1 mm

Safety
Door interlock 共beam off兲
Door closing safety
Audiovisual monitor共s兲
Stereotactic interlocks 共lockout兲
Radiation area monitor 共if used兲
Beam on indicator

ment and recognize the fact that the tests should be simple,
rapid, and reproducible. Since the publication of TG-40 there
have been many QA products designed around the TG-40
table that make execution of these tests more efficient.
TG-40 stated that the test procedures should be able to distinguish parameter changes smaller than tolerance or action
levels. A definition of repeatability is included in Sec. II C.
As noted in TG-40, the QA program for linear accelerators is very much a team effort, and the responsibilities of
performing various tasks are typically divided among physicists, dosimetrists, therapists, and accelerator engineers.
However, we reiterate the recommendation that the overall
responsibility for a linear accelerator QA program be assigned to one individual: The qualified medical physicist
共QMP兲.
The foundation of linear accelerator based QA lies in
Table II of TG-40. Since its publication linear accelerators
have changed not only with respect to their physical construction but also in their role as treatment devices. Asymmetric jaws, dynamic/virtual wedges, and multileaf collimators have been added. Intensity-modulated radiation therapy
and image-guided radiation therapy 共IGRT兲 have increased
demands on the accuracy required of the linear accelerator
for precise dose delivery. The types of treatments delivered
with the machine should also have a role in determining the
QA program that is appropriate for that treatment machine.
For example, machines that are used for SRS/SBRT treatments, TBI, or IMRT require different tests and/or tolerances. Some older machines may be upgraded 共MLCs, portal
vision兲 in order to perform IMRT or stereotactic radiotherapy. This will change the machine category for testing
requirements. Solid compensator based IMRT is an option
for some machines that are not IMRT capable. Many of the
mechanical and dosimetric tests that apply to IMRT maMedical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

NA

Functional
Functional
Functional
NA
Functional
Functional

Functional

chines will therefore be applied to these machines and in
most cases, specific for the particular manufacturer.
And finally, this report does give recommendations in regards to imaging devices that are connected to the accelerator and with gating as the accelerators operation can be tied
to the respiratory system’s signals. This was necessary as
safety, mechanical, and operational attributes of imaging and
gating are tied to the accelerator.
II. QUALITY ASSURANCE OF MEDICAL
ACCELARATORS
II.A. General

The recommendations of this report are summarized in six
tables. The first three tables, Table I 共daily兲, Table II
共monthly兲, and Table III 共annual兲, essentially replace Table II
of TG-40. However, as is evident, the scope of testing and
the number of variables have increased compared to TG-40.
Each table has specific recommendations based on the nature
of the treatments delivered on the individual machine. The
tables are differentiated into non-IMRT or nonstereotactic
machines, IMRT machines, and IMRT/stereotactic machines.
There are also explicit recommendations based on the equipment manufacturer as a result of the design characteristics of
those machines. The recommendations in each table utilize
the QA categories used in Table II of TG-40, dosimetry, mechanical, and safety, while adding a new category: Respiratory gating. The tests for asymmetric jaws and TBI/total skin
electron therapy 共TSET兲 are contained in Tables II and III.
Three additional tables were created for dynamic/virtual/
universal wedges 共Table IV兲, MLC 共Table V兲, and imaging
共Table VI兲. All of these ancillary devices not covered in
TG-40 are discussed in Sec. II D. Test frequencies for each
test are listed in the tables and the rationale for them is dis-

4200

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

4200

TABLE II. Monthly.
Machine-type tolerance
Procedure

Non-IMRT

IMRT

SRS/SBRT

Dosimetry
X-ray output constancy
Electron output constancy
Backup monitor chamber constancy
Typical dose ratea output constancy

2%
NA

Photon beam profile constancy
Electron beam profile constancy
Electron beam energy constancy

2% 共@ IMRT dose rate兲

2% 共@ stereo dose rate, MU兲

1%
1%
2%/2 mm

Mechanical
Light/radiation field coincidenceb
Light/radiation field coincidenceb 共asymmetric兲
Distance check device for lasers compared with
front pointer
Gantry/collimator angle indicators
共@ cardinal angles兲 共digital only兲
Accessory trays 共i.e., port film graticle tray兲
Jaw position indicators 共symmetric兲c
Jaw position indicators 共asymmetric兲d
Cross-hair centering 共walkout兲
Treatment couch position indicatorse
Wedge placement accuracy
Compensator placement accuracyf
Latching of wedges, blocking trayg
Localizing lasers

2 mm or 1% on a side
1 mm or 1% on a side
1mm
1.0°

2 mm/1°

⫾2 mm

2 mm
2 mm
1 mm
1 mm
2 mm/1°
2 mm
1 mm
Functional
⫾1 mm

1 mm/0.5°

⬍ ⫾ 1 mm

Safety
Laser guard-interlock test

Functional

Respiratory gating
Beam output constancy
Phase, amplitude beam control
In-room respiratory monitoring system
Gating interlock

2%
Functional
Functional
Functional

a

Dose monitoring as a function of dose rate.
Light/radiation field coincidence need only be checked monthly if light field is used for clinical setups.
c
Tolerance is summation of total for each width or length.
d
Asymmetric jaws should be checked at settings of 0.0 and 10.0.
e
Lateral, longitudinal, and rotational.
f
Compensator based IMRT 共solid compensators兲 require a quantitative value for tray position 共wedge or blocking tray slot兲 set at a maximum deviation of 1.0
mm from the center of the compensator tray mount and the cross hairs.
g
Check at collimator/gantry angle combination that places the latch toward the floor.
b

cussed in Sec. II C. This task group 共TG兲 considers that all of
the tests included in the tables are important for ensuring the
equipment to be suitable for high quality and safe radiation
treatments. For example, in reference to physical wedge
placement accuracy, Table II notes a monthly placement test
with an accuracy of 2 mm. Deviations greater than 2 mm
could result in errors as much as 2% at clinically relevant
depths.
A consistent beam profile is an important quantity for accurate and reproducible dose delivery in radiotherapy. Beam
uniformity was addressed in TG-40 Table II with flatness
constancy, i.e., consistent flatness and symmetry tolerance
Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

levels. Constancy is specifically associated with flatness;
however, symmetry tolerance can be interpreted as either absolute, regardless of reflection reference, or as constant values, taking into account the reflection reference, i.e., left to
right or right to left. We believe this needs further interpretation in order to detect excessive changes in relative symmetry via sign change that would still fall within the tolerance of absolute symmetry value. For example, a cross-plane
right/left symmetry drift from +3% to ⫺3% is within the
tolerance of TG-40 Table II but constitutes a beam shape
change of 6%. Therefore, the monthly and annual tolerance
values have been edited to take this into account and still

4201

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

4201

TABLE III. Annual.
Machine-type tolerance
Procedure

Non-IMRT

IMRT

NA

1%
⫾1%
1%
⫾1%
NA

SRS/SBRT

Dosimetry
X-ray flatness change from baseline
X-ray symmetry change from baseline
Electron flatness change from baseline
Electron symmetry change from baseline
SRS arc rotation mode
共range: 0.5–10 MU/deg兲

X-ray/electron output calibration 共TG-51兲
Spot check of field size dependent
output factors for x ray
共two or more FSs兲
Output factors for electron applicators
共spot check of one applicator/energy兲
X-ray beam quality 共PDD10 or TMR20
10兲
Electron beam quality 共R50兲
Physical wedge transmission
factor constancy
X-ray monitor unit linearity
共output constancy兲
Electron monitor unit linearity
共output constancy兲
X-ray output constancy vs dose rate
X-ray output constancy vs gantry angle
Electron output constancy vs
gantry angle
Electron and x-ray off-axis factor
constancy vs gantry angle
Arc mode 共expected MU, degrees兲
TBI/TSET mode
PDD or TMR and OAF constancy
TBI/TSET output calibration
TBI/TSET accessories

Monitor units set vs delivered:
1.0 MU or 2% 共whichever is greater兲
Gantry arc set vs delivered:
1.0° or 2% 共whichever is greater兲

⫾1% 共absolute兲
2% for field size ⬍4 ⫻ 4 cm2, 1% ⱖ4 ⫻ 4 cm2

⫾2% from baseline
⫾1% from baseline
⫾1 mm
⫾2%
⫾2% ⱖ5 MU

⫾5% 共2–4 MU兲, ⫾2% ⱖ5 MU

⫾5% 共2–4 MU兲,
⫾2% ⱖ5 MU

⫾2% ⱖ5 MU
⫾2% from baseline
⫾1% from baseline
⫾1% from baseline
⫾1% from baseline
⫾1% from baseline
Functional
1% 共TBI兲 or 1 mm PDD shift 共TSET兲 from baseline
2% from baseline
2% from baseline

Mechanical
Collimator rotation isocenter
Gantry rotation isocenter
Couch rotation isocenter
Electron applicator interlocks
Coincidence of radiation and
mechanical isocenter
Table top sag
Table angle
Table travel maximum range
movement in all directions
Stereotactic accessories, lockouts, etc.

⫾2 mm from
baseline

⫾1 mm from baseline
⫾1 mm from baseline
⫾1 mm from baseline
Functional
⫾2 mm from baseline

⫾1 mm from baseline

2 mm from baseline
1°
⫾2 mm
NA

NA

Safety
Follow manufacturer’s test procedures

Functional

Respiratory gating
Beam energy constancy
Temporal accuracy of phase/amplitude
gate on
Calibration of surrogate for respiratory
phase/amplitude
Interlock testing

Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

2%
100 ms of expected
100 ms of expected
Functional

Functional

4202

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

4202

TABLE IV. Dynamic/universal/virtual wedges.
Dynamic-including EDW 共Varian兲, virtual 共Siemens兲, universal 共Elekta兲 wedge quality assurance
Tolerance
Frequency

Procedure

Dynamic

Daily
Monthly

Morning check-out run for one angle
Wedge factor for all energies

Annual

Check of wedge angle for 60°, full field
and spot check for intermediate angle, field size

Universal

Virtual

Functional
C.A. axis 45° or 60° WF
5% from unity,
C.A. axis 45° or 60° WF
共within 2%兲a
otherwise 2%
共within 2%兲a
Check of off-center ratios @ 80% field width @ 10 cm to be within 2%

a

Recommendation to check 45° if angles other than 60° are used.

maintain the TG-40 intent. The tolerance values are also
stated such that new developments in treating beams without
flattening filters are considered.
In our updated tolerance table, the monthly tolerance values are specific to a consistent beam shape, where baseline
off-axis factors 共OAFs兲 were measured with a QA device
immediately following beam commissioning or updated by
the annual review. Ongoing QA measurements are compared
to the baseline off-axis factors. Chosen point locations that
fall within the core of the field 关as an example four points off
axis in multiple directions within 80% of an agreed upon
field size 共FS兲兴 should have an average of their absolute values within the tolerance value in Table II. This is expressed
as
N

冏

冏

TPL − BPL
1
· 100% ⱕ tolerance%,
·兺
N L=1
BPL
where TPL and BPL are off-axis ratios at test and baseline
points, respectively, at off-axis point L, N is the number of

off-axis points, and TPL = 共MPL / MPC兲 where M represents
the measurement value and C is the central axis measurement. Similarly, the baseline points are represented by BPL
= 共MBPL / MBPC兲
The annual table in TG-40 included a 2% tolerance for
“off-axis factor constancy,” with recommended testing at
various gantry angles, but there was no mention of flatness or
symmetry. We have added this as a profile comparison to
baseline commissioning data in a large field size; this increases the sensitivity to detect beam shape changes that result from a beam energy change or target change that may be
due to long term aging effects. The recommended field size
is 30⫻ 30 cm2 or greater for conventional x rays; the largest
field size for special x-ray applications if ⬍30⫻ 30 cm2 and
the largest applicator for electrons. The flatness and symmetry values in the center 80% FS of the measured profile, as
defined during machine commissioning, should not deviate
from the baseline by more than the tolerance values in Table
III. We believe that this test expansion is justified since the

TABLE V. Multileaf collimation 共with differentiation of IMRT vs non-IMRT machines兲.
Procedure

Tolerance
Weekly 共IMRT machines兲

Qualitative test 共i.e., matched segments, aka “picket
fence”兲

Visual inspection for discernable deviations such as an
increase in interleaf transmission
Monthly

Setting vs radiation field for two patterns 共non-IMRT兲
Backup diaphragm settings 共Elekta only兲
Travel speed 共IMRT兲
Leaf position accuracy 共IMRT兲

2 mm
2 mm
Loss of leaf speed ⬎0.5 cm/ s
1 mm for leaf positions of an IMRT field for four
cardinal gantry angles. 共Picket fence test may be used,
test depends on clinical planning-segment size兲
Annually

MLC transmission 共average of leaf and interleaf
transmission兲, all energies
Leaf position repeatability
MLC spoke shot
Coincidence of light field and x-ray field 共all energies兲
Segmental IMRT 共step and shoot兲 test
Moving window IMRT 共four cardinal gantry angles兲

Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

⫾0.5% from baseline
⫾1.0 mm
ⱕ1.0 mm radius
⫾2.0 mm
⬍0.35 cm max. error RMS, 95% of error counts
⬍0.35 cm
⬍0.35 cm max. error RMS, 95% of error counts
⬍0.35 cm

4203

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

4203

TABLE VI. Imaging.
Application-type tolerance
Procedure

non-SRS/SBRT

SRS/SBRT

Functional
ⱕ2 mm
ⱕ2 mm

Functional
ⱕ1 mm
ⱕ1 mm

Functional
ⱕ2 mm
ⱕ1 mm

Functional
ⱕ1 mm
ⱕ1 mm

ⱕ2 mm

ⱕ1 mm

ⱕ2 mm
Baselinec
Baseline
Baseline

ⱕ2 mm
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline

ⱕ2 mm

ⱕ1 mm

ⱕ2 mm
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline

ⱕ1 mm
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline

ⱕ2 mm
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline

ⱕ1 mm
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline

⫾5 mm
Baseline

⫾5 mm
Baseline

Baseline
Baseline

Baseline
Baseline

Baseline

Baseline

Dailya
Planar kV and MV (EPID) imaging
Collision interlocks
Positioning/repositioning
Imaging and treatment coordinate coincidence
共single gantry angle兲
Cone-beam CT (kV and MV)
Collision interlocks
Imaging and treatment coordinate coincidence
Positioning/repositioning
Monthly
Planar MV imaging (EPID)
Imaging and treatment coordinate coincidence
共four cardinal angles兲
Scalingb
Spatial resolution
Contrast
Uniformity and noise
Planar kV imagingd
Imaging and treatment coordinate coincidence
共four cardinal angles兲
Scaling
Spatial resolution
Contrast
Uniformity and noise
Cone-beam CT (kV and MV)
Geometric distortion
Spatial resolution
Contrast
HU constancy
Uniformity and noise
Annual (A)
Planar MV imaging (EPID)
Full range of travel SDD
Imaging dosee
Planar kV imaging
Beam quality/energy
Imaging dose
Cone-beam CT (kV and MV)
Imaging dose
a

Or at a minimum when devices are to be used during treatment day.
Scaling measured at SSD typically used for imaging.
c
Baseline means that the measured data are consistent with or better than ATP data.
d
kV imaging refers to both 2D fluoroscopic and radiographic imaging.
e
Imaging dose to be reported as effective dose for measured doses per TG 7536.
b

Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

4204

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

annual test is more comprehensive, intended to uncover
changes that may have remained undetected during more frequent but less rigorous testing throughout the year. Note that
the tolerance value is not absolute in that it should not be
interpreted as a comparison to the machine specification; instead it is a tolerance value from the baseline. The expansion
of tests is also justifiable due to the fact that since TG-40 and
post-IMRT, the selection of available QA tools makes annual
testing less burdensome; these tools range from 3D water
scanning tanks to large area detector arrays. The proper tools
should be chosen by matching the detectors and software to
the needs and sensitivity requirements.
II.B. Test frequencies

As with TG-40, testing is distributed among daily,
monthly, and annual QA frequencies. The underlying principles for test frequency follow those of TG-40 and attempt
to balance cost and effort with accuracy. In this report there
are additional factors that affect the frequency of the tests,
specifically the type of treatments delivered on the machine
and the inherent design of the machine. For example, some
linacs are designed with independent photon and electron
monitor chamber systems 共e.g., Siemens兲. It is recommended
that each independent monitor chamber system should be
checked daily.
The daily 共or in some cases weekly兲 tests include parameters that can affect dose to the patient by dosimetric 共output
constancy兲 or geometric 共lasers, optical distance indicator,
field size兲 means. The daily safety tests still include audiovisual monitoring of the patient and testing of the door interlock. With respect to EPID and kV imaging, the operation
and functionality are tested daily, as well as collision interlocks. The daily tests are typically performed by the morning
warm-up therapist, who should be trained by a qualified
medical physicist with a well defined policy and procedure to
follow if any of the tests are found to be out of tolerance.
Monthly tests include those that have a lower likelihood of
changing over a month 共e.g., tray position or profile
consistency—which also serves as an energy check for photons兲. Monthly tests for respiratory gating have been added
as well as more quantitative tests for EPIDs and kV imaging.
These tests are typically more involved and are generally
performed by the QMP. The annual tests are a subset of the
tests performed during acceptance testing and commissioning procedures. During the annual review of dosimetry systems, constancy factors are either established, reconfirmed,
or updated.
Several authors have attempted to develop a systematic
approach to developing QA frequencies and action
levels.37–39 More recently the work being performed by Task
Group 10040 of the AAPM. TG 100—A method for evaluating QA needs in radiation therapy 关based on “Failure modes
and effects analysis 共FMEA兲”兴—promotes individual departments to be responsible for development of unique QA programs based on procedures and resources performed at individual institutions. Institutional deviations from some of
these recommendations are expected based upon the instituMedical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

4204

tion’s policy and procedures; the clinical significance of
these deviations may be mitigated by other control methods
that are not anticipated in this document. In the case of decreasing the frequency of a particular test, the results of the
test must be examined and be validated with an appreciable
history of that test and based on sound statistical principles.
That decision must also be correlated with the documented
analysis of the potential impact of catastrophic results in the
event of an occurrence. By FMEA analysis, an institution can
estimate the degree of harm due to a failure along with 共lack
of兲 detection and occurrence probabilities. We reiterate the
recommendations of TG-401 that the QA program should be
flexible enough to take into account quality, costs, equipment
condition, available test equipment, and institutional needs.
However, we do recommend using the tests and frequencies
outlined in the tables that follow until methods such as TG100 supersede this report.
II.C. Guidelines for tolerance values

The original tolerance values in TG-40 were adapted from
AAPM Report 13. Report 13 used the method of quadratic
summation to set tolerance values for individual machine
parameters. These values were intended to make it possible
to achieve an overall dosimetric uncertainty of ⫾5% and an
overall spatial uncertainty of ⫾5 mm. These tolerances are
further refined in this report and those quoted in the tables
are specific to the type of treatments delivered with the treatment unit. For example, the coincidence of collimator, gantry, and couch axes with the isocenter is recommended to be
within 1 mm for a stereotactic machine and within 2 mm for
other machines.
To clarify the relationship of tolerance values with variations from dosimetric baseline values or deviations from absolute mechanical values established during acceptance testing, we provide the following definitions.
II.C.1. Acceptance testing procedure standards
During the process of acceptance of equipment the supplier demonstrates its performance to the satisfaction of the
customer against specifications, which should be part of the
agreed contract. The dosimetric and mechanical measurements should satisfy the agreed upon specification values.
Acceptance testing and commissioning set the baseline for
future dosimetric measurements for beam performance constancy and verifies that the equipment is mechanically functional and operates within certain tolerances from absolute
specified values.
II.C.2. Commissioning baseline values
Upon acceptance of the equipment, treatment beam characteristics needed for clinical use are established by the commissioning process. Often some of the beam characteristics
may have been already acquired during the acceptance testing procedures. These beam characteristics establish the
baseline values to be checked relative to constancy during
future dosimetric quality assurance measurements.

4205

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

II.C.3. Tolerances and action levels

4205

eter. Specified treatment functions should not continue
until the problem is corrected.
With these three action levels, there is an institutional
need to specify the deviations from baseline values and tolerances associated with levels 2 and 3. This should be carried
out by the QA committee as discussed in the TG-40 report
共Sec. B.I.C兲. The level 1 parameters’ thresholds cannot be
specified by the committee; these thresholds evolve from the
QA data. The level 1 threshold is not a critical requirement
but it can lead to significant improvements in the QA program. The report from TG-100 is expected to address some
of these issues.

The spirit and intent of TG 40 are maintained and further
clarified; the tolerances listed in the tables should be interpreted to mean that if either a baseline parameter measured
during AT exceeds the tabulated value or the change in the
baseline parameter exceeds the tabulated value, then an action is required. Therefore, if ongoing QA measurements fall
outside the tolerance levels 共allowed deviation兲 in the tables,
the equipment should be adjusted to bring the measured values back into compliance: the tolerances are action levels 关a
hierarchy of steps taken by the medical physicist 共MP兲 and
QA staff兴. However, if certain baseline parameters barely satisfy the tolerance value repeatedly, an appropriate action
should be taken to correct the equipment. These actions
should be set by the MP in terms of the level of action
共inspection, scheduled, or immediate stoppage兲 to be taken
and under what circumstances. The actions should be well
known by all personnel involved in the QA process.
It is not our intention to make prescriptive recommendations on the type of action but rather provide guidance as to
the types of actions that are needed in the QA process. We
believe there are three types of actions, with an action priority ranking from lowest to highest, as follows.

The TG-40 report1 stated that test procedures should be
capable of distinguishing parameter changes that are smaller
than tolerance or action levels. Here we attempt to further
clarify this requirement and offer some examples. There is an
associated measurement uncertainty that depends upon the
technique used, the measuring device, and the person using
the device and recording the measurement.

• Level 1: Inspection action. From repeated QA procedures, there are measurement values that become expected under normal operating conditions. A sudden and
significant deviation from the expected value should be
called to the attention of the MP, even if the measurement itself does not exceed the table tolerance value.
Some measured values may be affected due to intervention outside of the normal linac operation or measurement. For example, a change in personnel, setup, or
maintenance event may cause a measurement shift. The
change may also be indicative of a machine problem
that is not yet out of tolerance QA but a change nonetheless. Treatments should continue, but the cause
should be investigated during routine QA.
• Level 2: Scheduled action. We present two examples
which could require scheduled action. First, consecutive
results of a QA procedure that are at or near the tolerance value should cause investigation or scheduled
maintenance into the problem within one to two working days. Second, a single result that exceeds the tolerance value, but not excessively, should cause investigation or scheduled maintenance. Under these conditions,
deviations may slightly exceed the tolerance, but the
clinical impact over the course of a few days 共⬍1
week兲 may not be significant. Treatment may continue,
but mitigation of the cause should be scheduled to take
place within one to two working days.
• Level 3: Immediate action or stop treatment action or
corrective action. A measurement result could require
an immediate suspension of the treatment function related to the dosimetric parameter measured. Examples
for complete suspended use of the linear accelerator
could be as simple as nonfunctional safety interlocks or
as extreme as an excessive error in a dosimetry param-

• Measurement uncertainty 共or accuracy兲 is in reference
to an expected error of the measurement result with
respect to a defined standard 共baseline value兲.
• Measurement repeatability is in reference to the device’s measurement statistics, i.e., with no change in the
quantity being measured and no change in the measurement setup, the recorded values from repeated measurements will have a standard deviation about the mean.
• Measurement precision is in reference to the measuring
device’s scale resolution of the display.
For example, a dosimetry chamber/electrometer may have
a measurement precision of 0.01% on a full scale four digit
display, measurement repeatability with a deviation of the
mean of 0.05% after ten repeated measurements, and a measurement uncertainty of 1.5% absolute dose. Many of the
tolerance values in the tables are with respect to baseline
values from the QA measuring device, measured at the time
of commissioning. The measurement repeatability of the device and technique must be less than the tolerance level for
the parameter being measured. We recommend that the measurement system and procedure repeatability be such that
two standard deviations for three or more repeated consecutive measurements are less than the tolerance value.
The tolerance values in the tables have an interdependence with test frequency. Devices used for daily QA output
constancy may provide data for tests normally performed on
a monthly basis. However, the monthly tests are expected to
be performed at a higher level of skill and with a higher level
of test equipment and therefore those measurements carry a
tighter tolerance value. Therefore, when a procedure is performed on a more frequent schedule than required, the QA
committee may include the more frequent measurements
with a different tolerance value as listed in this report’s
tables. This will become apparent when establishing the level

Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

II.C.4. Uncertainties, repeatability, and precision

4206

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

1 action level. However, the tolerance values in this report
should be rigorously maintained for the specified procedure
frequency.
II.D. Ancillary treatment devices not in TG-40

The AAPM TG-40 report made it clear that new devices
coming on-line during this time period 共1994兲 would be beyond the scope of the report. The TG-40 report did not address asymmetric jaws, dynamic/virtual wedging, or multileaf collimation. However, task groups addressing each of
these new technologies never formed, or the final reports
were written after TG-40 was published, for example, the
multileaf collimation TG-5041 report. Klein et al.15 published
a manuscript on a QA program for ancillary high technology
devices on a dual-energy linear accelerator that included
asymmetric jaws, dynamic and virtual wedges, multileaf collimation, and electronic portal imaging. This paper was
based on one institution’s equipment and process for QA. In
addition, the technologies themselves have manifested into
more modern and complicated devices, especially the use of
multileaf collimation for IMRT.
This section addresses these ancillary devices/options in
terms of QA processes required to support them. We have
incorporated asymmetric jaws within the revised Table II
共TG-40兲 recommendations, while separate tables have been
created for MLC and dynamic/virtual wedges. This task
group makes specific recommendations for asymmetric jaws,
jaw based wedge delivery systems, and multileaf collimation
that are both vendor specific and operation specific. This was
necessary due to the differences among the systems. The
following sections outline these specific recommendations.
II.D.1. Asymmetric jaws
Slessinger et al.42 published one of the earliest papers on
implementation of asymmetric jaws including calculation
schemes and QA. For asymmetric jaws, there should be additional scrutiny for beam matching and the accuracy of
dynamic/virtual wedge delivery which depends strongly on
jaw positioning accuracy. For example, Klein et al.43 published a paper using a single isocentric technique relying on
asymmetric jaws with beam matching at the isocentric plane
for breast irradiation. To address this, the recommendation
was to perform monthly light-radiation coincidence and
asymmetric jaw positional accuracy for each jaw used clinically at 0.0 cm 共for beam matching兲 and also at 10.0 cm
共retracted from central axis兲. The testing of the jaws positioned at 0.0 can be performed with a single film to demonstrate nondivergent field matching.
II.D.2. Dynamic/virtual/universal wedge
Before IMRT, modulation of the beam during treatment
was accomplished by computer controlled movement of the
collimating jaw while the beam was on using computer
control.44 These technologies, dynamic 共later enhanced dynamic wedge兲 and virtual wedges, were clinically introduced
by Varian and Siemens, respectively. Jaw accuracy for the
Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

4206

dynamic wedge-type delivery published by Klein et al.45
showed that very small changes in jaw position could affect
the dynamic wedge factor. The dynamic wedge reports
共Klein,15 Liu,46,47 and Beavis48兲 all pointed to individual institution recommendations for dynamic jaw delivery to deliver a wedge field. Zhu et al.49 published similar recommendations for virtual wedge. As these technologies rely on
computer delivery of jaw position in a given instant or percentage of monitor units 共MUs兲, there should be scrutiny of
the embedded tables that map the location of jaw position in
relationship to time 共fraction of MU to be delivered兲. In this
report, we include the Elekta universal wedge within this
category 共described by Phillips et al.50兲, as computer control
moves the fixed internal 60° wedge in place to yield an effective wedge angle when combined with an open field. The
recommendations in Table IV include some simple daily systematic tests, operational tests of the computer control on a
monthly basis, and annual dosimetric tests. We recommend
that tests be performed with a 45° wedge delivery for systems that deliver an “effective” wedge angle by using a combination of 60° and open beam. If, however, a facility opts to
deliver a 60° wedge as a unique field, then the 60° wedge
angle should be checked.
II.D.3. MLC
Early implementations of multileaf collimation51–53 were
limited to tests and tolerance recommendations for early
Varian MLC machines. Soon afterward, Jordan and
Williams54 published a paper for Elekta machines and Das et
al.55 for Siemens machines. Mubata et al.21 published a paper dedicated to QA for Varian machines following these
initial papers. In 1998, the AAPM formed a task group
共AAPM TG-5041兲 to address multileaf collimation, including
extensive sections on multileaf collimator QA. This publication recommended a scope limited QA program. Although
the task group report was published during initial IMRT
implementations using multileaf collimation, it did not make
recommendations specific for MLCs as used for IMRT. Subsequent publications,9,30,56–61 particularly those by Cosgrove
et al.62 and Chang et al.,63 pointed to tests for MLC QA
along with tools for such tests. We have subsequently recommended testing 共Table V兲 that depends on whether or not the
MLC system is used for IMRT. With regards to the impact of
MLC on IMRT, publications have documented the impact of
leaf positioning accuracy and interleaf or abutted leaf transmission on the accuracy of delivered IMRT fields.64–66
Therefore additional tests of multileaf collimators that are
used for IMRT are recommended. Some of the leaf parameters that affect dose delivery for IMRT include leaf positional accuracy and transmission values. Simple tests, such
as the picket fence test described by LoSasso,66 can assess
positional accuracy qualitatively 共by the matching of sequential segments and leaf transmission, particularly interleaf兲.
We recommend the picket fence test be performed weekly
with a careful examination of the image acquired by static
film or on-line portal image. On a monthly basis, we recommend expansion of the leaf position accuracy test to account

4207

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

for gantry rotation which may affect leaf motion due to
gravitational effects imposed on the leaf carriage system.
Loss of travel speed can result in increased beam holds or
gap width errors.66 MLC travel speed is evaluated with vendor software or by MLC log file evaluation. As an example,
Varian offers a tool for such analysis.67,68 The software takes
data and creates a series of tables and plots, specifically an
error histogram showing all the leaf position deviations, error
RMS showing the calculated root mean square error for leaf
deviations, and beam hold off and beam on plots. As per
manufacturer specifications, the error histogram is deemed
acceptable if 95% of the leaf deviations are less than 0.35 cm
and the maximum error RMS for either carriage is less than
0.35 cm. We have incorporated use of this analysis in Table
V for multileaf collimation for Varian MLCs and recommend
repeating the customer acceptance test procedures on an annual basis. Similar types of analysis software can be developed for other systems if the leaf and time dependent data
can be extracted.
On an annual basis we recommend enhancing the transmission test to include quantitative analysis of the leaf transmission. Recent development of tools utilizing EPID devices
allow for subpixel precision to detect changes in discrete
locations of an acquired image.69,70 As treatment planning
parametrization seeks a global value for leaf transmission, it
is important that the leaf body, side, and end characteristics
do not change over time, the most vulnerable being the leaf
side rigidity due to leaf inderdigitation, as it may affect interleaf leakage, hence the close attention needed. Leaf position repeatability, MLC spoke shot, and coincidence of light
field and x-ray field all are tests intended to check the alignment of the MLCs. Vendor-specific tests are also recommended depending on the model of MLC used. Each vendor
has unique preventative maintenance program recommendations and therefore replacement of MLC motors and leaves
may vary in frequency. Therefore physicists must be aware
of the replacement schedule as post-testing is required. All
tests should reflect the types of treatments delivered in the
department. The method of testing 共film, solid state detectors, software, EPID兲 shall be sensitive enough to detect errors less than the tolerance level and have the ability to analyze all MLC leaves.
II.D.4. TBI/TSET
For either TBI or TSET QA tests chosen by a qualified
medical physicist are a subset of the commissioning data
sufficient to assure continued proper operation of the accelerator. QA tests should replicate test conditions performed
during the commissioning of the technique. In vivo patientspecific dosimetry should be considered for both TBI and
TSET.
TBI requires very large treatment fields to encompass the
entirety of the patient. Some health care facilities have treatment units specifically designed for total body irradiation,
but it is more common for conventional radiotherapy linear
accelerators to be used. AAPM Report 17 71 is a general
reference describing TBI techniques. Report 17 describes
Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

4207

phantom and patient dosimetry considerations for TBI. It is
common for the linear accelerator to operate in a special dose
rate mode for TBI treatment. The treatment distance is normally much greater than the standard 100 cm source-to-axis
distance 共SAD兲. TBI beam modifiers may be employed.
Thus, measurements at extended distance with the accelerator in the TBI mode and with TBI modifiers must be made
when this modality is commissioned. Table III recommends
annual tests of TBI modifiers’ transmission constancy if
used, tissue-phantom ratio 共TPR兲, OAF constancy, and measurement of output constancy 共⫾2%兲 in the TBI mode for the
clinical MU range at clinical dose rates 共MU/min兲. Measurement at two depths is sufficient for confirmation of beam
energy, and a limited number of off-axis measurements suffice for confirmation of OAFs. Some accelerators operate in
a special TBI mode that has identical operating parameters as
the normal non-TBI mode. In this case, annual measurements of the beam energy 关percentage-depth dose 共PDD兲 or
TMR兴 and beam profile 共OAF兲 at the isocenter are sufficient.
TSET is a specialized electron beam technique normally
at energies from 3 to 7 MeV at the patient. TSET is described
in detail in an AAPM Task Group Report.72 This report describes irradiation techniques for TSET as well as dosimetric
considerations specific to the technique. The linear accelerator operating parameters, such as dose rate, collimating device, and perhaps the beam scatterer, differ for TSET from
standard electron beam operating parameters. QA tests
should replicate test conditions done during the commissioning of the technique. Table III recommends annual tests of
TSET modifiers’ transmission constancy if used, PDD or
other energy check, OAF constancy, and measurement of
output constancy in the TSET mode for the clinical MU
range. Measurement at two depths is sufficient for confirmation of beam energy, and a limited number of off-axis measurements suffice for confirmation of OAFs.
II.D.5. Radiographic imaging
This section covers radiographic imaging systems commonly integrated with medical accelerators: Megavoltage
共MV兲 planar imaging, kV planar imaging, and MV or kV
computed tomographic imaging 共both serial and cone beam兲.
Table VI contains QA recommendations for the imaging systems. Each radiographic imaging device, either 2D or 3D,
has its own geometric coordinate system, similar to the delivery system. Even for the 2D portal imaging device which
uses the treatment beam as the imaging source, the manual
methods or software used to manipulate images could cause
some discrepancies with treatment coordinates. Typically, the
imaging coordinate system is correlated with the delivery
coordinate system through a calibration process. It is, therefore, critical to ensure the coincidence of these two coordinate systems for different clinical needs of image-guided radiation therapy procedures. The QA item “imaging and
treatment coordinate coincidence” is aimed to test this coincidence and is applicable for each of the imaging systems
considered. In addition, each system performing patient positioning and/or repositioning based on in-room imaging sys-

4208

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

tems, either 2D or 3D, relies upon vendor software that compares and registers on-board images and reference images.
Quality assurance of this process could be easily done by a
phantom study73 with known shifts and is recommended for
each system used clinically. The accuracy of this process
should be tested on the daily basis, especially for SRS/SBRT.
Clinical use of kV imaging devices is being systematically summarized in TG104,73 although there are no specific
recommendations for the QA tolerances in that report. In this
report, we set basic recommendations for the use of in-room
kV imaging systems. The fundamental goals for kV imaging
in radiation oncology target localization are different from
those in diagnostic imaging. In radiation oncology there is
greater emphasis on the localization accuracy. However, the
localization accuracy is dependent on the visibility of the
anatomic structures to be localized. Better image quality
typically leads to better visibility of anatomical structures but
is also proportional to higher imaging dose. It is understandable that the localization accuracy of some treatment sites
共such as breast portals兲 may be less sensitive to image quality than others 共such as head and neck兲. Therefore, it is critical to carefully balance the desire of image quality and imaging dose without compromising the localization accuracy.
A variety of kV imaging systems was recently introduced.
Applications of these kV imaging systems include 2D radiographic imaging, 2D fluoroscopic imaging, and 3D tomographic imaging as well as 4D imaging associated with organ
motions. Acceptance testing criteria for each imaging system
should be established between the manufacturer and the user.
These acceptance testing criteria should include parameters
related to safety, image quality, imaging dose, and localization accuracy. The baseline data 共including both means and
ranges or measured values and their upper and lower limits兲
established during the acceptance testing should be used for
the QA criteria.
II.D.5.a. Planar MV imaging (portal imagers). Clinical
use of electronic portal imaging devices has been addressed
by TG5874 and is described widely in the literature.17,75–77
Recommended QA tests from the TG-58 report are incorporated in Table VI, though updated to account for on-boardimaging tests. However, details of the test contents, such as
the dose rate to be checked for imaging quality, the energy,
and the calibration distances, should be determined specifically for each type of EPID and for each individual institution. It is important to note that image quality checks 共contrast, resolution, and noise兲 should be done for all calibration
modes and energies to be used for imaging.
II.D.5.b. Planar kV imaging. The basic QA for planar kV
imaging system mainly handles 2D x-ray imaging, either
with radiographic imaging 共single shot of a planar image兲 or
continuous fluoroscopic imaging. Radiographic 2D imaging
is very powerful in localizing bone structures and internal/
implanted markers with higher density. It is also fast with
negligible imaging dose. Fluoroscopic imaging is useful in
monitoring organ motion but caution should be paid for imaging dose. The baseline data from acceptance testing are
recommended as criteria for imaging quality QA. The user
Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

4208

should maintain the image quality not poorer than those data.
The criteria for the SRS/SBRT should be based on rigidbody phantom tests.
II.D.5.c. Serial and cone-beam CT. Basic recommendations for the QA of axial and CBCT systems, including both
kV78 and MV,79 are found in Table VI. These tools are primarily used for target localization, which provides excellent
soft tissue and volumetric information. In this report, serial
CT should include both axial and helical CT and mainly
refers to the CT-on-rail system. The positioning and repositioning accuracy should include couch movement from the
treatment position to the imaging position. The QA for tomotherapy which uses helical serial MV CT, will be discussed in a separate AAPM report 共TG-148兲. Although spatial accuracy of image reconstruction is paramount and most
heavily emphasized, image quality parameters 共e.g., contrast,
noise, uniformity, and spatial resolution兲 are important aspects that should also be considered. Additionally, manufacturer’s recommendations for imaging systems recalibration
procedures should be followed unless the user has shown in
extensive studies that the procedure frequency can be reduced. Since such imaging systems are often used daily and
are capable of delivering significant radiation dose, a direct
measure of imaging dose and beam quality/energy is recommended at least annually. As with the recommendations for
kV imaging, the baseline data 共including both means and
ranges or measured values and their upper and lower limits兲
established during the acceptance testing should be used for
QA criteria. Consistent with recommendations of TG-7536
共“Management of imaging dose during IGRT”兲, the tolerance
for variation of imaging dose and beam energy from baseline
measurements identified during acceptance testing should be
established such that the patient experiences clinically insignificant increases in stochastic and deterministic risk while
maintaining image quality parameters. We believe that an
annual review of imaging dose is sufficient due to minimal
impact on overall dose and by virtue of existing daily/
monthly reviews of many parameters that would detect
changes that could potentially affect dose. For the Siemens
MV CBCT the beam calibration parameters are typically
very similar to the treatment beam, yet they are unique and
independent, so the calibration of dose should be specifically
checked for the MV CBCT beam. The frequency of measuring dose and beam quality/energy depends on the likely system stability and details of clinical utilization; for example, if
the imaging dose is included in the treatment plan but represents ⬍10% of the prescribed dose, a 20% variation in imaging dose will still only result in a 2% dose error. This
report recommends annual assessment of imaging dose,
which may be deemed to be required more frequently by the
individual user based on clinical utilization and observed
system stability.
II.D.6. Respiratory gating
Respiratory gating, at the time of the report, is an emerging technology. As such, QA methods will need to evolve in
tandem with the technology. AAPM Report 9180 共TG-76兲,

4209

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

published in 2006, described all aspects of the management
of respiratory motion in radiation oncology, including imaging, treatment planning, and radiation delivery. Various configurations and techniques for implementation of respiratory
gating are described in TG-76. The TG-76 report also contains technology-specific QA recommendations. Though
there are different avenues of implementation, all respiratory
techniques fundamentally require a synchronization of the
radiation beam with the patient’s respiratory cycle. Characterization of the accelerator beam under respiratory gating
conditions is done during commissioning of this modality.
Dynamic phantoms which simulate human organ motions associated with respiration are recommended to test target localization and respiratory gated treatment accuracy. Tables II
and III include tests for respiratory gated accelerator operation, including measurement of beam energy constancy,
beam output constancy, temporal accuracy of phase/
amplitude gating windows used, calibration of surrogate for
respiratory phase/amplitude 共detailed below兲, and interlock
testing. One approach to performing these measurements
was described by Bayouth et al.,81 where gating windows
from 250 to 1500 ms were considered. Beam energy and
output constancy were quantified with a pair of ion chambers
共10 and 20 cm depths兲 measuring simultaneously for each
gated period; it was found that all dosimetric parameters
were within ⫾2% for gating windows ⱖ500 ms on a Siemens accelerator. The relationship between temporal accuracy and phase/amplitude gate used was established by gated
treatment delivery exposing the radio-opaque target attached
to motion phantom, where the geometric center of a radioopaque target was known at each phase/amplitude relative to
the beam central axis. These images were acquired on radiographic film but could also be acquired on an EPID. Table III
provides tolerance values to be verified during annual QA;
the 100 ms tolerance for temporal accuracy assumes the
moving object travels at speeds no greater than 20 mm/s,
which would result in 2 mm of positional uncertainty. The
QMP should maintain a tolerance consistent with spatial uncertainty values accounted for in the treatment planning process. Site-specific and technique-specific tests should be used
to supplement these general recommendations. For example,
several different types of surrogates of respiratory pattern
may be used clinically 共e.g., optical, strain-gauge belts with
pressure sensors, and spirometry兲; the QMP should verify the
phase and amplitude indicated by the surrogate do not
change significantly over time as is relevant to how they are
applied clinically. Calibration of the sensor for respiratory
phase/amplitude, which has not been described in the literature, consists in validating constancy between a known
location/movement of the surrogate and its response. An example test for the pressure sensor is placing a series of fixed
weights on the sensor and determining the gain and offset
values that produce a desired amplitude 共e.g., 50%兲. For optical systems, this can be accomplished by placing a fiducially marked block 共surrogate兲 at a series of fixed known
locations within the field of view and comparing the reported
Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

4209

displacements to the known values. Once spatial accuracy is
confirmed, phase confirmation can be established with a periodic motion phantom.
III. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS/
IMPLEMENTATION SCHEME
The tabulated items of this report have been considerably
expanded as compared with the original TG 40 report1 and
the recommended tolerances accommodate differences in the
intended use of the machine functionality 共non-IMRT, IMRT,
and stereotactic delivery兲.
共1兲 It is recommended that a departmental QA team be
formed to support all the QA activities and draft necessary policies and procedures. These policies and procedures should be readily available to all members of the
departmental QA team on hard copy and online. The
policy should establish the roles and responsibilities of
involved QA personnel. For QA measurements, detailed
instructions on equipment use, cross calibration of these
devices, measurement frequency, and documentation of
the results should be provided. In case of suspected malfunction of the equipment, policies and procedures
should also provide alternative methods for measurement.
共2兲 The first step in implementing the recommendations is
to establish institution-specific baseline and absolute reference values for all QA measurements. The QA team
needs to meet regularly and monitor the measurement
results against the established values to 共1兲 ensure the
machine performance and 共2兲 determine any significant
dose deviations from the treatment planning calculations. There are many commercially available QA devices that could be used for daily, weekly, and monthly
QA. The manufactures of these devices supply descriptive procedures that guide the user in utilizing these QA
devices correctly. It is recommended that such devices
be checked for accuracy and consistent performance
prior to use for any specific QA procedures based on the
manufacturer guidelines. These devices should also be
evaluated for proper use and appropriateness of the particular QA test.
共3兲 A QMP should lead the QA team. It should be her/his
responsibility to provide adequate training of the other
team members, such as the therapists and the dosimetrists, so that they clearly understand and follow policies and procedures. For example, training on the operation of the QA equipment may cover appropriate
warm-up period, how to interpret the measured data,
what to do when tolerance levels are exceeded, etc. It is
recommended that the QMP provide the proper action
level and methods of notification in the case tolerances
are exceeded.
共4兲 In general, the daily QA tasks may be carried out by a
radiation therapist using a cross-calibrated dosimetry
system. For such tasks, we recommend using robust and
easy-to-setup equipment. For example, a plastic phantom cube with a thimble ionization chamber insert may

4210

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

be used for the checking output constancy. In most
cases, the flat edge and the surface of the phantom can
be also used to check the alignment of in-room lasers.
Commercial flat-panel multidetector arrays with appropriate buildup material may be also used for daily QA.
The advantage of such equipment is that it allows efficient check of other beam parameters such as the flatness and symmetry without repeated setup of the equipment. Due to frequent use of the daily QA equipment,
correction factors influencing the detector response
should be carefully documented. These may include
temperature and pressure correction factors for a vented
chamber, electrometer calibration factors, leakage corrections, etc. All results should be documented in either
a permanent electronic or hardcopy format and should
be readily available for inspection purposes. There
should be clear guidelines for the personnel performing
the tests as to the appropriate action to take if a test is
out of tolerance. These guidelines would generally include notifying a physicist. In addition, the QMP should
review and sign off on the reports at a minimum of once
per month.
共5兲 Monthly QA tasks should be performed by a QMP or by
individuals directly supervised by a QMP. It is recognized that there is overlap on some test items for daily,
monthly, and annual. This overlap in frequency should
have some level of independence such that the monthly
check would not simply be a daily check. This can be
achieved with independent measurement devices, but the
full extent of monthly independence from the daily measurements is decided upon by the QMP. This involvement should include validation of devices through redundant measurements and validation of the daily
process by examination of the records. For example, if a
multidetector array is used for the daily output measurement and the monthly dosimetry measurements use the
same multidetector array, then an ionization chamber
with a phantom should be compared with the output
measurement of the array on an annual basis, including
reference to past baseline values. This provides confidence in the daily device and will identify trends that
may otherwise go undetected over the course of a long
period of time such as 1 year. Such comparison enables
effective use of minimal equipment in institutions with
limited resources. As for the daily QA tasks, all results
should be documented in either a permanent electronic
or hardcopy format and should be readily available for
inspection purposes. It is important for the physicist to
cross calibrate any equipment used with equivalent or
surrogate systems. There should be clear guidelines for
the personnel performing the tests as to the appropriate
action to take if a test is out of tolerance. These guidelines would generally include secondary checks and notification to the QMP. In addition, the QMP should review and sign off on the reports within 15 days of
completion.
共6兲 The annual QA items in the report represent the most
extensive tests on the machine performance. These
Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

4210

checks are sometimes adopted by the city or state regulatory agencies to ensure adequate functionality of the
linear accelerators for patient and environmental safety
concerns. For this reason, it is recommended that the
annual measurements be performed by a QMP with involvement of other QA team members. It is highly recommended that QA devices and equipment, such as ionization chambers and water scanning tank, should be
adequately checked prior to any measurements. The
measurements should be carried out using commissioning quality equipment as recommended by the forthcoming AAPM TG-106 report.7
共7兲 An end-to-end system check is recommended to ensure
the fidelity of overall system delivery whenever a new or
revised procedure is introduced. This can be done by
creating a set of sample treatment plans typical of the
facility’s clinical caseload, transferring the plan data
across the data network, and delivering them at the treatment machine. If the record and verify 共R&V兲 system is
a conduit for data, it must be included in the end-to-end
testing. End-to-end tests are necessary whenever software changes occur with the treatment planning software, R&V software, or delivery system software. In
particular, point dose measurements should be performed for treatment plans to ensure constancy between
the dose calculation and the treatment delivery process.
These end-to-end tests should be documented for the life
of the various system components.
共8兲 During the annual QA review, absolute machine output
should be calibrated as per the TG51 calibration
protocol82 using an ionization chamber with a NIST
traceable calibration factor. Once the machine output has
been calibrated, all secondary QA dosimeters including
the daily QA and the monthly QA devices should be
cross-checked against such calibrations. Although our
report did not make specific recommendations regarding
independent acceptance tests for a new machine, we promote the use of the annual QA tests recommended by
this report to be used as a general guide when reviewing
vendor-specific acceptance tests and tolerance values.
Upon completion of the measurements, it is recommended
that an annual QA report be generated. The report should
state significant findings based on the recommended table
tolerance values. The report can be similarly divided into
sections that include 共1兲 dosimetry, 共2兲 mechanical, 共3兲
safety, 共4兲 imaging, and 共5兲 special devices/procedures. The
QA report should be signed and reviewed by the QMP and
filed for future machine maintenance and inspection needs.
a兲

TG-142 was constituted by the AAPM—Science Council—Therapy
Physics Committee—Quality Assurance and Outcome Improvement
Subcommittee.
b兲
Electronic mail: eklein@radonc.wustl.edu
1
G. J. Kutcher, “Comprehensive QA for radiation oncology: Report of
AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 40,” Med. Phys. 21,
581–618 共1994兲.
2
“Determination of absorbed dose in a patient irradiated by beams of x- or
gamma-rays in radiotherapy procedures,” International Commission on
Radiation Units and Measurement Bethesda Report 24, 1976.

4211

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

3

R. Nath, P. J. Biggs, F. J. Bova, C. C. Ling, J. A. Purdy, J. van de Geijn,
and M. S. Weinhous, “AAPM code of practice for radiotherapy accelerators: Report of AAPM Radiation Therapy Task Group No. 45,” Med.
Phys. 21, 1093–1121 共1994兲.
4
“Medical electron accelerators-functional performance characteristics,”
International Electrotechnical Commission Publication 976, 1989.
5
“Medical electron accelerators in the range 1 MeV-50 MeV—Guidelines
for functional performance characteristics,” International Electrotechnical
Commission Publication 977, 1989.
6
“Physical aspects of quality assurance in radiation therapy,” American
Association of Physicists in Medicine Task Group Report 13 共American
Institute of Physics, New York, 1984兲.
7
I. Das, J. C. Cheng, R. J. Watts, A. Ahnesjo, J. P. Gibbons, X. A. Li, J.
Lowenstein, R. K. Mitra, W. E. Simon, and T. C. Zhu, “Accelerator beam
data commissioning equipment and procedures: Report of the TG-106 of
the Therapy Physics Committee of the AAPM,” Med. Phys. 35, 4186–
4215 共2008兲.
8
“Radiation control and quality assurance in radiation oncology: A suggested protocol,” American College of Medical Physics Report Series No.
2 共American College of Medical Physics, Reston, VA, 1986兲.
9
J. E. Bayouth, D. Wendt, and S. M. Morrill, “MLC quality assurance
techniques for IMRT applications,” Med. Phys. 30, 743–750 共2003兲.
10
L. Berger, P. Francois, G. Gaboriaud, and J. C. Rosenwald, “Performance
optimization of the Varian aS500 EPID system,” J. Appl. Clin. Med.
Phys. 7, 105–114 共2006兲.
11
H. Bouchard and J. Seuntjens, “Ionization chamber-based reference dosimetry of intensity modulated radiation beams,” Med. Phys. 31, 2454–
2465 共2004兲.
12
M. G. Davis, C. E. Nyerick, J. L. Horton, and K. R. Hogstrom, “Use of
routine quality assurance procedures to detect the loss of a linear accelerator primary scattering foil,” Med. Phys. 23, 521–522 共1996兲.
13
R. E. Drzymala, E. E. Klein, J. R. Simpson, K. M. Rich, T. H. Wasserman, and J. A. Purdy, “Assurance of high quality linac-based stereotactic
radiosurgery,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 30, 459–472 共1994兲.
14
A. Gonzalez, I. Castro, and J. A. Martinez, “A procedure to determine the
radiation isocenter size in a linear accelerator,” Med. Phys. 31, 1489–
1493 共2004兲.
15
E. E. Klein, D. A. Low, D. Maag, and J. A. Purdy, “A quality assurance
program for ancillary high technology devices on a dual-energy accelerator,” Radiother. Oncol. 38, 51–60 共1996兲.
16
T. LoSasso, C. S. Chui, and C. C. Ling, “Comprehensive quality assurance for the delivery of intensity modulated radiotherapy with a multileaf
collimator used in the dynamic mode,” Med. Phys. 28, 2209–2219
共2001兲.
17
D. A. Low, E. E. Klein, D. K. Maag, W. E. Umfleet, and J. A. Purdy,
“Commissioning and periodic quality assurance of a clinical electronic
portal imaging device,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 34, 117–123
共1996兲.
18
W. R. Lutz and B. E. Bjarngard, “A test object for evaluation of portal
films,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 11, 631–634 共1985兲.
19
W. R. Lutz, R. D. Larsen, and B. E. Bjarngard, “Beam alignment tests for
therapy accelerators,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 7, 1727–1731
共1981兲.
20
L. Ma, P. B. Geis, and A. L. Boyer, “Quality assurance for dynamic
multileaf collimator modulated fields using a fast beam imaging system,”
Med. Phys. 24, 1213–1220 共1997兲.
21
C. D. Mubata, P. Childs, and A. M. Bidmead, “A quality assurance procedure for the Varian multi-leaf collimator,” Phys. Med. Biol. 42, 423–
431 共1997兲.
22
J. Rassow, “Quality control of radiation therapy equipment,” Radiother.
Oncol. 12, 45–55 共1988兲.
23
J. Rassow and E. Klieber, “Quality assurance procedures in
radiotherapy—IEC specifications for equipment,” Strahlenther. Onkol.
162, 496–502 共1986兲.
24
R. J. Watts, “Evaluation of a diode detector array for use as a linear
accelerator QC device,” Med. Phys. 25, 247–250 共1998兲.
25
M. S. Al-Ghazi, B. Arjune, J. A. Fiedler, and P. D. Sharma, “Dosimetric
aspects of the therapeutic photon beams from a dual-energy linear accelerator,” Med. Phys. 15, 250–257 共1988兲.
26
M. S. Al-Ghazi, D. Lingman, B. Arjune, L. D. Gilbert, and J. Thekkumthala, “Characteristic parameters of 6–21 MeV electron beams from a
21 MeV linear accelerator,” Med. Phys. 18, 821–828 共1991兲.
27
C. Constantinou and E. S. Sternick, “Reduction of the ‘horns’ observed on
Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

4211

the beam profiles of a 6-MV linear accelerator,” Med. Phys. 11, 840–842
共1984兲.
28
P. B. Dunscombe and J. M. Nieminen, “On the field-size dependence of
relative output from a linear accelerator,” Med. Phys. 19, 1441–1444
共1992兲.
29
B. A. Faddegon, P. O’Brien, and D. L. Mason, “The flatness of Siemens
linear accelerator x-ray fields,” Med. Phys. 26, 220–228 共1999兲.
30
M. N. Graves, A. V. Thompson, M. K. Martel, D. L. McShan, and B. A.
Fraass, “Calibration and quality assurance for rounded leaf-end MLC
systems,” Med. Phys. 28, 2227–2233 共2001兲.
31
S. W. Hadley and K. Lam, “Light field and crosshair quality assurance
test using a simple lens system,” Med. Phys. 33, 930–932 共2006兲.
32
Y. Mandelzweig and V. Feygelman, “Evaluation of electron-beam uniformity during commissioning of a linear accelerator,” Med. Phys. 20, 1233–
1236 共1993兲.
33
R. Rajapakshe and S. Shalev, “Output stability of a linear accelerator
during the first three seconds,” Med. Phys. 23, 517–519 共1996兲.
34
A. S. Shiu, S. S. Tung, C. E. Nyerick, T. G. Ochran, V. A. Otte, A. L.
Boyer, and K. R. Hogstrom, “Comprehensive analysis of electron beam
central axis dose for a radiotherapy linear accelerator,” Med. Phys. 21,
559–566 共1994兲.
35
M. K. Woo, P. O’Brien, B. Gillies, and R. Etheridge, “Mechanical and
radiation isocenter coincidence: An experience in linear accelerator alignment,” Med. Phys. 19, 357–359 共1992兲.
36
M. J. Murphy, J. Balter, S. Balter, J. A. BenComo, Jr., I. J. Das, S. B.
Jiang, C. M. Ma, G. H. Olivera, R. F. Rodebaugh, K. J. Ruchala, H.
Shirato, and F. F. Yin, “The management of imaging dose during imageguided radiotherapy: Report of the AAPM Task Group 75,” Med. Phys.
34, 4041–4063 共2007兲.
37
T. E. Schultheiss, A. L. Boyer, J. L. Horton, and R. J. Gastorf, “Calibration frequency as determined by analysis of machine stability,” Med.
Phys. 16, 84–87 共1989兲.
38
M. Rozenfeld and D. Jette, “Quality assurance of radiation dosage: Usefulness of redundancy,” Radiology 150, 241–244 共1984兲.
39
T. Pawlicki, M. Whitaker, and A. L. Boyer, “Statistical process control
for radiotherapy quality assurance,” Med. Phys. 32, 2777–2786 共2005兲.
40
“Method for evaluating QA needs in radiation therapy,” American Association of Physicists in Medicine Task Group Report 100, 2009 共unpublished兲.
41
A. Boyer, P. Biggs, J. Galvin, E. Klein, T. LoSasso, D. Low, K. Mah, and
C. Yu, “Basic applications of multileaf collimators,” AAPM Radiation
Therapy Committee Task Group No. 50 Report No. 72, 2001.
42
E. D. Slessinger, R. L. Gerber, W. B. Harms, E. E. Klein, and J. A. Purdy,
“Independent collimator dosimetry for a dual photon energy linear accelerator,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 27, 681–687 共1993兲.
43
E. E. Klein, M. Taylor, M. Michaletz-Lorenz, D. Zoeller, and W. Umfleet,
“A mono isocentric technique for breast and regional nodal therapy using
dual asymmetric jaws,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 28, 753–760
共1994兲.
44
P. K. Kijewski, L. M. Chin, and B. E. Bjarngard, “Wedge-shaped dose
distributions by computer-controlled collimator motion,” Med. Phys. 5,
426–429 共1978兲.
45
E. E. Klein, R. Gerber, X. R. Zhu, F. Oehmke, and J. A. Purdy, “Multiple
machine implementation of enhanced dynamic wedge,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 40, 977–985 共1998兲.
46
C. Liu, Z. Li, and J. R. Palta, “Characterizing output for the Varian enhanced dynamic wedge field,” Med. Phys. 25, 64–70 共1998兲.
47
C. Liu, T. C. Zhu, and J. R. Palta, “Characterizing output for dynamic
wedges,” Med. Phys. 23, 1213–1218 共1996兲.
48
A. W. Beavis, S. J. Weston, and V. J. Whitton, “Implementation of the
Varian EDW into a commercial RTP system,” Phys. Med. Biol. 41, 1691–
1704 共1996兲.
49
X. R. Zhu, M. T. Gillin, P. A. Jursinic, F. Lopez, D. F. Grimm, and J. J.
Rownd, “Comparison of dosimetric characteristics of Siemens virtual and
physical wedges,” Med. Phys. 27, 2267–2277 共2000兲.
50
M. H. Phillips, H. Parsaei, and P. S. Cho, “Dynamic and omni wedge
implementation on an Elekta SL linac,” Med. Phys. 27, 1623–1634
共2000兲.
51
E. E. Klein, W. B. Harms, D. A. Low, V. Willcut, and J. A. Purdy,
“Clinical implementation of a commercial multileaf collimator: Dosimetry, networking, simulation, and quality assurance,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 33, 1195–1208 共1995兲.
52
J. M. Galvin et al., “Evaluation of multileaf collimator design for a pho-

4212

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

ton beam,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 23, 789–801 共1992兲.
J. M. Galvin, A. R. Smith, and B. Lally, “Characterization of a multi-leaf
collimator system,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 25, 181–192
共1993兲.
54
T. J. Jordan and P. C. Williams, “The design and performance characteristics of a multileaf collimator,” Phys. Med. Biol. 39, 231–251 共1994兲.
55
I. J. Das, G. E. Desobry, S. W. McNeeley, E. C. Cheng, and T. E. Schultheiss, “Beam characteristics of a retrofitted double-focused multileaf collimator,” Med. Phys. 25, 1676–1684 共1998兲.
56
A. L. Boyer and S. Li, “Geometric analysis of light-field position of a
multileaf collimator with curved ends,” Med. Phys. 24, 757–762 共1997兲.
57
C. Burman, C. S. Chui, G. Kutcher, S. Leibel, M. Zelefsky, T. LoSasso, S.
Spirou, Q. Wu, J. Yang, J. Stein, R. Mohan, Z. Fuks, and C. C. Ling,
“Planning, delivery, and quality assurance of intensity-modulated radiotherapy using dynamic multileaf collimator: A strategy for large-scale
implementation for the treatment of carcinoma of the prostate,” Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 39, 863–873 共1997兲.
58
S. C. Vieira, M. L. Dirkx, K. L. Pasma, and B. J. Heijmen, “Fast and
accurate leaf verification for dynamic multileaf collimation using an electronic portal imaging device,” Med. Phys. 29, 2034–2040 共2002兲.
59
M. Sastre-Padro, U. A. van der Heide, and H. Welleweerd, “An accurate
calibration method of the multileaf collimator valid for conformal and
intensity modulated radiation treatments,” Phys. Med. Biol. 49, 2631–
2643 共2004兲.
60
J. J. Sonke, L. S. Ploeger, B. Brand, M. H. Smitsmans, and M. van Herk,
“Leaf trajectory verification during dynamic intensity modulated radiotherapy using an amorphous silicon flat panel imager,” Med. Phys. 31,
389–395 共2004兲.
61
S. J. Baker, G. J. Budgell, and R. I. MacKay, “Use of an amorphous
silicon electronic portal imaging device for multileaf collimator quality
control and calibration,” Phys. Med. Biol. 50, 1377–1392 共2005兲.
62
V. P. Cosgrove, U. Jahn, M. Pfaender, S. Bauer, V. Budach, and R. E.
Wurm, “Commissioning of a micro multi-leaf collimator and planning
system for stereotactic radiosurgery,” Radiother. Oncol. 50, 325–336
共1999兲.
63
J. Chang, C. H. Obcemea, J. Sillanpaa, J. Mechalakos, and C. Burman,
“Use of EPID for leaf position accuracy QA of dynamic multi-leaf collimator 共DMLC兲 treatment,” Med. Phys. 31, 2091–2096 共2004兲.
64
J. E. Bayouth and S. M. Morrill, “MLC dosimetric characteristics for
small field and IMRT applications,” Med. Phys. 30, 2545–2552 共2003兲.
65
E. E. Klein and D. A. Low, “Interleaf leakage for 5 and 10 mm dynamic
multileaf collimation systems incorporating patient motion,” Med. Phys.
28, 1703–1710 共2001兲.
66
T. Losasso, “IMRT delivery performance with a varian multileaf collimator,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 71, S85–S88 共2008兲.
67
C. D. Venencia and P. Besa, “Commissioning and quality assurance for
intensity modulated radiotherapy with dynamic multileaf collimator: Experience of the Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile,” J. Appl. Clin.
Med. Phys. 5, 37–54 共2004兲.
68
A. M. Stell, J. G. Li, O. A. Zeidan, and J. F. Dempsey, “An extensive
53

Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

4212

log-file analysis of step-and-shoot intensity modulated radiation therapy
segment delivery errors,” Med. Phys. 31, 1593–1602 共2004兲.
69
S. S. Samant, W. Zheng, N. A. Parra, J. Chandler, A. Gopal, J. Wu, J.
Jain, Y. Zhu, and M. Sontag, “Verification of multileaf collimator leaf
positions using an electronic portal imaging device,” Med. Phys. 29,
2900–2912 共2002兲.
70
M. Mamalui-Hunter, H. Li, and D. A. Low, “MLC quality assurance
using EPID: A fitting technique with subpixel precision,” Med. Phys. 35,
2347–2355 共2008兲.
71
J. Van Dyk, J. M. Galvin, G. P. Glasgow, and E. B. Podgorsak, “The
physical aspects of total and half body photon irradiation,” AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 29 Report No. 17, 1986.
72
C. J. Karzmark, J. Anderson, A. Buffa, F. P, F. Khan, G. Svensson, K.
Wright, P. Almond, F. B, K. Hogstrom, R. Loevinger, R. Morton, and B.
Palos, “Total skin electron therapy: Technique and dosimetry,” AAPM
Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 30 Report No. 23, 1987.
73
“Kilo voltage localization in therapy,” American Association of Physicists
in Medicine Task Group Report 104, 2009 共unpublished兲.
74
M. G. Herman, J. M. Balter, D. A. Jaffray, K. P. McGee, P. Munro, S.
Shalev, M. Van Herk, and J. W. Wong, “Clinical use of electronic portal
imaging: Report of AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group
58,” Med. Phys. 28, 712–737 共2001兲.
75
R. Rajapakshe, K. Luchka, and S. Shalev, “A quality control test for
electronic portal imaging devices,” Med. Phys. 23, 1237–1244 共1996兲.
76
A. L. Boyer, L. Antonuk, A. Fenster, M. Van Herk, H. Meertens, P.
Munro, L. E. Reinstein, and J. Wong, “A review of electronic portal
imaging devices 共EPIDs兲,” Med. Phys. 19, 1–16 共1992兲.
77
M. G. Herman, J. J. Kruse, and C. R. Hagness, “Guide to clinical use of
electronic portal imaging,” J. Appl. Clin. Med. Phys. 1, 38–57 共2000兲.
78
D. A. Jaffray, J. H. Siewerdsen, J. W. Wong, and A. A. Martinez, “Flatpanel cone-beam computed tomography for image-guided radiation
therapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol,. Biol., Phys. 53, 1337–1349 共2002兲.
79
J. Pouliot, A. Bani-Hashemi, J. Chen, M. Svatos, F. Ghelmansarai, M.
Mitschke, M. Aubin, P. Xia, O. Morin, K. Bucci, M. Roach, 3rd, P.
Hernandez, Z. Zheng, D. Hristov, and L. Verhey, “Low-dose megavoltage
cone-beam CT for radiation therapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys.
61, 552–560 共2005兲.
80
P. J. Keall, G. S. Mageras, J. M. Balter, R. S. Emery, K. M. Forster, S. B.
Jiang, J. M. Kapatoes, D. A. Low, M. J. Murphy, B. R. Murray, C. R.
Ramsey, M. B. Van Herk, S. S. Vedam, J. W. Wong, and E. Yorke, “The
management of respiratory motion in radiation oncology report of AAPM
Task Group 76,” Med. Phys. 33, 3874–3900 共2006兲.
81
J. Bayouth, J. Sample, T. Waldron, and R. Siochi, “Evaluation of 4DRT:
CT acquisition and gated delivery system,” Med. Phys. 33, 2188–2189
共2006兲.
82
P. R. Almond, P. J. Biggs, B. M. Coursey, W. F. Hanson, M. S. Huq, R.
Nath, and D. W. Rogers, “AAPM’s TG-51 protocol for clinical reference
dosimetry of high-energy photon and electron beams,” Med. Phys. 26,
1847–1870 共1999兲.

