American Association of Physicists in Medicine
Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 53:
Quality assurance for clinical radiotherapy treatment planning
Benedick Fraassa)
University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan

Karen Doppke
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts

Margie Hunt
Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
and Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York

Gerald Kutcher
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York

George Starkschall
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

Robin Stern
University of California, Davis Medical Center, Sacramento, California

Jake Van Dyke
London Regional Cancer Center, London, Ontario, Canada

~Received 15 December 1997; accepted for publication 4 August 1998!
In recent years, the sophistication and complexity of clinical treatment planning and treatment
planning systems has increased significantly, particularly including three-dimensional ~3D! treatment planning systems, and the use of conformal treatment planning and delivery techniques. This
has led to the need for a comprehensive set of quality assurance ~QA! guidelines that can be applied
to clinical treatment planning. This document is the report of Task Group 53 of the Radiation
Therapy Committee of the American Association of Physicists in Medicine. The purpose of this
report is to guide and assist the clinical medical physicist in developing and implementing a
comprehensive but viable program of quality assurance for modern radiotherapy treatment planning. The scope of the QA needs for treatment planning is quite broad, encompassing image-based
definition of patient anatomy, 3D beam descriptions for complex beams including multileaf collimator apertures, 3D dose calculation algorithms, and complex plan evaluation tools including dose
volume histograms. The Task Group recommends an organizational framework for the task of
creating a QA program which is individualized to the needs of each institution and addresses the
issues of acceptance testing, commissioning the planning system and planning process, routine
quality assurance, and ongoing QA of the planning process. This report, while not prescribing
specific QA tests, provides the framework and guidance to allow radiation oncology physicists to
design comprehensive and practical treatment planning QA programs for their clinics. © 1998
American Association of Physicists in Medicine. @S0094-2405~98!03410-5#
Key words: treatment planning, quality assurance, 3D treatment planning
PREFACE
This document is the report of Task Group 53 of the Radiation Therapy Committee of the American Association of
Physicists in Medicine ~AAPM!. The purpose of this report
is to guide and assist the radiation oncology physicist in
developing and implementing a comprehensive but viable
program of quality assurance for radiotherapy treatment
planning. This report is the first guidance on the topic of
treatment planning quality assurance ~QA! from the AAPM,
although there are several related reports,1 including the recent report from Task Group 40 on Comprehensive QA for
Radiation Oncology.2 Further expansion of AAPM recommendations regarding treatment planning quality assurance is
1773

Med. Phys. 25 „10…, October 1998

likely after the radiation oncology community accumulates
some experience with the approach recommended in this report.
In recent years, the increased complexity of the treatment
planning process required to support such procedures as conformal radiotherapy has led to the need for a comprehensive
set of quality assurance guidelines that can be applied to
treatment planning systems that support this complex process. This Task Group has been charged by the AAPM to
prepare this report recommending the scope and content of
necessary quality assurance procedures and the frequency of
tests, from acceptance testing, characterization and commissioning to routine quality assurance of clinical system use.

0094-2405/98/25„10…/1773/57/$10.00

© 1998 Am. Assoc. Phys. Med.

1773

1774

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

These procedures will be tailored to the complexity and
functionality of the treatment planning procedures used clinically. This report provides the overall framework within
which individualized quality assurance programs may be designed and implemented.
This report on treatment planning quality assurance attempts to aid the radiation oncology physicist in creating a
quality assurance program for the clinical use of treatment
planning in the physicist’s department. In general, except for
recommendations summarized in one appendix, this report
does not discuss quality assurance activities that should be
carried out by vendors or other providers of treatment planning systems. The numerous important quality assurance
tasks associated with the design, software engineering, testing, validation, packaging, marketing, and other preparation
of a commercial treatment planning system for safe use are
beyond the scope of the current task group. This document
considers only the responsibility of the radiation oncology
physicist in establishing and maintaining a quality assurance
program for the clinical use of radiotherapy treatment planning.
The report also concentrates on quality assurance for the
treatment planning process, and not just QA or commissioning of the treatment planning system. Although a treatment
planning system ~software and hardware! may be tested extensively, a QA program for treatment planning must also
consider how the treatment planning system is used as well
as how it interacts with the treatment planning process.
Therefore, creation of a treatment planning process that incorporates self-consistency and procedural checks is a major
component of a quality assurance program for treatment
planning.
In order to successfully implement an appropriate quality
assurance program for treatment planning, adequate resources must be allocated. The radiation oncology physicist
must be afforded adequate time to ascertain the extent and
complexity of the treatment planning needs of the radiation
oncology clinic, and based upon this information, the physicist must design and implement an appropriate quality assurance program. For a treatment planning process of a given
complexity, the quality assurance requirements in a small
radiation oncology facility should be no less than those in a
large, academic medical center.
The report begins with a summary intended for radiation
oncology administrators ~Part A!. Part B is directed to the
radiation oncology physicist, and comprises the bulk of the
report. Part B begins with an introduction which delineates
the scope of the task, introduces some definitions and terms,
and establishes targets for the accuracy of treatment planning
results. Chapter 2 describes specifications and acceptance
testing for the treatment planning system. The most extensive part of the report is contained in Chaps. 3 and 4, which
describe commissioning of the nondosimetric and dosimetric
parts of the planning system, respectively. Routine testing of
the treatment planning system is described in Chap. 5. Chapter 6 discusses ways to apply QA to the entire planning process, while Chap. 7 lists computer-system management activities which are an important part of the treatment planning
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1774

quality assurance process. Finally, the last chapter summarizes some of the important recommendations of the task
group. Appendix 1 contains some recommendations and
comments about both vendor and user responsibilities. Appendix 2 contains examples of some nondosimetric test procedures, to give the reader an idea of how to design and
implement test procedures. Appendices 3, 4, and 5 give examples of dose calculation commissioning tests for photon
beams, electron beams, and brachytherapy, respectively.
Terminology used in this report will be similar to that
used in other AAPM task group reports:
• Shall or must are used when the activity is required by
various regulatory agencies.
• Recommend is used when the task group expects that
the procedure should normally be followed as described. However, there may prove to be instances
where other issues, techniques or priorities could force
the modification of the recommendation of the task
group.
• Should is used when it is expected that local analysis of
the situation may change the way a particular activity is
performed.
This report recommends the institution of a comprehensive quality assurance program for treatment planning in
each radiation oncology clinic. As will be seen, this encompasses a large amount of work, requiring the attention particularly of the radiation oncology physicist, but also including dosimetrists/treatment planners, radiation oncologists,
radiation therapists and, if available, computer support staff.
Particularly at this time of downsizing and major restructuring of the way the practice of clinical medicine works, it is
very important for hospital administrators and providers of
medical care reimbursement to understand the critical nature
of appropriate quality assurance for a procedure that is such
an important part of the way high quality radiotherapy is
performed. If compromises must be made in the interest of
cost reduction, these compromises should be made initially
in establishing the complexity and efficiency of the treatment
planning process in the clinic. Once a particular type of process has been established, then it is imperative for the safety
and well-being of the patient that an appropriate quality assurance program be implemented to support that process. In
this report, we have tried to balance the need to be cost
effective and efficient with the need for high quality care. As
the recommendations of this task group are used throughout
the community, it will be important for radiation oncology
physicists to improve their quality assurance tools and programs, so that the quality of treatments can be improved
while also keeping the costs as low as feasible.
OUTLINE
Preface
Part A: INFORMATION FOR RADIATION
ONCOLOGY ADMINISTRATORS
Part B: QUALITY ASSURANCE FOR CLINICAL
RADIOTHERAPY TREATMENT
PLANNING

1775

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

Chapter 1: Introduction
1.1. Introduction
1.2. General definitions and aims
1.3. Scope
1.4. Initial recommendations ~how to use this
report!
1.5. The treatment planning process
1.6. Sources of uncertainties
1.7. Required and/or desired tolerances and
accuracy
Chapter 2: Acceptance tests for treatment planning
systems
2.1. Acceptance testing
2.2. Determination of specifications
2.3. Acceptance testing procedure
Chapter 3: Nondosimetric commissioning
3.1. Introduction
3.2. Patient positioning and immobilization
3.2.1. Immobilization
3.2.2. Positioning and simulation
3.3. Image acquisition
3.3.1. Imaging parameters
3.3.2. Artifacts and distortion in image
acquisition systems
3.4. Anatomical description
3.4.1. Image conversion and input
3.4.2. Anatomical structures
3.4.2.1. 3D structures
3.4.2.2. Contours
3.4.2.3. 3D points and lines
3.4.3. Density representation
3.4.3.1. Bolus and editing the 3D
density distribution
3.4.4. Image use and display
3.4.5. Dataset registration
3.5. Beams
3.5.1. Beam arrangements and definition
3.5.2. Machine description, limits and
readouts
3.5.3. Geometric accuracy
3.5.4. Field shape design
3.5.4.1. Manual aperture entry
3.5.4.2. Automatic aperture definition
3.5.4.3. Special MLC features
3.5.5. Wedges
3.5.6. Beam and aperture display
3.5.7. Compensators
3.6. Operational aspects of dose calculations
3.6.1. Methodology and algorithm use
3.6.2. Inhomogeneity correction effects
3.7. Plan evaluation
3.7.1. Dose display
3.7.2. Dose volume histograms
3.7.3. Use of NTCP/TCP and other tools
3.7.4. Composite plans
3.8. Hardcopy output
3.9. Plan implementation and verification
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1775

3.9.1. Coordinate systems and scale
conventions
3.9.2. Data transfer
3.9.3. Portal image verification
3.10. Brachytherapy issues
Chapter 4: Dose calculation commissioning
4.1. Introduction
4.2. Measurement of self-consistent dataset
4.2.1. Self-consistency
4.2.2. Data analysis, handling, and storage
4.3. Data input into the RTP system
4.3.1. General considerations
4.3.2. Computer transfer of data from a
water phantom
4.3.3. Manual data entry
4.3.4. Verification of input data
4.4. Dose calculation algorithm parameter
determination
4.5. Methods for dosimetric comparison and
verification
4.6. External beam calculation verification
4.6.1. Introduction
4.6.2. Required and/or achievable accuracy
4.6.3. Photon calculation verification
experiments
4.6.4. Electron calculation verification
experiments
4.7. Brachytherapy calculation verification
4.8. Absolute dose output and plan normalization
4.8.1. General guidelines for QA for
normalization and MU calculation
4.8.2. Verification of the steps in the process
4.9. Clinical verifications
Chapter 5: Periodic quality assurance testing
Chapter 6: QA as part of the daily planning process
Chapter 7: System management and security
7.1. Management personnel
7.1.1. Responsible physicist
7.1.2. Computer systems manager
7.2. Computer system management tasks
7.3. Data management tasks
7.4. Computer networks
7.5. System security
Chapter 8: Summary of recommendations
Chapter 9: Conclusions
Appendix 1: Vendor and user responsibilities
A1.1. Vendor responsibilities
A1.1.1. Documentation
A1.1.2. User training
A1.1.3. Software quality assurance
A1.1.4. Version updates
A1.1.5. Release of data formats
A1.1.6. Communication with users
A1.1.7. Suggestions for vendors
A1.2. User responsibilities
A1.2.1. Responsible physicist
A1.2.2. Documentation
A1.2.3. User training

1776

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

A1.2.4. Software quality assurance
A1.2.5. Version updates
A1.2.6. Use of data formats
A1.2.7. Education and communication with
vendor
Appendix 2: Example QA tests
Appendix 3: Photon dose calculation commissioning
A3.1. Depth dose
A3.2. Output factors
A3.3. Open field data
A3.4. Patient shape effects
A3.5. Wedges
A3.6. Blocks
A3.7. Multileaf collimator
A3.8. Asymmetric fields
A3.9. Density corrections
A3.10. Compensators
A3.11. Anthropomorphic phantoms
Appendix 4: Electron dose calculation commissioning
A4.1. Depth dose and open fields
A4.2. Output factors
A4.3. Extended distance
A4.4. Shaped fields
A4.5. ECWG test cases
Appendix 5: Brachytherapy dose calculation
commissioning
A5.1. Source entry methods
A5.2. Source library
A5.3. Source strength and decay
A5.4. Single source dose calculations
A5.5. Multiple source dose calculations and
optimization algorithms
A5.6. Global system tests
A5.7. Other tests
References

PART A: INFORMATION FOR RADIATION
ONCOLOGY ADMINISTRATORS
The goal of radiotherapy treatment of cancer is to cure or
locally control the disease while minimizing complications
in normal tissues. The process of treatment planning, inasmuch as it determines the detailed technique used for a patient’s radiation treatments, is instrumental in accomplishing
that goal. The term ‘‘treatment planning’’ has sometimes
been narrowly interpreted as a process primarily concerned
with dosimetry procedures such as the generation of computerized dose distributions and the calculation of treatment
times or monitor unit settings.
In actuality, treatment planning is a much broader process
than just performing dose calculations: it encompasses all of
the steps involved in planning a patient’s treatment.
• The initial step in the treatment planning process is patient positioning and immobilization, during which an
optimum patient position for treatment is determined
and immobilization devices necessary to maintain the
patient in that position during treatment are constructed.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1776

• Next, the size, extent, and location of the patient’s tumor ~target volume!, and its relationship with normal
organs and external surface anatomy must be determined. This step, often referred to as localization or
simulation, requires special equipment ~e.g., simulators,
CT simulators or CT scanners, other imaging studies!
for imaging the tumor and normal organs and obtaining
the shape of the external patient surface. In some ~but
not all! cases, the treatment fields are designed or
‘‘simulated’’ during this step. Other information must
also be incorporated into the planning process, including prior radiation therapy, concurrent chemotherapy,
and other radiosensitive conditions.
• Only at the completion of these first two procedures can
traditional ‘‘treatment planning’’ or ‘‘dose planning’’
begin. This step in the treatment planning process is
performed using a computerized radiation treatment
planning system ~RTP system!. The RTP system is
comprised of computer software, at least one computer
workstation which includes a graphical display, input
devices for entering patient and treatment machine information, and output devices for obtaining hardcopy
printouts for patient treatment and records. The patient
anatomical information and any treatment field information obtained during localization and simulation are entered into the RTP system, field design is performed as
necessary, the dose distribution within the patient is calculated and optimized by the treatment planner, and the
final plan is evaluated by a radiation oncology physicist
and approved by the radiation oncologist.
• The last step in the treatment planning process, plan
verification, involves checking the accuracy of the
planned treatment prior to treatment delivery. During
this step, the patient may return to the department for
additional procedures including a ‘‘plan verification’’
simulation or ‘‘setup’’ ~treatment simulation on the
treatment machine!. Additional radiographic images
may be taken and treatment information may be transferred from the planning system to other computer systems ~such as a record and verify system or treatment
delivery system! so that the plan may be delivered to
the patient by the treatment machine.
It should be apparent from this description that the treatment planning process, in its entirety, is a complex series of
interwoven procedures involving the efforts of many departmental personnel.
The complexity and sophistication of treatment planning
and treatment planning systems has increased tremendously
during the past decade. In addition to the software features
found in traditional RTP systems, sophisticated options such
as three-dimensional ~3D! and beam’s eye view ~BEV! displays, digitally reconstructed radiographs ~DRRs!, threedimensional dose computations and display, and plan evaluation tools such as dose volume histograms ~DVHs! have
become standard on the newest systems. Furthermore, the
complexity of the treatment planning process may increase
with more complex treatments. For example, electronic portal imaging, multileaf collimators, and computer controlled
treatment delivery are all treatment options which offer the
potential of improving patient care and treatment delivery

1777

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

efficiency, but also require increased personnel efforts for
commissioning and quality assurance at both the treatment
delivery and treatment planning levels.
The International Commission on Radiation Units and
Measurements3 recommends that radiation dose be delivered
to within 5% of the prescribed dose. This requires that the
uncertainty in each individual step in the treatment process
~including treatment planning! be significantly less than the
quoted 5%, and is a worthy goal. Unlike small errors in
treatment delivery which usually occur on a daily basis and
are often random in nature, uncertainties or errors introduced
during the treatment planning process are much more likely
to be systematic and constant over the entire course of treatment. Therefore, they harbor a huge potential for adversely
affecting tumor control and/or normal tissue complications.
The need for stringent QA requirements to minimize the possibility of systematic errors—so the ICRU recommendations
can be met—is obvious.
While specific goals of a treatment planning QA program
include meeting the ICRU dose delivery standards and addressing specific QA issues related to the increased complexity and sophistication in planning and treatment delivery systems, the overall aim should be to improve the care of
patients treated with radiation. To meet the goals of a QA
program, adequate equipment including treatment and imaging units, computerized treatment planning systems, and radiation measuring devices such as computerized data acquisition systems and phantoms are necessary, along with
adequate staffing of all the specialties, including radiation
oncologists, radiation oncology physicists, medical radiation
dosimetrists, and radiation therapists. It is important to realistically assess the staffing required for a QA program, particularly when new, sophisticated systems are introduced
into a department. Clearly, increased treatment planning
complexity calls for more, not less, staffing to ensure the
systems are used safely and that the complex QA procedures
can be practically completed. We therefore concur with the
recommendation of the AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 402 that radiation facilities should be staffed
at least at the levels described in the ‘‘Blue Book,’’ the
Report of the InterSociety Council for Radiation Oncology,4
since this report does not directly consider the requirements
of more modern 3D planning systems.
As discussed in the TG 40 report,2 the QA program for a
radiation oncology department should originate from the departmental QA committee, and the QA program designed for
treatment planning should be subject to review and approval
by that committee. It is the opinion of this task group, however, that QA for the treatment planning process and for the
treatment planning system is primarily the responsibility of
the radiation oncology physicist. Nevertheless, the support of
other departmental members will be crucial to the success of
the program. The responsibilities of various members of the
department with regard to comprehensive radiation oncology
QA have been outlined by Task Group 40. These recommendations are reproduced below with additional emphasis on
the role of each group in treatment planning QA.
Radiation oncologist. Radiation oncologists are solely reMedical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1777

sponsible for crucial aspects of the treatment planning process including the dose prescription, localization of the patient’s tumor and the related target volumes, any dosimetric
or normal tissue dose constraints, as well as final approval of
the treatment plan. They should be certified by one of the
recognized boards ~the American Board of Radiology or its
equivalent! and hold an appropriate state license, where applicable.
Radiation oncology physicist. The radiation oncology
physicist shall be primarily responsible for the design and
implementation of the QA program for treatment planning.
The physicist generates the treatment machine data necessary
for input into the planning system, and directs and reviews
all computerized dosimetry planning for patients. Moreover,
the radiation oncology physicist determines the local QA
program for treatment planning, including the tests to be performed, tolerances, and frequency of the tests. The physicist
shall also understand and appropriately respond to discrepancies or problems uncovered by that QA program. We recommend that the radiation oncology physicist be certified in
Radiation Oncology Physics by the American Board of Radiology or American Board of Medical Physics ~or the Canadian College of Physicists in Medicine, if applicable! and
hold an appropriate state license, where applicable.
Radiation therapist. The radiation therapist is often involved in or responsible for several aspects of the treatment
planning process, most notably patient positioning and immobilization, simulation or localization, and plan verification. The radiation therapist should be able to detect equipment deviations or malfunctions, understand the safe
operating limits of the equipment, and be able to judge when
errors in treatment planning may have occurred, due to
equipment, patient-related problems, or human mistakes. We
recommend that the radiation therapist have credentials in
Radiation Therapy Technology as defined by the American
Registry of Radiologic Technologists or possess suitable
equivalent qualifications, and hold an unrestricted state license in radiation therapy technology, where applicable.
Medical radiation dosimetrist. The medical dosimetrist is
responsible for patient data acquisition, radiation treatment
design, and manual and computer-assisted calculations of radiation dose distributions. In consultation with the radiation
oncology physicist and radiation oncologist, the dosimetrist
generates and documents the chosen treatment plan for each
patient. The final plan is reviewed by the radiation oncology
physicist and approved by the radiation oncologist. The dosimetrist may also assist the radiation oncology physicist
with various aspects of the treatment planning QA program.
We recommend that medical dosimetrists be certified by the
Medical Dosimetry Certification Board, or at least possess
the credentials for board eligibility, if possible.
In summary, it is important to understand that the treatment planning process involves multiple complex steps performed by many people throughout the department. The QA
program for treatment planning must therefore focus on the
process as a whole and assess the cumulative effects of uncertainties throughout the process. It is also important to reiterate that the complexity of the treatment planning process

1778

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

is increasing, making it imperative that a strong QA program
be designed and that the appropriate equipment, personnel,
and time be available to implement it. QA for treatment planning has clinical, physical, and administrative components,
and its successful implementation requires the teamwork of
many personnel.
PART B: QUALITY ASSURANCE FOR CLINICAL
RADIOTHERAPY TREATMENT PLANNING

1778

designed. There can be a very large difference in treatment
planning capabilities and their clinical utilization among different clinics. Therefore, this report will not define a standard
QA program which should be applied by each clinic. Rather,
the radiation oncology physicist in each clinic should review
this report, use its guidelines to determine those issues that
are of most importance, and then concentrate the RTP QA
program on those issues. An example framework for each
clinic’s QA program can be found here, but the specific details of the program should be determined individually.

Chapter 1: Introduction

1.1 Introduction
Radiotherapy treatment planning ~RTP! has long been an
important part of the radiotherapy treatment process, so assuring that the treatment planning process is being performed
correctly is thus an important responsibility of the radiation
oncology physicist. In recent years, as three-dimensional
~3D! and image-based treatment planning has begun to be
practiced in numerous clinics, the need for a comprehensive
program for treatment planning quality assurance ~QA! has
become even more clear. An AAPM task group ~TG 40! has
recently published an overall approach to QA for the therapy
process,2 but this work includes only a very general discussion of treatment planning QA issues. In this report, we propose a methodology to be used by radiation oncology physicists to create the appropriate QA program for the treatment
planning systems and processes used in their clinics. Although this QA program will vary widely between different
clinics, use of this report should allow each clinic to concentrate its QA efforts on those areas of most importance.

1.2. General definitions and aims
The radiotherapy treatment planning process is defined to
be the process used to determine the number, orientation,
type, and characteristics of the radiation beams ~or brachytherapy sources! used to deliver a large dose of radiation to a
patient in order to control or cure a cancerous tumor or other
problem. Most often, treatment planning is performed with
the assistance of a computerized treatment planning system
that helps the treatment planner and physician define the target volume, determine beam directions and shapes, calculate
the associated dose distribution, and evaluate that dose distribution. The RTP system consists of a software package, its
hardware platform, and associated peripheral devices. Diagnostic tests ~imaging, x rays, other laboratory tests!, clinical
impressions, and other information are also incorporated into
the planning process, either qualitatively or quantitatively
~an example is the creation of a model of the patient’s
anatomy based on information from CT scans!. The treatment planning process includes a wide spectrum of tasks,
from an evaluation of the need for imaging studies up to an
analysis of the accuracy of daily treatments. This broad definition of the treatment planning process will be described
further below ~see Sec. 1.5!.
The aim of this report on Quality Assurance for Clinical
Radiotherapy Treatment Planning is to describe in detail
those issues that should be considered when a QA program is
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1.3. Scope
In earlier decades, the scope of the decisions made inside
the treatment planning system, and inside the treatment planning process, generally involved only dose calculation results and related issues such as wedge selection. Much of the
planning was done by the physician—often in the
simulator—where the number of beams, beam directions,
field sizes, field shaping, and related issues were all determined. Quality assurance work performed in this environment naturally concentrated on dose calculation-related
issues.5–10,1
Now, however, with the continuing expansion of 3D planning capabilities in many centers, a huge increase in the
magnitude and complexity of treatment decisions that are
made inside the RTP system has occurred. With full 3D
planning, decisions about the area to be treated, importance
of normal tissue doses, beam directions and energy, field
sizes, beam aperture, and most other aspects of how to treat
the patient are usually made during treatment planning by
some combination of the treatment planner, physician, and
physicist. The scope of the RTP QA program must therefore
be increased significantly. Therefore, this report encompasses QA for the entire treatment planning process, and not
just the limited dose calculation and display parts of planning.
In recent years there have been a number of attempts to
broaden the scope of QA efforts in treatment planning.11–17
The report by Van Dyk et al.,18 containing recommendations
for commissioning and QA of treatment planning computers
from the Ontario Cancer Institute and Ontario Cancer Treatment and Research Foundation, is a very valuable description of an approach to RTP QA that should be reviewed
carefully by all radiation oncology physicists involved in
treatment planning. However, that report did not deal with
many of the issues that have become important with the increased availability and use of image-based 3D planning systems.
In this report, a comprehensive approach to the design of
a quality assurance program for the radiation treatment planning process will be described. QA issues to be addressed
include:
• Acceptance testing and specifications for acquisition of
a RTP system ~Chap. 2!.
• Testing, documentation, and characterization of the
nondosimetric aspects of planning ~Chap. 3!.

1779

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

• Measurement, testing, and verification of the dosimetric
aspects of the planning system ~Chap. 4!.
• Routine QA testing ~Chap. 5!.
• QA of the clinical use of treatment planning throughout
the entire planning and treatment processes ~Chap. 6!.
• Computer systems management as part of the QA program ~Chap. 7!.
• Vendor and user responsibilities in the areas of software
quality assurance and vendor support. Although a very
important part of the report, this discussion is included
in Appendix 1 since it deals with the interactions between vendor and user, rather than the direct activities
that are the main part of the QA program.

1.4. Initial recommendations (how to use this
report)
A small number of recommendations are listed in Table
1-1 to help readers read and use this report effectively.

1.5. The treatment planning process
As described in Sec. 1.2, the treatment planning process
consists of all the activities associated with determining how
TABLE 1-1. General Recommendations and Guidelines for Use
1. This report is not a prescriptive listing of all that must be done to perform adequate RTP QA. The report is intended to give a comprehensive
summary of issues which should be considered when creating the RTP
QA program for an institution. No one institution will need to perform all
of the work discussed in this report.
2. The Task Group recommends that users of a particular commercial
treatment planning system should band together, with or without the
assistance of the vendor of that system, to help each other create and
perform the comprehensive QA which is required for that particular
planning system. It is unlikely that any one institution can perform all the
quality assurance, by itself, that is appropriate for a complex commercial
planning system.
3. It is critical that each institution name one radiation oncology physicist
to be the ‘‘responsible physicist’’ for treatment planning in that institution.
This position includes overall responsibility for the implementation,
quality assurance, and clinical use of treatment planning in the institution,
and is the most appropriate point of contact for vendor RTP support or
other people involved in treatment planning outside of the institution.
4. Treatment planning system vendors have important quality assurance
and testing requirements ~see Appendix 1!, but this report deals only with
the kinds of work which should be performed by the radiation oncology
physicists in order to assure the appropriate use of treatment planning in
their institution.
5. Although this report includes discussion of many issues which are
relevant only to RTP systems which are so-called ‘‘3-D RTP systems’’,
institutions with less sophisticated and complex RTP systems should also
make use of the report. Some issues discussed here may be trivially or
simply handled inside those simpler planning systems, but even so, those
issues are still present somewhere in the planning process, either explicitly
or implicitly in the way the system is used. In either event, the process of
treatment planning should be analyzed in the same way, and the quality
assurance program should be appropriately modified to handle the
situation.

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1779
TABLE 1-2. The Clinical Treatment Planning Process
1. Patient Positioning and Immobilization
• Establish patient reference marks/patient coordinate system.
2. Image Acquisition and Input
• Acquire and input CT, MR, and other imaging information into the
planning system.
3. Anatomy Definition
• Define and display contours and surfaces for normal and critical
structures.
• Geometrically register all input data ~CT, MR!, including registration
with initial simulation contours, films, patient position, etc.
• Define target contours, generate 3-D target surface using surface
expansion, import target information from multiple imaging
modalities.
• Generate electron density representation from CT or from assigned
bulk density information.
4. Beam/Source Technique
• Determine beam or source arrangements.
• Generate beam’s-eye-view displays.
• Design field shape ~blocks, MLC!.
• Determine beam modifiers ~compensators, wedges!.
• Determine beam or source weighting.
5. Dose Calculations
• Select dose calculation algorithm and methodology, calculation grid
and window, etc.
• Perform dose calculations.
• Set relative and absolute dose normalizations.
• Input the dose prescription.
6. Plan Evaluation
• Generate 2-D and 3-D dose displays.
• Perform visual comparisons.
• Use DVH analysis.
• Calculate NTCP/TCP values, and analyze.
• Use automated optimization tools.
7. Plan Implementation
• Align ~register! the real patient with the plan ~often performed at a
plan verification simulation!.
• Calculate Monitor Units or implant duration.
• Generate hardcopy output.
• Transfer plan into record and verify system.
• Transfer plan to treatment machine.
8. Plan Review
• Perform overall review of all aspects of plan before implementation.

the radiation treatments will be carried out. Table 1-2 lists a
general model of the treatment planning process. This model
is not intended to include all institution-specific details, but it
does include most major aspects.

1.6. Sources of uncertainties
Treatment planning involves numerous uncertainties, all
of which can affect the accuracy with which planning and
treatment are done. From a QA standpoint, one should estimate each uncertainty and then determine the expected re-

1780

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

sultant uncertainty in the calculated dose distribution. Some
of the sources of uncertainty in the RTP process are listed
below:
• Patient localization. Patient motion, including organ
motion, during CT scanning, simulation, treatment, and
other associated procedures adds to the uncertainty in
location of the patient, target, and/or critical normal
structures with respect to the radiation beams.
• Imaging. Problems in transfer, conversion, or use of
imaging data can lead to increased geometrical uncertainties in the relationship of the beams to the anatomy.
Use of more than one imaging modality increases this
problem due to the need to geometrically register the
image sets with each other. Additional uncertainty is
caused by geometrical distortions @magnetic resonance
~MR!# and/or lack of resolution @positron-emission tomography ~PET!, single photon emission computed tomography ~SPECT!#.
• Definition of the anatomy. Inaccuracy in definition of
the anatomical model of the patient may be one of the
largest sources of uncertainty in the entire RTP process.
Each of the steps involved ~drawing contours, meshing
contours into a 3D object description, creating surface
and volumetric displays! include a geometrical uncertainty. Furthermore, the delineation of tumor and target
volumes by the physician is very dependent on the physician, and differences between physicians or between
different sessions with the same physician have been
demonstrated.19,20
• Establishment of beam geometry. The accuracy of the
treatment planning beam geometry depends on the resolution and tolerance of each machine parameter, and on
the frequency and magnitude of setup errors made during daily treatments. Error rates on the order of 1%
have been described.21 Computerized record and verify
~R/V! systems and multileaf collimators ~MLCs! may
reduce some of these errors, but may substitute more
systematic errors for the random errors which they help
prevent.
• Dose calculation. Sources of uncertainty include the accuracy of the original measured data, consistency of
machine output, resolution and sensitivity of the measuring instruments, quality of the data analysis, transfer
of the data into the RTP system, and the way those data
are used. Uncertainties associated with calculation algorithms arise from poor modeling of the physical situation, lack of appropriate supporting physics, inappropriate approximations, use of calculational grids that are
too large, poor parametrizations, and other limitations
of either the basic algorithm or its use.
• Dose display and plan evaluation. Uncertainties in dose
display depend mostly on how accurate the representation of the dose distribution is, but are also related to
how clearly the information is presented. Dose volume
histograms ~DVHs! are sensitive to anatomical definition, the methods used for representing the anatomical
objects, the resolution and extent of the dose calculation
grid, the resolution and methodology behind the formation of the DVH, and how the DVH is presented. If
tools like normal tissue complication probability
~NTCP! and tumor control probability ~TCP! are used,
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1780

then the reliability and clinical relevance of those models must be considered, as well as the limited clinical
data which are available to help parametrize the models.
• Plan implementation. Errors include transcription errors
in writing the plan into a patient ~paper or electronic!
chart and misconceptions of the treatment therapists
when faced with poor documentation of some aspect of
patient or plan setup.

1.7. Required and/or desired tolerances and
accuracy
Determining the required or achievable accuracy for treatment planning is a very difficult aspect of the creation of a
RTP QA program. Here, we will not provide a table of recommended values, since it is clear that what is achievable
with one kind of planning system may be quite unachievable
with another. It is the responsibility of the radiation oncology
physicist to determine ~1! the accuracy of the institution’s
particular RTP system for a range of clinical situations; and
~2! how that expectation of accuracy must be modified to
account for any particular clinical situation, the kinds of
treatment plans that are created, and other aspects of the
local situation.
For illustration, we present two example sets of expectations for the accuracy of various parts of two different treatment planning systems spanning the range of sophistication
found in RTP systems:
• ‘‘Traditional.’’ This is the prototypical ‘‘twodimensional’’ ~2D! planning system, which uses only
manual contour input ~no CT data!, allows only axial
beams, does not model blocks or compensators, and
only contains a 2D model for calculating the dose distribution from a beam.
• ‘‘3D.’’ This is a fully 3D system, which models all the
capabilities of normal treatment machines and contains
a modern 3D pencil beam electron dose calculation
model and a modern 3D photon beam dose calculation
algorithm that take into account 3D scatter, the 3D
shape of inhomogeneities, and other effects.
Table 1-3 gives the range of accuracies that are probably
achievable with these two kinds of planning systems.
Chapter 2: Acceptance tests for treatment planning
systems

2.1. Acceptance testing
QA testing is sometimes confused with acceptance testing. In this report, we use the term acceptance testing as
follows: an acceptance test is performed to confirm that the
RTP system performs according to its specifications. If there
is little rigor in the specifications of the RTP system, then
there will be little need or ability to design an acceptance
test. This highlights the need for rigorous and careful design
of the specifications for acquisition of an RTP system if one
wants to ~1! know how the RTP system should perform in
various situations; and ~2! be able to design and perform a
formal acceptance test to verify that the system works as
specified.

1781

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1781

TABLE 1-3. This Table Illustrates the Reasoning Behind the Choice of Ranges of Generally Achievable Tolerances Which Might Be Chosen as a
Demonstration of Differences Between ‘‘Traditional’’ and ‘‘3-D’’ RTP Systems
Issue

Traditional

3-D

Reasons

0.3 cm

0.1 cm

Traditional contour typically obtained mechanically. 3-D contour
typically obtained from CT.

Creation of planning target volume
~PTV! axial contours, given a clinical
target volume ~CTV!

0.5 to 10 cm

0.3 cm

Traditional system uses a 2-D PTV drawn by hand around the CTV.
Expansion onto other 2-D contours is quite inaccurate, as it is totally
manual. In 3-D system, PTV can be created by 3-D expansion
around CTV by the software.14

Use of MR images for target
delineation

1.0 to 2.0 cm

0.2 to 0.5 cm

Traditional system involves totally manual registration and contour
transfer. 3-D system registration has at best about 2 mm
reproducibility, plus additional distortions, plus transfer of MRI
contours to CT dataset.

Beam location resolution

0.5 cm

,0.1 cm

Traditional system may force beam center to be on axial calculation
plane or CT slice. 3-D system allows any specified isocenter
coordinates.

Collimator setting

0.5 cm

0.1 cm

Resolution of jaw positions typically 1 mm, although traditional
system will usually specify field width and length with resolution of
0.5 cm at best.

Aperture definition

0.3 cm or more

0.1 cm

Block shape not modeled in prototype traditional system, but may be
entered with digitizer for some types of systems. 3-D system may
use computer-generated aperture.

Collimation and aperture display

up to many cm

0.1 cm

Traditional system may not display aperture shape and may not
display divergence effects.

Gantry angle

1 deg

,1 deg

Resolution of gantry angle typically 0.1 deg in 3-D systems.

Table and/or collimator angle

N/A

,1 deg

Table and/or collimator angles often not allowed or displayed in
traditional system.

Dose, central 80% of beam width,
central axis slice

1%

1%

Traditional beam models reproduce measured data. 3-D models may
do no better since they are not directly based on measurements of
this situation.

Dose, central 80% of beam width,
non-axial slice

.10%

1%

Traditional beam models do not handle non-axial behavior. 3-D
models are just as accurate in non-axial directions as axial direction.

Dose in penumbra ~80% to 20%!,
open field

2–5 mm

1–5 mm

10%

2% is achievable
~probably!

Traditional beam normalization depends only on central axis of
beam on axial slice for the open rectangular field in a water phantom.
3-D normalization includes all effects, including scatter under blocks
and inhomogeneity effects.

Dose under block

.100%

2%

Traditional system cannot handle blocks, so can make large errors
under blocks. 3-D model accurately handles dose under blocks,
perhaps with accuracy of 1–2%.

Dose in block penumbra

.1 cm

1 mm

Block penumbra not modeled in traditional system.

DVH accuracy

N/A

Depends on many factors

DVH accuracy depends on dose calculation grid, volumetric
region-of-interest grid, accuracy of object segmentation, bin size of
histogram, plan normalization

Predicted NTCP value

N/A

Depends on model
and input data

Given a DVH and an NTCP model, NTCP calculation can be
verified. However, clinical accuracy or relevancy is beyond the
scope of this report.

Entry of axial contours

Dose to normalization point
in blocked field

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

Depends on grid effects, model.

1782

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1782

2.2. Determination of specifications

TABLE 2-1. Example Dose Calculation Accuracy Specification

A detailed discussion on the creation of specifications for
a modern 3D RTP system is a large task and beyond the
scope of this report. However, a few brief comments are
included here.
Specifications must be reasonable constraints that are
quantifiable and testable or measurable. For example, it is
meaningless to write a specification requiring 2% accuracy
in dose calculations. This is much too broad a statement.
Where? Under what circumstances? With what input beam
data? In addition, satisfaction of specifications usually
should not be dependent on clinic-specific beam data since a
vendor typically cannot test or verify the quality of an individual clinic’s data.
Items suitable for specification can be divided into three
broad categories:

The NCI ECWG electron dataset will be used for a series of dose calculation verification checks of the accuracy of the 3-D electron pencil beam
dose calculation which is included in the system.

• Computer hardware: This includes the CPU and all the
peripheral devices that are part of the RTP system, such
as the display monitor~s!, printer, plotter, tape drive,
etc.
• Software features and functions: Many software feature
specifications will be of the yes/no or exists/does-notexist type, rather than quantitative.
• Benchmark tests: Performance on benchmark tests indicates the accuracy of the dose calculation algorithm under very specific circumstances with specific beam data.
Calculation times can also be measured.
If the radiation oncology physicist chooses to write specifications for the purchase of a new RTP system, rather than
just selecting a particular system, then the needs and requirements of that particular clinic must first be carefully assessed. This includes evaluation of the manner in which the
treatment planning system will be used. All aspects of the
treatment planning process should be considered, not just the
dose calculation abilities. What functionality and capabilities
are required? What types of input are needed? What types of
input will be used? What level of performance ~on which
benchmark tests! is desirable? These requirements then need
to be translated into specifications that can be quantitatively
stated and tested. The specifications document itself should
clearly define each item and the desired specification, as illustrated in Table 2-1. After the physicist has determined the
ideal specifications, the physicist will need to negotiate with
the vendor to settle upon a final set of specifications.

2.3. Acceptance testing procedure
Specifications should be written with particular tests already in mind. It is important to make sure that the procedure
actually tests the feature to be tested and is capable of determining whether the specification is satisfied or not. Thought
should be put into the exact procedures and the order of the
tests in order to minimize the total work necessary and to
correlate optimally with other acceptance tests as well as
with QA and commissioning tests. A procedures document
should then be written that clearly describes the individual
procedures in detail. The procedures to be used must be
agreed to by both the user and the vendor.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1. The vendor shall demonstrate that the dose calculations for open field
electron beams with applicator sizes 636 and 15315 cm, at 100 and 110
SSD, will agree with the ECWG measured data within 63% in the central
80% of the projected field size, and that the 10, 20, 50, 80 and 90%
isodose lines ~relative to 100% at dmax on the central axis of the beam!
will be within 2 mm of the respective measured isodose lines.
2. The vendor ...

The acceptance testing should be carried out on the system after it has been installed in the clinic but before it is
used clinically. Tests of the hardware and the software features should be performed by the user. Significant time may
be required to perform detailed benchmark testing of dose
calculation or other algorithm accuracy, so it should be determined at the time of the definition of the acceptance test
procedure whether these tests are to be performed by the user
or the vendor. If these tests are performed by the vendor, the
user may want to repeat some or all of the tests to verify the
results.
Results from the acceptance testing should be carefully
documented, along with any variation from the defined procedures, and kept as long as the treatment planning system is
used in the department. Table 2-2 lists some examples of
items which might be included in an acceptance test.
Chapter 3: Nondosimetric Commissioning

The modern RTP process includes many aspects not directly related to dose calculations. Therefore, the RTP QA
program must also handle these important nondosimetric issues. Most of the general topics the QA procedure should
cover are discussed below, although all possible nondosimetric issues are not listed.
The long list of issues in this section may appear to apply
only to complex 3D planning systems. However, these issues
should also be considered for 2D systems, although many of
the issues raised may condense to testing a few simple features of the system. Conversely, this list may be incomplete
for workers who have advanced systems or those who have
developed specialized techniques. The aim of this section is
to provide a framework that will help radiation oncology
physicists design QA programs appropriate for their clinical
planning techniques and systems. Considering the huge
amount of work that would be required to thoroughly test
each of the features listed here, it is reasonable to expect that
only those RTP system features that will be used clinically
should be tested initially. However, one should be aware that
some of these features may be important to understand, even
if no explicit use of the feature is intended, due to exploration, evolution of planning techniques, or design of the system. The terms ‘‘confirm’’ and ‘‘verify’’ are used throughout
this section as testing of various capabilities or features are

1783

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1783

TABLE 2-2. Acceptance Test Features
Topic

Tests

CT input

Create an anatomical description based on a standard set of
CT scans provided by the vendor, in the format which will
be employed by the user.

Anatomical description

Create a patient model based on the standard CT data
discussed above. Contour the external surface, internal
anatomy, etc. Create 3-D objects and display.

Beam description

Verify that all beam technique functions work, using a
standard beam description provided by the vendor.

Photon beam dose calculations

Perform dose calculations for a standard photon beam
dataset. Tests should include various open fields, different
SSDs, blocked fields, MLC-shaped fields, inhomogeneity
test cases, multi-beam plans, asymmetric jaw fields,
wedged fields, and others.

Electron beam dose calculations

Perform a set of dose calculations for a standard electron
beam dataset. Include open fields, different SSDs, shaped
fields, inhomogeneity test cases, surface irregularity test
cases, and others.

Brachytherapy dose calculations

Perform dose calculations for single sources of each type,
as well as several multi-source implant calculations,
including standard implant techniques such as a GYN
insertion with tandem and ovoids, two-plane breast
implant, etc.

Dose display, dose volume histograms

Display dose calculation results. Use a standard dose
distribution provided by the vendor to verify that the DVH
code works as described. User-created dose distributions
may also be used for additional tests.

Hardcopy output

Print out all hardcopy documentation for a given series of
plans, and confirm that all textual and graphical
information is output correctly.

discussed: Note that the methods used to perform and document this task may be very dependent on the treatment planning system and/or features being considered.

3.1. Introduction
This chapter is perhaps the most complex chapter in the
report. To a physicist familiar only with older treatment
planning systems that support only straightforward twodimensional treatment planning, the terminology and tasks
developed in this chapter may seem unfamiliar, for it is in
the nondosimetric issues that much of the complexity of
modern treatment planning systems is manifest. The quality
assurance testing of the nondosimetric aspects of the treatment planning process that is recommended in this report
follows the actual clinical treatment planning process, as
summarized in Table 1-2, and this table can provide a helpful
guide through this chapter. The first part of the chapter deals
with acquisition of patient information, starting with patient
positioning and immobilization, image acquisition, and conversion of the image information into a suitable anatomical
model of the patient. The chapter continues with a discussion
of acquisition of beam information, including beam geomMedical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

etry, definition of field aperture, identification and description of beam modifiers, and identification of treatment machine, modality, and energy. The next part of the chapter
addresses operational aspects of the dose calculations, including selection of dose algorithm and heterogeneity corrections. Evaluation of treatment plans is addressed next, including issues related to dose display and dose-volume
histograms. The next part of the chapter looks at plan documentation, implementation, verification, and transferring
plan information from the treatment planning system to the
treatment machine and the patient record. The chapter then
addresses nondosimetric quality assurance issues in brachytherapy including source definition, source geometry, source
display, and dose calculations. The chapter concludes with a
description of integrated ‘‘start-to-finish’’ tests used to perform a final check on the systematic behavior of the treatment planning process.

3.2. Patient positioning and immobilization
Patient immobilization and positioning are an important
part of the planning process, since many planning decisions
are based on data from these procedures.

1784

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

3.2.1. Immobilization. The purpose of patient immobilization is to help position the patient in a reproducible manner
~consistent with the technical goals of the treatment! and to
help the patient remain motionless during treatment. Immobilization techniques may be as simple as positioning the
arms in a particular fashion or as complicated as the use of
an invasive stereotactic device. The quality of the immobilization affects the reproducibility with which the patient is
positioned for each of the procedures involved in the
planning/delivery process, and may affect the accuracy of
treatments. The use of particular immobilization devices may
change image quality and/or monitor unit calculations, so
these effects should be investigated prior to clinical use.
Note that few immobilization devices actually keep the patient immobile, so motion and positioning errors often continue to be a concern even with use of such a device.
3.2.2. Positioning and simulation. The next step in the
planning process involves localizing the volume to be
treated. This includes defining the positions of the patient,
tumor, target, and normal structures. Traditionally, this procedure has been accomplished with the simulator using orthogonal radiographs, a manual contour, and laser marks
which establish an initial isocenter. However, with the development of image-based RTP systems and ‘‘virtual’’ simulation, localization procedures involving CT images are now
often used.
No matter how it is obtained, the patient position information must be acquired accurately and then transferred accurately into the RTP system for further planning and analysis. Similar accuracy requirements hold for beam geometry
and other information obtained during simulation. Simulators, CT scanners, and ‘‘virtual’’ simulators should therefore
be subject to a rigorous QA program that includes both mechanical and image quality tests. For example, for simulators
and CT/MR scanners, the geometrical accuracy of all beam
and couch parameters, laser alignment systems, and gradicules should be assessed. QA for simulators has been the
topic of a number of publications2,22,23 and the reader is referred to those reports. QA for CT scanners is discussed in
Sec. 3.3.1. QA for CT-simulation software is covered in the
present report, as CT-simulation software corresponds primarily to the geometric aspects of a treatment planning system.

3.3. Image acquisition
A set of ‘‘images’’ used to define the patient anatomy can
be as simple as a manual contour and a pair of orthogonal
simulator films, or as complex as cross-sectional image sets
from several different modalities. Images can be obtained
from many sources including planar radiography ~film or
digital!, computed tomography ~CT!, magnetic resonance
~MR!, positron emission tomography ~PET!, single photon
emission computed tomography ~SPECT!, and ultrasound
~US!. Although most of these imaging sources are used for
visualizing anatomy or physiology, there are also other reasons for their use. For example, CT often is used to generate
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1784

a 3D map of the patient electron density, necessary for accurate dose calculations.
The manner in which these imaging data are acquired
may have dramatic effects later in the planning process, particularly if the data are not acquired correctly. QA of image
acquisition must ensure that images have been obtained in an
optimal way, and that their transfer into the RTP system, and
use therein, has been performed accurately.
3.3.1. Imaging parameters. Numerous imaging system
parameters can affect how the image data are used. For example, incorrect setting or reading of image parameters such
as pixel size, slice thickness, CT number scale, and orientation coding can cause the RTP system to make incorrect use
of the data. Furthermore, lack of understanding of partial
volume effects in cross-sectional images may cause incorrect
identification of anatomical or other information from the
images. Control of the imaging parameters at acquisition is
therefore an important part of the QA process that applies to
each patient.
For correct use of imaging information, this report recommends developing standard protocols for image acquisition,
optimized for each disease site. These protocols should be
used routinely and should be confirmed by routine inspection
of clinical procedures. These protocols should include the
following information:
• the extent of the patient that is to be scanned,
• the position of the patient as well as any immobilization
devices,
• location and type of radio-opaque markers used on patient surface as coordinate system reference,
• scan parameters such as slice spacing and thickness,
• breathing instructions for patients scanned in abdomen
and/or chest,
• the policy on the use of contrast agents ~for CT, MR,
and other modalities!.
QA and commissioning of the simulator ~see Sec. 3.2.2! and
other imaging devices such as CT or MR should be performed according to relevant AAPM task group
recommendations2,24,25 and other useful work.26
3.3.2. Artifacts and distortion in image acquisition systems. All imaging systems are susceptible to artifacts and/or
geometrical distortions, thus information from the image
may need to be modified or interpreted before it can be used.
Examples abound, such as streaking in CT images near highdensity anatomic structures such as teeth and fillings, modification of the derived tissue densities when CT contrast is
used, distortion in MR images ~e.g., near interfaces of
changes in magnetic susceptibility such as the tissue/air interface which causes distortion in external fiducial markers!,
or the general systematic variations in image value ~Hounsfield units! at different locations in the imaging volume. Imaging protocols should therefore try to minimize artifacts,
allow easy identification of an artifact when it does occur,
and allow for correction of the image data. Geometrical distortions and inaccuracies in various imaging modalities have
been discussed in the literature for CT17 and MRI.20

1785

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

TABLE 3-1. Some Imaging Artifacts and Their Consequences
Artifact

Consequence

Finite voxel size

Errors in delineation of target volumes and
structure outlines, particularly for small targets
and/or thick slices.

Partial volume effects

Errors in voxel grayscale values and in contours
obtained via autocontouring.

High-density
heterogeneities

Streaking artifacts in CT images, which can
lead to non-representative density values and
image information.

Contrast agents

Errors in voxel grayscale values. May lead to
errors in CT-derived electron densities or
interpretation of imaging information for other
modalities.

MR distortion

Distortion in geometric accuracy of MR
images, dependent typically on magnetic field
homogeneity,
changes
in
magnetic
susceptibility at interfaces, and other effects.
May lead to incorrect geometrical positioning
of imaging information.

Paramagnetic sources

Local distortions in MR images.

Because these artifacts are dependent on the particular
situation and are not due to software-specific problems, the
QA procedures to deal with these issues are part of the clinical planning process. Although detailed discussion of these
issues is beyond the scope of this report, the user should be
aware of the possibility of the kinds of artifacts listed in
Table 3-1, as well as how to resolve, circumvent, or compensate for the problems they cause.

3.4. Anatomical description
The anatomical model or description of the patient is one
of the most critical issues in RTP, and the introduction of 3D

1785

planning has greatly expanded our knowledge of the
anatomy of each individual patient. As we all know, very
precise knowledge of the dose distribution will do little good
if we have incorrectly identified the tumor, target or normal
tissues. Therefore, a significant effort should be spent on QA
of the anatomical description. Since much of the testing associated with the anatomical description of the patient is dependent on the details of the RTP system used, this section
concentrates on delineating the issues that should be considered and why they are important, rather than describing specific tests in detail.
3.4.1. Image conversion and input. In recent years, imaging information obtained from CT has become the basis of
our anatomical model. Other image information, such as
digitized radiographs or images from other imaging modalities, may also be incorporated. Typically, each of these images is transferred from a vendor-specific computer system,
usually with a vendor-specific image file format and/or transfer media or network, to the RTP system. Test issues are
listed in Table 3-2. Many of these tests can be performed
using scans of phantoms with various configurations of the
imaging device. In Appendix 1, The Task Group recommends that all vendors of image acquisition systems and
RTP systems make available the standard DICOM image
format for image input/output,33 so that the number of image
conversion methods is reduced to this one universal format.
Note that the dataset registration process which is necessary
if one uses more than one set of images ~dataset! is discussed
in Sec. 3.4.5.
3.4.2. Anatomical structures. In older 2D RTP, the only
anatomical information available was one or more contours
of different structures taken on one or a few slices, so the
description of anatomical structures was quite simple. Little
QA was required other than confirmation that the drawing
device ~digitizer or other such device! accurately input the
desired coordinates for a particular contour. In a 3D planning
system, however, the anatomical model used for the patient
is much more complex, requiring a much more complete set

TABLE 3-2. Image Input Tests
Topic

Tests

Reasons

Image geometry

Document and verify parameters used to determine
geometric description of each image ~e.g., number of
pixels, pixel size, slice thickness!.

Vendor and scanner-specific file formats and conventions
can cause very specific geometrical errors when converted
for RTP system.

Geometric location and
orientation of the scan

Document and verify parameters used to determine
geometric location of each image, particularly left-right
and head-foot orientations.

Vendor and scanner-specific file formats and conventions
can cause very specific geometrical errors when converted
for RTP system.

Text information

Verify that all text information is correctly transferred.

Incorrect name or scan sequence identification could cause
misuse or misinterpretation of the scans.

Imaging data

Verify accuracy of grayscale values, particularly for
conversion of CT number to electron density.

Wrong grayscale data may cause incorrect identification of
anatomy or incorrect density corrections.

Image unwarping
~removing distortions!

Test all features, including the documentation tools which
assure that the original and modified images are correctly
identified within the system.

Methodologies which modify imaging information may
leave incorrect data in place.

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1786

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

TABLE 3-3. Anatomical Structure Definitions
Term

Description

3-D anatomical structure

A 3-D construct that delineates an anatomical
object based on voxel, surface, slice, contour,
and/or other descriptions.

Voxel description

A set of 3-D voxels used to describe a
particular 3-D structure.

Surface description

A surface mesh that defines the boundary of a
3-D structure.

Slices

2-D planes, usually corresponding to 2-D
images ~e.g., CT!.

Contours

2-D outlines, usually created on a slice or
image plane. These outlines are typically used
to generate the 3-D anatomical structure
description.

Reference lines

Straight or curved line segments used to mark
special anatomy or other features relevant to the
treatment plan.

Points

Points defined in 3-D, often used as markers.

Density description

A description of the electron density of a
structure. Either defined as a bulk ~or assigned!
value or derived from CT data.

Region-of-interest
~ROI! description

A voxel or surface description of each 3-D
structure of interest. Used for calculation of
dose volume histograms and other kinds of
statistics.

Dataset

A geometrically self-consistent set of data ~e.g.,
a set of CT scans obtained in one acquisition!.

of test procedures. The basic contours of the 2D system have
been superseded by a hierarchy of objects including points,
contours, slices, 3D structures, 3D surface descriptions, and
even multiple datasets of self-consistent volumetric descriptions, as summarized in Table 3-3.
3.4.2.1. 3D Structures: One of the major differences between 2D and 3D RTP systems is how anatomical structures
are described. In 2D, most structures are defined by 2D contours on one or a few axial slices, and contours are generally
not related from one slice to the next. In 3D, a 3D structure
is created for each anatomical object. This structure is often
defined by a series of contours drawn on multiple slices of
some image dataset ~for example, CT!, and the contours for
a particular structure are all related. A 3D RTP system may
require many different procedures to check the 3D anatomical structure description functionality, as listed in Table 3-4.
3.4.2.2. Contours: Anatomical structures can be entered
into the RTP system by a variety of methods, but the most
typical method is to create contours on a series of slices
through the patient, and then to create the 3D structure from
the serial contours. QA tests for contour definition are considered in Table 3-5.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1786

3.4.2.3. Points and lines: The display and geometrical
definition of points and lines defined inside the system must
accurately reflect the geometrical location of the image on
which they are defined. If multiple datasets are allowed, then
the point and line definitions must be checked in all image
sets and coordinate systems.
3.4.3. Density representation. In most image-based planning systems, the CT data are used not only for positional
information about the anatomy, but also to define the relative
electron density ~number of electrons per unit volume! distribution throughout the patient model. This information is
used for density-corrected dose calculations. Table 3-6 discusses issues related to the density description.
The actual performance of density-corrected dose calculations, and the specific use of the relative electron density
information, are part of the dosimetric QA and are discussed
in Chap. 4.
3.4.3.1. Bolus and editing the 3D density distribution: Bolus may be used in treatment planning in at least three different ways:
• Definition of external bolus on the surface of the patient.
• Modification of the CT-based electron densities in a
certain region of the patient ~e.g., to edit out the effects
of contrast material!.
• Introduction of bolus material into sinuses or other body
cavities.
• In each of the three implementations, the bolus may
affect the rest of the RTP system in a different way.
Bolus test issues are listed in Table 3-7.
3.4.4. Image use and display. The various ways image
information is used and displayed should be considered in
the RTP QA program, as in Table 3-8.
3.4.5. Dataset registration. One of the more powerful
advances associated with the use of 3D planning has been
the ability to quantitatively use imaging information from
various different imaging modalities such as CT, MR, PET,
SPECT, ultrasound, and radiographic imaging. In order to
use this information, the planning system must contain tools
which make it possible to quantitatively register the data
from one imaging modality with similar data obtained from
another modality. Checks of the dataset registration and multiple dataset functionality involve general commissioning
tests as well as development of routine procedural checks to
make sure the information is used correctly for each particular case.
Dataset registration and the use of multiple datasets in
RTP, as well as in other fields, is a large and complex area,
and detailed discussion of methods or QA of dataset registration are beyond the scope of work of this task group. The
task group recommends that AAPM form another task group
specifically charged to develop a report on use and quality
assurance of dataset registration techniques. Readers should
consult the relevant registration literature27–31,20,32,79 for further guidance.

1787

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1787

TABLE 3-4. Anatomical Structure Tests
Topic

Tests

Reasons

Structure attributes

Verify type ~e.g., external surface, internal structure,
inhomogeneity! and capabilities that are dependent on
that type.

Incorrect attributes may cause incorrect usage of the
structure.

Relative electron
density definition

Verify that correct definition for relative electron density
~r.e. density! is used:
• Assigned bulk density which sets specified r.e. density
everywhere inside structure.
• R.e. densities derived from CT number ~see density tests
in 3.4.3, Table 3-6!.

Relative electron densities used during dose calculations
depend on the choice of method for definition of r.e.
density and on its correct implementation.

Display characteristics

Check color, type of rendering, and type of contours to be
drawn when displaying structure.

Display errors can cause planning errors due to
misinterpretations.

Auto-segmentation
parameters

Check parameters for autocontouring and other types of
autostructure definition for each structure.

Incorrect parameters can lead to incorrect structure
definition. Parameters are likely to be defined separately
for each structure.

Structure created
from contours

Resolve issues such as:
• Can non-axial contours be used?
• Is number of contour points limited?
• What is the response to sharp corners in contours?
• What happens with missing contours?
• Is regular spacing required between contours?
• Does algorithm handle bifurcated structures?

This is the most common way to define 3-D structures.
Errors in functionality, use or interpretation could lead to
systematic errors in treatment planning for a large number
of patients.

Structure constructed
by expansion or contraction
from another structure

Resolve issues such as:
• What are the limits of the expansion algorithm?
• 2-D or 3-D expansion? If 3-D, verification must be
performed in 3-D. If 2-D, 3-D implications should be
understood.
• Verify algorithm with complex surfaces ~e.g., sharp
point, square corners, convexities, etc.!
• Check bookkeeping issues ~e.g., is expansion updated
upon change of source structure?!.

Planning target volumes ~PTVs! are often defined by
expansion from the clinical target volume ~CTV!.66 Errors
in the expansion could cause errors in target definition.

Structure constructed from
non-axial contours

• Test should include same tests as for creation of
structures from axial contours but should be performed
separately for all contour orientations.
• Verify bookkeeping for source of structure definition.

Numerous independent difficulties can arise dependent on
the underlying 3-dimensionality of the data structures and
design of the code.72,80

‘‘Capping’’ ~how end of
structure is based on
contours!

• Verify that all methods of capping are performed
correctly and 3-D implications are understood.
• Document default capping for different structures.
• Establish clinical protocols for each 3-D anatomical
structure.

Capping can affect dose calculation results, target volume
shapes, BEV display and DRR generation, effects of lung
densities and other important parts of the plan.

Structure definition

• Verify basic surface generation functionality using
simple contours. See example test in Appendix 2.
• Run test case~s! for situations in which the exact
formulation of the surface mesh has been calculated by
hand.
• Verify surface generation functionality for extreme
cases ~e.g., sharply pointed contours, unclosed
contours!. Tests will depend on algorithm.

These tests should convince the user that the algorithm
generally works correctly.

3.5. Beams
The next major section of a normal planning system incorporates modeling of, and interactions with, the radiation
beams. Numerous aspects of the beam definition and use
functionality are critical items to be checked by the QA program.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

3.5.1. Beam arrangements and definition. Table 3-9 lists
some of the parameters required to create the specification of
a beam. Clearly, it is essential to understand, document, and
test the behavior of all beam parameters as beams are created, edited, saved, and used throughout the planning process. Understanding how these parameters are used and

1788

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1788

TABLE 3-5. Contour Tests
Topic

Tests

Reasons

Manual contour
acquisition

• Define standard procedures for contour acquisition.
• Check and document separation and SSDs to AP and lateral
reference points for check of integrity of digitization.
• Check laser alignment marks.

Incorporate standard checks into the acquisition of manual
contours to prevent systematic and/or patient-specific
errors.

Digitization process
~hardware & software!

• Digitize standard contours weekly or use other process-related
checks to check geometric accuracy. See example test in
Appendix 2.
• Verify the geometric accuracy of the digitizer over the entire
surface of the digitizer.
• See for example Refs. 12,75.

Geometrical accuracy of the digitization device can be
quite user- dependent. Many digitization systems suffer
from position-dependent distortions. Digitizer behavior
can also be time-dependent.

Contouring on
2-D images

Verify:
• The accuracy of the contour display with respect to the image
display.
• The 3-D location of the contour in the coordinate system~s! in
which the planning system calculates dose.
• The response of the contouring algorithm to extreme situations
~e.g., too many points entered, looped contour, .1 distinct
closed contours created!.
• The identification of each contour and its associated 3-D
structure.

Contouring on CT images is the basis of most 3-D
planning. Errors in contour coordinates or display can lead
to incorrect anatomy being used for planning. Contour
accuracy may be dependent on image type or orientation.

Tests may include:
• Contouring structures on a scanned phantom and comparing
contours to the known dimensions of the phantom’s structures.
• Contouring structures on a grayscale phantom constructed in
software. This eliminates any image acquisition and pixel
averaging errors.
• A subset of tests should be performed for each type of image,
and for each slice orientation ~sagittal, coronal, axial, oblique!,
since the contouring features and/or use of the contours may not
be independent of these parameters.
Autotracking contours

• Verify proper response of the tracking algorithm for various
situations ~e.g., different grayscale gradients, different image
types, markers, contrast, image artifacts!.
• Tests may involve scanned phantoms or simulated grayscale
phantoms as described above. Partial volume effects probably
are most easily sorted out using images which model the effects
of slice thickness changes on the grayscale values.

• The gradient range used to identify the threshold to be
autotracked can affect the size and location of the contour.
• Misunderstandings of partial volume effects may lead to
improper contours.

Bifurcated structures

Resolve issues such as:
• Can the system maintain more than one contour per slice for a
particular structure?
• Does it form the 3-D structure correctly? Check 3-D surfaces
visually and check DVHs.

The algorithm for creating bifurcated structures may affect
the calculation of volumes of these structures.

Contours on projection
images ~DRRs, BEVs!

• Check that points defined on projection images define lines
through the 3-D data.
• Check that contours drawn on projection images are projected
correctly when viewed in full 3-D displays.
• Check intersection of such contours with various axial, sagittal,
and coronal slices.

Incorrect handling of contours on projection images can
lead to misinterpretation of plan displays.

Contours on CT
scannograms

Same tests as for projection images.

CT scannograms have significant divergence in the axial
direction but typically negligible divergence in the sagittal
direction.

Extracting contours
from surfaces

Determine the general limitations and functionality of the
implementation:
• Can contours be cut onto a slice of arbitrary orientation?
• Are enough points used to accurately define the contour?
• Does an extracted contour overwrite the original drawn
contour?
• What happens for complex structures which result in multiple
independent contours on a single slice?

Contour extraction onto axial and non-axial images or
reconstructions provides one of the best ways to
quantitatively check the 3-D description of anatomical
structures.

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1789

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1789

TABLE 3-6. Density Description Tests
Topic

Tests

Reasons

Relative electron density
representation

• Verify that the system creates the correct relative electron
density representation. See example test in Appendix 2.
• Verify that the representation is maintained correctly when
contours and/or images are modified.

Incorrect relative electron density information may result in
incorrect dose calculations.

CT number conversion

Verify that the CT number ~image grayscale value! to
Hounsfield number to relative electron density conversion are
performed correctly. The conversion may be scanner
dependent.

Incorrect conversion can cause
density-corrected calculations.

Editing

Verify the proper operation of functions used to edit the
relative electron density.

Image grayscale might be altered due to the presence of
contrast or image artifacts, leading to incorrect derived relative
electron densities.

Measurement tools

Verify display tools used to measure relative electron density.

Incorrect information may lead to errors in planning.

when they can be modified is an important and difficult part
of the QA program design.
Table 3-10 lists some parameters which describe a MLC
in the RTP system. If some of these parameters are missing
from the description, there may be limitations in how the
system can model a particular MLC.
In order to assure that the RTP system faithfully reproduces the desired beam configuration, numerous issues must
be verified, as listed in Table 3-11.
3.5.2. Machine description, limits and readouts. As
modern planning systems use more and more of the capabilities of the treatment machine, an increasingly sophisticated
description of the limits of those capabilities for each par-

incorrect

result

for

ticular machine must be a part of the beam technique module
of the planning system. Complex systems may make use of:
• numerous energies/modalities and/or specialized
modes,
• individual jaw and MLC leaf motion limits,
• number, type, and orientation of wedges,
• naming conventions,
• machine angle conventions, limitations, and resolution
of readouts for each motion,
• speed of motions, if available,
• the entire geometric shape of the treatment machine.

TABLE 3-7. Bolus Tests
Topic

Tests

Reasons

Electron density within bolus

Verify that the density in the bolused region is set to the
assigned value. Particularly check use of bolus to edit a
CT image.

Incorrect density will lead to incorrect density-corrected
dose calculations.

Density measurement tools

Verify that tools read the correct density values within the
bolus.

Error reading density values makes verification of correct
behavior difficult.

Automated bolus design

Verify that:
• Bolus is designed correctly.
• Bolus information is correctly exported for manufacture
and physical bolus is correctly made.

Incorrect behavior will lead to wrong design or
implementation of bolus.

Beam assignment

Confirm whether bolus is associated with a single beam or
with the entire plan.

Could lead to incorrect calculation results.

Dose calculation

Verify that the bolus is accounted for in the dose
calculation.

Could lead to incorrect calculation results.

Monitor unit calculation

Confirm the proper method to calculate monitor units
when bolus is used.

Possible incorrect MU calculation or patient set-up.

Output and graphic displays

• Verify that bolus is displayed properly in all displays
and hardcopy output.
• Verify that bolus is properly documented within the plan
and in the hardcopy output.

Possible incorrect bolus setup or use during treatment.

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1790

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1790

TABLE 3-8. Image Use and Display Tests
Topic

Tests

Reasons

Grayscale window and
level settings

• Verify functionality of window and level setting.
• Determine whether displayed window/level values agree
with those on scanner/film.

Window/level settings can greatly effect the interpretation
of imaging data.

Creation and use of
reformatted images

• Verify accuracy of the geometric location of the image.
• Verify accuracy of the grayscale reconstruction and of
any interpolation performed during that reconstruction.
• Check consistency between the new images and the
original images.

Use of sagittal, coronal, and oblique reconstructions is an
important part of the 3-D visualization features used in
treatment planning.

Removal of imaging table

Verify the capability to remove unwanted imaging
information, such as the patient support table.

Use of CT information which describes material which
will not be present during dose delivery will cause dose
distribution to not be representative of the real dose
distribution.

Geometrical accuracy of slices
associated with images

Verify accuracy of the geometrical location of the slices
with respect to the rest of the patient anatomy.

Inaccuracies in geometry can lead to errors in the 3-D
visualization and in planning.

Region-of-interest analysis

Verify mean, minimum, and maximum CT number inside
a region of interest ~in a slice and in a volume! for a range
of situations.

CT numbers and electron densities are important when
evaluating the accuracy of the dose calculation results.

Positional measurements

Verify point coordinates, distances, and angles in each
coordinate system for each display type.

Measurements are often used for important planning and
evaluation functions such as placing beams and identifying
anatomical markers.

3-D object rendering

Confirm color and other rendering functions.

Incorrect rendering may misrepresent the geometrical
situation.

Multiple window display use

Verify that each panel of a multiple window display is
kept current as the planning session proceeds.

Inconsistencies could lead to incorrect planning decisions.

TABLE 3-9. Beam Parameters

This task group recommends the adoption of the IEC
1217 conventions34 for specifying gantry angle, collimator
angle, table angle, wedge orientation, multileaf collimator
leaf specification, and patient orientation. However, until
these standards are universally used, it is necessary that the
user be aware of both the convention used by his/her treatment machine and that used by the RTP system. If possible,
the planning system should be configured to agree with the
treatment machine. If this is not possible, the user must determine and document transformation of planning system parameters to machine settings. Testing is suggested in Table
3-12.
3.5.3. Geometric accuracy. The location and orientation
of each beam in a plan must correspond to the real situation.
The correctness of the translation of the planning system
beam coordinates into those coordinates used to setup the
fields on the actual patient must be continuously monitored,
since it depends not only on software but on the treatment
planning and treatment delivery procedures used in the
clinic.
Further geometric checks of accuracy are listed below:
• The geometric resolution and accuracy for each parameter must be assessed using the coordinate values contained inside the file which contains the beam description as well as with graphical displays of the
information inside the RTP system.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

Beam Description
• machine
• modality
• energy
Beam Geometry
• isocenter location and table position
• gantry angle
• table angle
• collimator angle
Field Definition
• source-collimator distance
• source-tray distance
• source-MLC distance
• collimator settings ~symmetric or asymmetric!
• aperture definition, block shape, MLC settings
• electron applicators
• skin collimation
Wedges
• name
• type ~physical, dynamic, auto!
• angle
• field size limitations
• orientations
• accessory limitations ~blocks, MLC, etc.!
Beam Modifiers
• photon compensators
• photon and/or electron bolus
• various types of intensity modulation
Normalizations
• beam weight or dose at beam normalization point
• plan normalization

1791

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1791

TABLE 3-10. MLC Parameters
Leaf width

Leaf travel ~min, max!, field size min and max.

Number of leaves

Overlap between leaves ~the tongue and groove design of most MLC systems affect this parameter!.

Distance over midline that can be traveled by a leaf

Maximum extension between leaves.

Movement of the leaf carriage

Interdigitation of leaves allowed or disallowed.

Leaf transmission

Leaf readout resolution.

Minimum gap between opposing leaves

Jaw algorithm ~how the jaw positions are required to relate to the MLC shape!.

Leaf labels

Leaf end design ~curved versus focused!.

Leaf editing capabilities

Design of side of leaves.

Dynamic leaf motion ~DMLC! capability

Leaf synchronization for DLMC

• Complex combinations of motions should be entered
and displayed to verify the correct interactions between
parameters.
3.5.4. Field shape design. Field apertures can be created
using rectangular collimators, shaped focused blocks, irregularly shaped electron cutouts, and multileaf collimators, and
can be entered into a RTP system using several different

methods. All methods of field shape entry should be
checked. Field shape design issues are described in Table
3-13.
3.5.4.1. Manual aperture entry: Field shape can be manually entered in several ways, e.g., by digitizing block shapes
drawn on simulator films, drawing with the mouse on a BEV
display35 or using keyboard or mouse to move the leaves of

TABLE 3-11. Beam Configuration Tests
Topic

Tests

Reasons

Machine library

Verify that the library of available machines and beams is
correct. Clinical beams should be segregated from
research or other beams.

Incorrect beam choice leads to wrong dose calculation and
monitor units.

Machine/beam accessories

Verify that the availability of machine and beam-specific
accessories, such as electron cones or wedge, is correct.

Wrong accessories lead to plans that are not usable,
incorrect, or misleading.

Parameter limitations

Verify that limitations are correct for jaws, multileaf
collimator, field sizes for fields with wedges,
compensators, MLC, electron applicators. Verify MU
limits, MU/deg. limits, angle limits ~gantry, table,
collimator!, etc.

Incorrect limitations lead to plans that are not usable.

Beam names and numbers

Verify correct use and display of user-defined names and
numbers.

Incorrect numbering/names can lead to
treatments due to confusing documentation.

Readouts

• Verify correct use and display of angle readouts for
gantry, collimator, and table.
• Verify correct use and display of linear motion readouts
of table, collimator jaws, and MLC.
• Check names and motion limitations.

Lack of agreement between readout information in RTP
system and machine leads to systematic machine treatment
errors.

Beam technique tools

Verify correct functionality of tools such as those to move
isocenters or set SSDs.

Incorrect functioning of these features will lead to internal
mistakes in planning.

Wedges

Verify that wedge characterizations such as coding,
directions, field size limitations, and availability are
correct.

This can lead to incorrect wedge use in plan or during
treatment.

Compensators

Verify correct use and display.

Incorrect use during treatment may cause important
dosimetric errors.

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

incorrect

1792

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1792

TABLE 3-12. System Readout Conventions and Motion Descriptions Testing
Topic

Tests

Reasons

General system conventions

Verify that the planning system conventions agree with
system documentation and are used consistently
throughout the system.

Problems can cause systematic treatment errors.

Internal consistency

Examine the machine settings and 2-D and 3-D displayed
orientation of the beam for a variety of gantry, collimator,
and target angles. Confirm that the displayed orientations
agree with the parameter specifications and with
calculated dose distributions. For example, the user
should confirm that the beam diverges in the direction
away from the gantry, and that the hot spot for a wedged
field appears under the toe of the wedge.

Problems here will cause systematic planning system
errors.

Readouts

Verify that the planning system parameters ~transformed
as necessary! agree with the actual machine settings
required to obtain the desired treatment configuration.
This can be done by configuring the treatment machine
according to the planning system specifications and
comparing to the planning system displays, especially a
3-D room view display.

Errors may cause very isolated but systematic treatment
errors.

Test frequency

Verify the accuracy of this information at the
commissioning of the RTP system and at each major
software update.

Systematic errors might be missed at new releases unless
checks are made.

Multi-user environment

Establish a procedure to ensure consistent beam
information in multi-user and network environments.

Users might interfere with each other’s plans, or access to
the machine database, or other similar problems.

a MLC. Testing of manual aperture entry is described in
Table 3-14.
3.5.4.2. Automatic aperture definition: Automatic shape
creation algorithms are often used to design block and MLC
shapes.36,35,37 A more complex testing procedure may be
necessary for this function, since these algorithms often include use of 3D projections of the selected 3D surface~s!
onto the BEV plane, followed by an automatic routine which

generates the correct aperture shape. These algorithms can be
sensitive to details of the anatomical or beam aperture representations, and should be carefully checked over a series of
different situations.
3.5.4.3. Special MLC features: In addition to the issues
discussed above, there are some special considerations for
MLC-defined apertures. The exact correspondence of the
MLC leaf position with the desired and recorded positions

TABLE 3-13. Field Shape Design Tests
Topic

Tests

Reasons

Block type

Verify that the system distinguishes between ‘‘island’’
blocks, in which the aperture delineates the block shape, and
‘‘aperture’’ or ‘‘conformal’’ blocks, for which the drawn
aperture encloses the open irradiated area. Divergent and nondivergent blocks should also be considered.

Could lead to incorrect identification of blocked or irradiated
areas.

Block transmission

Verify correct specification of transmission or block thickness
for full blocks and partial transmission blocks.

Incorrect transmission entry or use leads to incorrect dose
under blocks.

MLC leaf fits

Document and test all methods used to fit the MLC leaves to
the desired field shape.

Inappropriate aperture shape can lead to extra dose to normal
tissue or missing some of the target.

Electron applicators

Verify availability and size of electron applicators.

Can lead to plans which cannot be used.

Hardcopy output

Check all output showing beam apertures and/or used for
beam aperture fabrication ~e.g., MLC leaf positions, BEV
plots! for accuracy against the displays.

Inappropriate documentation may lead to incorrect fabrication
of the aperture, or inappropriate clinical QA checks.

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1793

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1793

TABLE 3-14. Manual Aperture Entry Tests
Topic

Tests

Reasons

Film magnification factors

Confirm that film magnification is correct for film
digitization entry.

Incorrect block shape could be used in plan.

Special drawing aids

Check geometrical accuracy of aids such as a circular
cursor with definable radius.

Could lead to incorrect margins during aperture design.

Number of points in
aperture definition

Evaluate the effects of any limitation on number of
defining points.

Could lead to incorrect aperture shape.

Editing apertures

Evaluate how the algorithm handles aperture editing.

Could lead to incorrect aperture shape.

Defining apertures on
BEV/DRR displays

Confirm geometry, particularly the distance from the
source at which the displayed ‘‘BEV plane’’ is located.

This could lead to incorrect interpretation of planned
aperture.

3-D projections

Confirm correct 3-D projections of anatomical
information including contours, structures, and 3-D points
into BEV/DRR displays.

Might lead to incorrect aperture design or choice of beam
direction.

must be verified. Also, the different methods used to fit the
leaves to a drawn aperture ~see the description in Ref. 38!
must be individually tested with aperture shapes that will
show deviations from the expected result if the algorithm
does not work correctly. Testing should include cases involving variable margins, convoluted shapes, and the exclusion
of normal anatomic structures from the aperture.
3.5.5. Wedges. The use of wedges is an important component of most treatment planning and delivery. General
concerns for QA of wedge use are listed in Table 3-15.
3.5.6. Beam and aperture display. Modern 3D planning

systems make use of various types of displays and anatomical representations to aid the treatment planner in designing
and evaluating a beam configuration. It is thus important to
avoid misconceptions of the relationship of the beams and
anatomy by verifying the accuracy of these representations,
as described in Table 3-16.
Checks of the beam-anatomy projections can be based on
calculations of how various anatomical objects should be
projected, or they can be confirmed with film and the radiotherapy simulator using a phantom. The calculation approach
should be used at least once to confirm the accuracy of the

TABLE 3-15. Wedge Tests
Topic

Tests

Reasons

Orientation and angle
specifications

Confirm that wedge orientation and angle specifications are
consistent throughout the planning system, including the
hardcopy output. If possible, they should agree with treatment
machine conventions.

Wedge labeling or orientation conventions which do not agree
with the RTP system can lead to confusion in plans and
treatment.

2-D display

Check display of wedges in different 2-D planes ~parallel,
orthogonal, oblique! for different beam directions, collimator
rotations, and wedge orientations.

Visual orientation checks are most effective way to prevent
wrong wedge orientation in plan or treatment.

3-D display

Check display of wedges in room view 3-D displays for
situations as described above.

Incorrect wedge orientation leads to large dose differences.

Orientation and field
size limitations

Verify that wedge orientations and field sizes not allowed by
the treatment machine are not allowed in the planning system.
These limits might be defined separately for each beam
energy, so they should be tested for each energy/wedge
combination.

May lead to plans which cannot be delivered.

Autowedges ~wedges
inside the head
of the machine!

Confirm that the division of a field into fractional open and
wedged fields agrees in the RTP system and on the treatment
machine.

Could lead to incorrect dose distribution or monitor units.

Dynamic wedge69

Verify that the implementation in the RTP system has the
same capabilities, limitations, orientations, and naming
conventions as on the treatment machine.

Incorrect use of dynamic wedge possible.

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1794

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1794

TABLE 3-16. Beam Geometry Display Tests
Topic

Tests

Reasons

Axial beam divergence

Test intersection of divergent beam and aperture edges with
axial slices.

Incorrect divergence leads to selection of wrong field sizes or
aperture shape.

Non-axial divergence

Test intersection of divergent beam and aperture edges with
sagittal, coronal, and oblique slices. For systems that are not
fully 3-D, there may be 2-D limitations in the projections
which must be taken into account.

Incorrect divergence leads to selection of wrong field sizes or
aperture shape, especially if 3-D effects are not completely
understood.

BEV/DRR displays

• Verify projection of contours/structures defined on axial
slices into BEV-type displays. Compare with the grayscale
images for DRR displays. This is most easily done with a
simple phantom containing only a few internal structures.
• Verify projection of divergent beam and aperture edges.
• Check at several different SSDs and projection distances.

Incorrect projections lead to selection of wrong aperture shape,
especially if 3-D effects are not completely understood.

3-D displays

• Verify that apertures defined on 2-D planes are correctly
projected in 3-D.
• Verify that the relationships between structure and beam
and aperture edges are correct.
• 2-D limitations of the system must be considered ~e.g., a
2-D system may not correctly display divergence in the
third direction!.

Incorrect projections lead to selection of wrong aperture shape,
especially if 3-D effects are not completely understood.

Patient and beam labels

• Verify patient orientation with respect to beam and
orientation annotations.
• Verify correctness of orientations and annotations for
machine position views or icons associated with 2-D or 3-D
displays.

Incorrect labeling can mislead treatment therapists or
physicians.

system, but simulator-based checks may be appropriate for
routine checks that can be combined with other RTP QA
tests.
3.5.7. Compensators. Compensators can be designed either within the RTP system or by some independent system.
In either case, the accuracy of the input of compensator information such as size, shape, thickness variation, and associated beam must be confirmed. Display and specification of
compensators can be checked much like that for wedges,
blocks, and other beam modifiers. Automated transmission
of compensator information to a compensator maker must
also be checked. Calculational accuracy is assessed in Chap.
4.

3.6. Operational aspects of dose calculations
The dose calculation is often thought of as the heart of the
treatment planning process; however, it may be better to consider it as just one of the many different aspects of planning.
Quality assurance of dose calculations includes more than
confirming that the algorithm works correctly or that the calculated doses agree with the measured ones. Many parameters must be defined before calculations can be performed,
either explicitly by the user or by default by the system, and
these parameters influence the resulting dose distributions.
The scope of checks of the operational aspects of the calculation methodology which are required can be quite dependent on the sophistication of the RTP system implementation. However, even if not all of the details below are
handled explicitly by the RTP system, each institution should
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

consider the relevance of each issue, since somewhere within
the planning process most of these issues are being handled,
either explicitly or implicitly.
3.6.1. Methodology and algorithm use. Table 3-17 gives
a list of issues that should be investigated as part of the RTP
QA program.
3.6.2. Density corrections. The accuracy of the density
corrections which are part of most dose calculation algorithms will be discussed in the next chapter. However, a
number of operational issues related to inhomogeneity corrections are part of this discussion on the mechanics of dose
calculations ~Table 3-18!.

3.7. Plan evaluation
3.7.1. Dose display. Analysis of displays of the dose
distribution, particularly in association with the anatomical
data, is one of the major ways that physicians and planners
make decisions about how the treatment plan should be optimized. A series of issues is listed in Table 3-19. For all
tests, it is important for the user to be aware that correctness
of dose refers to agreement of the display with calculated,
not measured, dose. Agreement between calculations and
measurements is discussed in Chap. 4.
Tests should be performed first for single beams, then for
one or more simple multiple field configurations. Similarly,
brachytherapy tests should be performed first with a single
source, then with multiple sources. The user should be aware
that RTP systems often calculate point doses independently
from 2D and 3D dose distributions, therefore these methods

1795

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1795

TABLE 3-17. Methodology and Algorithm Use Tests
Topic

Tests

Reasons

Regions to be calculated

Evaluate and confirm the correct functioning of methods
used to identify the regions to be calculated.

Must calculate dose to regions which are important.

Calculation grid definition

Evaluate and verify proper functioning of:
• grid size definition
• use of uniform and/or non-uniform grid spacing.
• interpolation method for determining dose between grid
points
• invalidation of calculations if grid size, spacing, or
extent is changed
• proper alignment of coordinate system in which dose
computation points are defined relative to the image
coordinate system and the machine coordinate system
~i.e., the collimator system! must also be checked

Incorrect grid use can result in dose in incorrect places,
miscalculation, incorrect display, misalignment, incorrect
display, misalignment of dose and beam, etc.

Status of density corrections

Verify correct bookkeeping for status of corrections.
Determine how status of corrections is stored and
documented.

Misleading dose distributions, incorrect monitor units are
possible.

Reading saved plan information

Verify functionality associated with reading stored
anatomical, beam, dose, and source information. Tests
should be designed with detailed knowledge of the
system.

This is just as important as doing the original dose
calculation correctly.

Calculation validity logic

Evaluate system rules for recalculation of dose
distribution when changes are made in anatomy, beam
definitions, beam weights, or normalization. Often, only
the affected beam~s! will be recalculated.

Incorrect logic will either 1! waste valuable time and
resources; or 2! leave an invalid dose calculation for
incorrect interpretation.

Dose calculation algorithm
selection

Verify that default algorithm selections are appropriate,
and that the selected algorithm is the one actually used.

If more than one algorithm is available, most likely the
different algorithms are intended for specific purposes.

may not exactly agree. Any differences should be documented.
3.7.2. Dose volume histograms. The use of dose volume
histograms ~DVHs! is an important part of modern treatment
planning. Care must be taken when designing tests for this
function, since the simple dosimetric and anatomic models
which would be easy to use are often prone to various grid
alignment type errors.39 Issues to be tested or checked are
listed in Table 3-20.
3.7.3. Use of NTCP/TCP and other tools. Modern planning systems sometimes include calculations based on norTABLE 3-18. Density Correction Issues
If the density corrections are turned on or off, this should force a new
dose calculation with or without the corrections, respectively.
Some RTP systems allow the use of either a CT-based density distribution
or one based on assignment of bulk densities. In each case, the user must
confirm that the correct density distribution is used and that it is
appropriately documented in the plan datafiles and hardcopy output.
The CT number to Hounsfield Unit conversion is machine and vendor
dependent and can also be dependent on the CT calibrations. These
conversions should be the subject of routine checks.17
Proper functioning of tools which display relative electron density at a
point should be verified.

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

mal tissue complication probability ~NTCP! and tumor control probability ~TCP! models to aid in evaluation of
competing treatment plans. If these capabilities are used for
clinical planning, it is essential that they be included in the
QA program. Note that many of the parameters of NTCP and
TCP models, and in fact the models themselves, are not wellknown, and may be the subject of significant controversy.
The verification checks used for NTCP/TCP calculation
functions should ~1! verify the correct implementation of the
model; and ~2! verify values of the parameters which the
physicians and physicists expect to use. It is also desirable to
verify that the clinical ‘‘predictions’’ of the model are in
agreement with the expectations of the physicians interpreting those values, but this is clearly an area in which the
physician’s clinical judgment cannot be ignored.
3.7.4. Composite plans. In some planning systems, it is
possible to add ~and/or subtract!15 dose distributions from
different plans in order to create a composite dose distribution which represents the entire treatment course for the patient. This ‘‘composite plan’’ may often be the plan which is
evaluated for dose, complication probability, etc. In addition
to checking all the input data for these composite plans, other
issues include:
• Dose prescription input for each component plan.
• Availability of fractionation ~bio-effect! corrections.

1796

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1796

TABLE 3-19. Dose Display Tests
Topic

Tests

Reasons

Dose points

Verify that:
• point is defined at the desired 3-D coordinates
• point is displayed at the correct 3-D position
• dose at point is displayed correctly

Point displays used for critical structure doses and for
investigating dose distribution behavior.

Interactive point doses

Verify that:
• point coordinates correctly correspond to cursor position on
display
• dose at point is displayed correctly

Problems would affect results of plan optimization.

Consistency

Verify that:
• doses in intersecting planes are consistent
• doses displayed with different display techniques are
consistent

Inconsistency demonstrates algorithm limitations or problems,
makes evaluations impossible.

Dose grids

Verify that dose is correctly interpolated between grid points
for both small and large spacing ~see for example Ref. 74!.

Interpolations done incorrectly give wrong dose results,
particularly in penumbra regions.

2-D dose displays

Verify that:
• isodose lines ~IDLs! are correctly located
• the colorwash display lines up correctly with IDLs and
agrees with the point dose displays

This is the main kind of display used to decide if coverage of
PTV is actually adequate.

Isodose surfaces

Verify that:
• surfaces are displayed correctly—particularly check higher
dose surfaces, which may break up into numerous small
volumes unattached to each other.
• surfaces are consistent with isodose lines on planes

Might lead to use of plans with too much or too little target
coverage, or other misrepresentations of the dose distribution
with respect to the anatomy.

Beam display

Verify that:
• positions and field sizes are correct
• wedges are shown and the orientation is correct
• beam edges and apertures are shown correctly

Must be aligned correctly with dose distribution or entire plan
should be doubted.

• Interpolation of individual plan dose distributions onto
a common grid.
• Handling of plans with different dose units ~e.g., % vs.
daily dose vs. total dose vs. dose rate!.
• Accuracy of the addition/subtraction.

3.8. Hardcopy output
RTP system hardcopy output may include text information, plots of 2D dose distributions on arbitrarily oriented
planes, DVHs, BEV, and DRR displays, and 3D displays of
anatomy, beams, and dose. These various types of hardcopies are used to implement and/or document the treatment
plan, so the accuracy of this information is critical.
Table 3-21 lists the minimal information that should appear on the various types of output, and therefore should be
confirmed in various situations. In addition, all output should
contain the patient name and ID, the treatment plan ID, and
a plan version number or time/date stamp.

3.9. Plan implementation and verification
Once a treatment plan has been completed and approved,
the plan must be implemented. Implementation includes
transfer of planning system treatment parameters to actual
treatment unit settings; fabrication of blocks, compensators,
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

and bolus from planning system information; proper use and
positioning/orientation of beam modifiers; and proper positioning of patient. Since much if not all of this information is
obtained via the planning system hardcopy output, testing of
plan implementation should be carried out after verification
of the hardcopy output from the RTP system ~see Sec. 3.8!.
3.9.1. Coordinate systems and scale conventions. Potential problems arise when the nomenclature and conventions
used by the RTP system are not the same as those used by
the department and/or by the treatment unit ~see also Sec.
3.5.2!. Some of the problem areas are listed in Table 3-22.
The RTP QA program must check and document the way
each parameter is represented ~names, units, scaling, resolution! in the RTP system and how it should be transferred to
the physical treatment machine.
3.9.2. Data transfer. Numerous potential problems can
develop during the transfer of treatment planning information from the RTP system to the paper chart, treatment machine, record/verify ~R/V! system, or anywhere else. The issues listed in Table 3-23 must be considered as part of the
QA for the planning process.
Correct transfer of parameters should be verified using a
set of test plans varying from simple ~e.g., single axial field!
to complex ~e.g., multiple non-coplanar and oblique fields!.
These plans should make use of all the methods used by the

1797

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1797

TABLE 3-20. DVH Tests
Topic

Tests

Reasons

Volume region of interest
~VROI! identification

Test creation of the voxel VROI description used to create
DVHs against structure description.

Misidentification of VROI leads to incorrect DVH.

Structure identification

Test Boolean combinations of objects ~VROI and DVH of
Normal Tissue-Target!, and how voxels which belong to
multiple structures are handled.

Incorrect complex VROI also leads to incorrect DVH.

Voxel dose interpolation

Verify accuracy of dose interpolated into each voxel.

Interpolation from one 3-D grid to another could lead to
grid-based artifacts or inaccuracies.

Structure volume

Test accuracy of volume determination with irregularly
shaped objects, since regular shapes ~particularly
rectangular objects! can be subject to numerous
grid-based artifacts.

Structure volume is basis of much NTCP modeling. Also,
volume may be directly used in physician plan evaluation
considerations.

Histogram bins and limits

Verify that appropriate histogram bins and limits are used.

Inappropriate bins and/or limits to DVH can lead to
misleading DVH.

DVH calculation

Test DVH calculation algorithm with known dose
distributions.

Basic calculation must be sound, else incorrect clinical
decisions about plan evaluation may result.

DVH types

Verify that standard ~direct!, differential, and cumulative
histograms67 are all calculated and displayed correctly.

Each type of DVH display is useful in particular situations.

DVH plotting and output

Test DVH plotting and output using known dose
distributions.

Hardcopy output must be correct, as this may be used for
physician decision making.

Plan and DVH normalization

Verify relationship of plan normalization ~dose! values to
DVH results.

Plan normalization is critical to the dose axis of the DVH.

Dose and VROI grid effects

Review and understand relationship of dose and VROI
grids.

Grid-based artifacts can cause errors in volume, dose,
DVH, and the evaluation of the plan.

Use of DVHs from
different cases

Test correct use of DVHs from different cases with
different DVH bin sizes, dose grids, etc.

Comparison of DVHs from different plans depends
critically on bin sizes, etc.

RTP system to indicate treatment machine information, location of treatment fields, correct phantom/patient information,
correct collimator, table, and gantry settings, extended treatment distance techniques, and use and orientation of beam
modifiers such as wedges, bolus, blocks, and compensators.
For each test case, the user should implement the plan on the
treatment unit using a phantom and then verify that the
implementation is correct using visual inspection and portal
films or images.
3.9.3. Portal image verification. 3D planning systems
may contain the ability to import portal and simulator images
and to register or at least compare those images with RTP
system images such as BEV displays and/or DRRs. Some of
the QA associated with this part of the process is described
in the TG 40 report on a comprehensive QA program for
radiotherapy.2 QA for these features should address ~at least!
the issues listed in Table 3-24.

3.10. Brachytherapy issues
Many brachytherapy issues have been discussed in two
recent publications: the NCI-funded Interstitial Collaborative
Working Group report,40 and the recent AAPM Task Group
43 report,41 however, neither of these reports describe all of
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

the QA which should be incorporated in a QA program for
brachytherapy RTP. Many of these issues can be handled in
parallel to those which address external beam RTP. However, we specifically describe some of the more important
QA issues below.
• Brachytherapy source arrangements consist of individual sources, but they are often grouped as strings,
trajectories, or applicators. One should confirm that parameter changes which should affect an entire group of
sources are correctly made.
• During commissioning, and also in later checks, each
property or attribute described for each source in the
source library should be verified ~see Appendix 5!.
• Input, display, and plan optimization and evaluation test
issues which are relatively specific to brachytherapy
planning are listed in Table 3-25, and are further discussed in Appendix 5.
• Clinical ‘‘system’’ tests or benchmark tests which confirm the entire process used for brachytherapy planning
in each clinic are recommended by the Task Group to
be performed for each basic kind of brachytherapy procedure ~interstitial breast implants, GYN cesium applications, etc.!.

1798

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1798

TABLE 3-21. Hardcopy Output Information

TABLE 3-23. Data Transfer Issues

Text printout

Plan information transfer by hand into a paper chart or record/verify system is prone to significant transcription error rates.70

• Treatment machine/modality/energy for each beam
• Beam parameters ~e.g., field size, gantry angle! in
machine-specific coordinates for each beam
• Isocenter location in 3-D for each beam
• Set-up SSD for each beam
• Presence and orientation of beam modifiers ~e.g., blocks,
wedges, compensators, bolus! for each beam
• Calculational algorithm used
• Whether inhomogeneity corrections were used, and the
source of the inhomogeneous description of the patient
• Dose calculation grid size
• Dose to and position of calculation points
• Plan normalization
• MU ~not calculated by all systems!
• How to convert the plan’s beam weights into monitor unit
calculations ~for systems which do not calculate MU!
• Plan/beam version number, time and date of calculation
• User comments

2-D dose plots • Location/orientation of displayed plane
• Scale factor
• Intersection of fields ~with fields labeled!
• Presence and proper orientation of beam modifiers
• Patient contour/grayscale information
• Dose information ~e.g., isodose lines!
• Location of calculation points
BEV or DRR

• SSD/SAD/SFD
• Scale factor
• Associated field
• View orientation
• Collimation, including block shapes and/or MLC aperture
• Patient anatomical information
• Central axis location

DVHs

• Plot legend
• Scales and units
• Case, plan, other identifying info
• Associated anatomical structure~s!

3-D displays

• Scale factor
• View orientations
• Beam locations/orientations
• Anatomy and dose identification
• Isodose surfaces

Blocks and compensators are made using information from the planning
system. The physical blocks and compensators should be verified for
correct size, shape, and placement in the treatment field. Verification
should be performed for simple and complex shapes of modifiers
associated with orthogonal and oblique fields.
MLC shape information is often transferred to ~or from! the treatment
machine from the planning system.63,68,38 This is clearly a critical quality
assurance issue, and must be carefully verified and routinely checked.
Several QA considerations for automatic transfer of the complete set of
plan information from the RTP system to the treatment machine or to its
record/verify system have been discussed in detail in recent papers on a
Computer-Controlled Radiotherapy System.64,65,73

Further specifics for brachytherapy planning QA are included in Sec. 4.7 and Appendix 5.
Chapter 4: Dose calculation commissioning

Historically, most treatment planning quality assurance
has been primarily concerned with dosimetric issues, particularly dose calculation verification. Most users of treatment
planning systems, realizing the importance of dose calculations, have performed some tests of their systems to verify
the agreement between calculated and measured doses. Furthermore, most published reports have concentrated exclusively on verification of 2D dose calculations,5–10 although
the recent work by Van Dyk18 contains many other specific
recommendations for dosimetric QA.
However, none of these studies addresses in detail the
issues and techniques which must be applied to commissioning dose calculations in a modern treatment planning system.
In this chapter, we present one consistent approach to the
commissioning of dose calculations for treatment planning.
Other organizations and methods are of course possible, but
this approach is flexible and adaptable to a wide range of
dose calculation and treatment planning situations.
TABLE 3-24. Portal Image Verification Issues
Importing portal or simulator images directly from digital imagers or
through the use of a laser digitizer system.

TABLE 3-22. Nomenclature and Readout Convention Issues
Angle conventions for gantry, collimator, and table angles
Collimator jaw labels and readouts
Independent ~asymmetric! jaw labels and readouts
MLC leaf labels and readouts
Field labels
Wedge orientation and labels
Indications and labels for field modifiers
Table coordinates and direction labels
Table top orientation
Immobilization device positioning

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

Image registration capabilities which allow geometrical registration of a
particular portal or simulator image with the coordinate systems used for
planning. The quality of the registration is often user-dependent, therefore
QA procedures should be built into the clinical process to confirm the
registration quality for each registration.
Image enhancement tools, since a number of these functions can actually
change the way the image and/or registration are used elsewhere in the
planning process.
Bookkeeping which ties various images to the appropriate plans and/or
fields inside the RTP system must be confirmed.

1799

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1799

TABLE 3-25. Non-Dosimetric Brachytherapy Tests
Topic

Tests

Reasons

Source input and
geometrical accuracy

• For source location entry using a digitizer and orthogonal or
stereo-shift films, checks should be made of the data entry
software, the film acquisition process, source identification,
and other associated activities. 3-D seed coordinate
representation after entry should be confirmed.
• Automatic seed identification and locating software must be
verified.
• For source location entry using CT images,76 other tests
should be included.
• For applicator trajectory identification, the appropriate tests
described above should be performed. In addition, the
accuracy of dwell points or source locations along the
trajectory should be confirmed.

Dose calculations for brachytherapy are very sensitive to exact
source positions.

Source display

Verify accuracy of source position display on:
• 2-D slices, including CT and reconstructed images and the
arbitrary planes often used in non-CT brachytherapy.
• 3-D views
• Special views, such as the Probe’s Eye View used in
stereotactic brain implant planning.77
• Dummy sources in phantom can be scanned, DRRs
generated to use as a check for radiograph-based
identification and positioning.

Accurate display of source position is crucial to plan
development and optimization.

Optimization
and evaluation

• Test automated brachytherapy optimization tools, such as
automatic determination of dwell positions and times to
yield a specified dose distribution with an afterloader unit.
Test designs should be very dependent on algorithm used.
See Appendix 5.
• Test other standard tools such as DVHs.

Incorrect functioning of optimization and evaluation tools can
result in sub-optimal or incorrect treatment.

4.1. Introduction
Several different terms ~and issues! which figure prominently in the commissioning of dose calculations for RTP are
defined below:
• Input data checks. Most RTP systems require some input data. One of the most basic checks required in a
dosimetric QA program is verification that the RTP system accurately reproduces the input data.
• Algorithm verification. The purpose of algorithm verification testing is to demonstrate that the calculation
algorithm is working correctly,16 not to determine how
well the algorithm predicts the physical situation. Calculational results may not agree well with measured
data, but if the model on which the algorithm is based is
inadequate, this is to be expected. Algorithm verification requires detailed knowledge of the dose calculation
algorithm and its implementation, and may easily be
beyond the testing capabilities of individual radiation
oncology physicists.
• Calculation verification. Calculation verification tests
compare calculated and measured doses for the user’s
beam~s! over a range of expected or representative
clinical situations. These comparisons reflect the overall
agreement ~or disagreement! between the dose calculations from the RTP system, as handled by the user, and
the data, as measured by the user. Disagreements revealed in these types of tests are not necessarily related
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

to the software or the calculation algorithm, but may
simply reflect anomalies in the system use and/or measured data.
• Applicability and limits of the dose calculation algorithm. Some of the most important checks that can be
performed on a dose calculation algorithm are those that
investigate the limits of applicability of the algorithm.
The user must understand the limitations of each algorithm so that dose calculations for clinical situations
which press ‘‘the edge of the envelope’’ for that algorithm are either avoided or appropriately interpreted.
These tests may be more extreme than is expected in
clinical use.
• Dose verification over the range of clinical usage. These
checks are similar to the algorithm limitation checks
described above, except that in this case the clinical
limits of usefulness of the actual calculations are determined. Evaluation of the clinical situations for which
the model is and is not adequate is necessary. With very
complex 3D dose calculation algorithms which consider
3D inhomogeneities, conformal field shapes, intensity
modulation, and various other complex dosimetric issues, there is a very large range of clinical usage that
must be investigated.
The radiation oncology physicist should be aware of
several basic dosimetric QA facts:
• Most dose calculation verification tests traditionally in-

1800

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

volve comparison of calculated doses with measured
data for a range of clinical situations. As treatment planning in the institution becomes more sophisticated, the
range of dosimetric testing should expand and will
eventually become quite extensive. Identifying the various effects or situations to be tested, and defining the
limits over which each effect will be tested, will help
the physicist organize the testing.
• Calculation verification tests generally fall into two categories: ~1! comparisons involving simple water
phantom-type geometries, which are usually easy to interpret; and ~2! comparisons involving complex geometries ~often with anthropomorphic phantoms! in clinically realistic situations, which are difficult to interpret,
since uncertainties in measurements, errors in input
data, parameter fitting, algorithm coding and/or design,
calculation grid effects, and various other uncertainties
are all incorporated into the results. Although these
complex tests are critical for evaluating the overall system precision for particular calculations, their usefulness in explaining discrepancies is limited.
• Often, in an attempt to minimize effort, some of the
tests and measured data are used repeatedly to test multiple aspects of the planning system. When this is done,
the tests should be designed to be as independent as
possible, so that the appropriate analysis and actions are
taken when necessary.
• The comparison of calculation results and measurements is not a competition. The task of performing the
measurements and parameter determination and calculation verification testing should begin by assuming that
there are likely to be many errors and inconsistencies
uncovered, and that these will have to be resolved by
the whole team in an open, cooperative fashion.
The three following recommendations stress the importance
of dosimetric QA to all radiation oncology physicists, physicians, administrators, and dosimetrists who are involved with
treatment planning systems:
~1! The verification of external beam and brachytherapy
dose calculations for clinical use is a very important part
of RTP system commissioning. A comprehensive series
of test cases must be planned, measured, calculated,
compared, analyzed, and evaluated before any dose calculations are used clinically.
~2! The particular test cases designed as part of the commissioning and QA programs for any particular institution
depend on the RTP system involved, the way the system
is ~or will be! used clinically, and many other clinic and
system-dependent factors. While most basic testing will
be similar, optimizing the test procedure for each clinic
is essential if the QA program is to be effective yet
achievable in a modern sophisticated radiation oncology
department.
~3! Tools such as precise water phantom scanning systems,
calibrated film digitizers, TLD readers, redundant detector systems, measurement phantom systems ~including
anthropomorphic phantoms! must be readily available to
perform quality assurance. The effort required for this
QA testing increases dramatically if the appropriate tools
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1800
TABLE 4-1. Methods for Obtaining a Self-Consistent Dataset
Design the measurements so that the data required to tie all the various
separate measurements together are obtained during the same measurement session.
Make measurements over the shortest time span possible consistent with
obtaining representative dose measurements.
Use the same equipment and procedures for all similar measurements.
Relate measurements made with different measurement methods to each
other. Ideally, some of the measurements should be repeated with an
independent, preferably different type, dosimeter.
Use a reference chamber to account for output fluctuations when making
measurements with a scanning ionization chamber.
Periodically repeat base measurements, such as the dose at 10 cm depth
for a 10310 cm2 field, to monitor the consistency of the machine output
and the measuring system. Note that this may involve use of temperature
equilibrated water and/or monitoring the barometric pressure, in certain
situations.

are difficult or impossible to access, so these systems
normally must be maintained on-site at each clinic. A
QA program for the test tools must be instituted for the
QA tools to be effective.

4.2. Measurement of self-consistent dataset
Measurement of a self-consistent dataset is a fundamental
part of commissioning and QA for a treatment planning system. A measured dataset is used initially as system input for
modeling the institution’s treatment beams and subsequently
in calculation verification tests. For 3D dose calculation algorithms in particular, the basic data should be measured in a
manner that adequately describes all of the dosimetric attributes of the beams or sources.
4.2.1. Self-consistency. The requirements for measured
data at each institution will depend primarily on the needs of
the RTP system for beam modeling and system QA. As a
minimum, most systems require depth dose and beam profiles at one or more depths in one or more planes through the
central axis for multiple open field sizes, as well as data for
fields modified with wedges or other devices. Many systems
will require more. In addition to the data necessary for beam
modeling, data must also be acquired for calculation verification tests.
It is of primary importance to generate a self-consistent
dataset. This means, for example, that all of the depth dose
curves, axial and sagittal plane profiles, coronal plane profiles and/or 2D dose distributions and any other data, for a
particular experiment, are all consistent with each other, and
can be combined into one self-consistent dose distribution
for that experiment. This can typically be achieved by acquiring a set of relative measurements which are then interrelated by a small subset of either relative or absolute
measurements.42 Recommendations for methods to assure
dataset self-consistency are listed in Table 4-1.

1801

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

4.2.2. Data analysis, handling, and storage. As discussed above, the measured data ~depth dose curves, profiles,
2D distributions, etc.! must be coalesced into a single selfconsistent dataset. This involves careful data handling,
analysis, and renormalization, much of which may be performed with the RTP system:
• Postprocessing. All measurements must be converted to
dose, either relative or absolute.
• Smoothing. Raw data often should be smoothed to remove artifacts of the measurement technique. Care must
be taken to ensure that the smoothing is not done too
aggressively, smoothing out real dose variations.
• Renormalization. All data ~depth doses, profiles, etc.!
should be renormalized to make the dataset selfconsistent.
• The task group recommends that vendors of RTP systems provide sophisticated data input, storage, analysis,
renormalization, display and other capabilities inside
their RTP systems15,43 to help physicists utilize the
measured data.

4.3. Data input into the RTP system
All treatment planning systems require the entry of data
associated with specific treatment machine beams and
brachytherapy sources. The data required are specified by the
vendor of the system and can vary substantially depending
on the type of dose calculation algorithm used by the system.
The task group strongly recommends the following:
• Vendors should specify the data required by their system in the system documentation and make this information available to users before purchase of the system.
• Only data that has been measured on the specific treatment machine being commissioned into the RTP system
should be used, unless it is known that the treatment
units in question have exactly the same characteristics.
Other beam data or ‘‘representative’’ data provided by
an accelerator vendor ~or by others! should never be
used for dose calculation verification testing. Generic
dose distribution data, such as depth-doses and profiles,
are only useful for self-consistent checks of the software.
• A data log book for documenting data acquisition, data
handling, renormalization and/or data smoothing procedures used in preparation and analysis of the beam data
should be maintained. The source of the data, the date
that the measurements were done and the person or persons involved in the measurements should be logged.
The log book should be maintained for the lifetime of
the treatment planning system.

1801

cause it is not always clearly indicated in the manufacturer’s prepurchase information. Knowledge of the
beam data requirements will allow an accurate assessment of the amount of new beam data needed.
• A complete review of the currently available data
should be performed. The existing beam data may have
been obtained several years earlier, may not be in the
correct format, may not be documented adequately, or
may be irrelevant to the new RTP system.
• The data required by the system may have to be renormalized or reformatted, necessitating modification of
the measured data before it can be used.
• If monitor unit settings will be generated by the RTP
system, then the monitor unit calculation algorithm and
methodology should be compared to the present system
used in the department. Any differences between the
methods must be thoroughly understood and resolved
before the new system is used.
• At least one complete set of photon beam, electron
beam, and brachytherapy source data should be available for entry when the system is installed. Vendor
training can then include data entry and beam parameter
fitting processes.
• Additional beam data ~more than is required by the
RTP system! will always be needed. These data should
be carefully prepared and handled as part of the verification dataset.
4.3.2. Computer transfer of data from a computercontrolled water phantom. Direct transfer of data from a
computer-controlled water phantom system ~WPS! to the
RTP system is the most common method of inputting data
into the RTP system. The task group recommends that vendors provide information on the required data and/or file
structures to users and WPS vendors, so that direct data
transfer is available from each WPS to each RTP system.
Data transfer issues which must be considered by the physicist are listed in Table 4-2.
4.3.3. Manual data entry. If computer-based data transfer is not possible, manual entry of the data into the RTP
system may be necessary. This is usually accomplished using
both the keyboard and the digitizer tablet. For manual data
entry, the following should be considered:

4.3.1. General considerations. The kinds of data input
into any particular RTP system for dose calculation, and the
methods used for that input, are quite varied. For each particular situation, therefore, the following issues should be
addressed by the user:

• Digitizer accuracy should be tested before data entry
begins. This testing should include determination of the
inherent accuracy with which data can be entered using
the digitizer. Significant data entry errors, particularly
in low dose regions, may result because of digitizer
inaccuracies.
• Special attention should be paid to the digitization of
data plotted on nonstandard scales.
• Keyboard entry of data should be checked carefully,
particularly for typographical errors.

• A clear understanding of the data required by the system is necessary before purchase. Often, the physicist
will need to request this information specifically, be-

4.3.4. Verification of input data. After data are input into
the RTP system, the user must verify that the data were input
correctly.

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1802

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1802

TABLE 4-2. Water Phantom System Data Issues

TABLE 4-3. Data Comparison Methods

Data exchange compatibility between the WPS and the RTP system
should be determined prior to purchase. Often the WPS or RTP system
vendor will provide exchange software.

Comparison

File naming/labeling conventions should be decided before data is taken
or transferred. Files should be uniquely identified on both systems.
Documentation for each WPS data file should include:
• filename in the WPS
• filename in the RTP system, if different
• date of measurement
• machine parameters such as beam energy, field size and shape,
gantry/collimator angle, beam modifiers
• phantom setup, including any special features ~e.g., an air
inhomogeneity!
• 3-D coordinate system of the WPS and its relationship to the beam
coordinate system
• scan parameters such as scan direction, scan mode, depth/location of
scan
Records should be kept in the data log book in addition to information
stored within the WPS.
The data exchange link should be initially tested with a small test data
sample. Verify that format modifications are made correctly and that no
substantive changes are made to the measured dose values.

• 2D algorithms are usually based directly on input data.
Data entry can be verified by generating dose distributions for the field sizes used for input data and comparing with the input data.
• Many 3D dose calculation algorithms, such as convolution algorithms,44,45 are much more complex and not
directly based on input data. For these types of algorithms, much of the input data is not directly related to
any measured dose distributions, but rather to machineindependent calculation results.46
In any event, all input data should be verified, preferably
independently by two people, and all discrepancies must be
resolved, or at least well-characterized and understood, since
they will affect all further comparisons between calculations
and measured data.

4.4. Dose calculation algorithm parameter
determination
For many systems, once the beam data are input into the
RTP system, beam parameters that fit the beam model to the
measured data must be determined. The beam model parameters that are selected will directly affect the accuracy of the
dose calculations and must be determined with great care.
Although the details of the parameter determination process
are highly system dependent and beyond the scope of this
report, documentation of the results of this process is an
important issue addressed below. The user should:
• Review any beam model data files or similar data used
by the calculation algorithm and verify that the final
parameters are correct.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

Reasons

1-D line comparisons

Comparison of depth doses and beam profiles
provides a basic check related directly to the
measured data.

FDD and TPR tables
of differences

Tables of the differences between calculated and
measured FDD ~fractional depth dose! or TPR
~tissue phantom ratio! values as a function of field
size and depth are useful for analyzing overall data
agreement.14,78 Statistics calculated using the
difference table are also useful.

2-D isodose lines

In addition to isodose curves overlaid on axial
planes, overlays on sagittal and coronal planes and
3-D axonometric displays14 are useful for 3-D dose
comparisons.

Colorwash dose
displays

Colorwash display can aid in visualizing dose
differences
between
calculations
and
measurements. Some systems allow interactive
colorwash display of dose ranges on planar or
axonometric displays.

Dose difference
displays

Graphical display of dose difference distributions
in 1, 2, or 3 dimensions, generated by subtracting
measured and calculated dose distributions, can be
useful for highlighting small differences in the
distributions.14

DVH analysis

Results of the dose comparison throughout the 3-D
volume of interest can be summarized by making a
histogram ~DVH in 3-D! of the dose difference
distribution.15,71

Distance maps

A distance map showing the distance between
particular isodose lines in the measured and
calculated distributions is particularly useful in
high gradient regions.81

• Document the dose calculations, fits and other checks
that were used during the process of parameter determination and the results of those activities.
• Summarize data sources, methods used for parameter
determination, the presumed accuracy or sensitivity of
the parameters, and any other salient information. This
information should be stored in the RTP system log.

4.5. Methods for dosimetric comparison and
verification
Dose calculation verification tests compare calculated and
measured dose distributions. The standard method of comparison for 2D dose distributions consists of overlaying hardcopy plots of measured and calculated doses in the form of
cross-beam profiles, depth doses, or isodose distributions.
For quantitative comparisons of entire 3D dose distributions,
more sophisticated techniques, such as those listed in Table
4-3, are also needed to perform the analysis.
To use these tools, the RTP system must be able to handle
1D, 2D, and 3D measured dose distributions. Although this
kind of functionality has been demonstrated,15,43 it is not yet

1803

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1803

available in many commercial RTP systems. The task group
recommends that vendors include all of these types of extensive data analysis and display features in their RTP systems.

4.6. External beam calculation verification
4.6.1. Introduction. There are a number of different ~but
valid! approaches to designing and organizing the experiments and calculation verification checks to be used during
commissioning of a particular calculation algorithm or individual beam parametrization. In this section, one approach is
outlined. We recommend that the radiation oncology physicist analyze the clinical needs, dose calculation algorithms,
treatment machines, and treatment techniques specific to his/
her clinic and then modify this outline to fit that particular
situation.
Each kind of calculation test should be clearly identified
as an input check, algorithm test, or calculation verification
check. In some situations, one or more tests may be used to
satisfy multiple needs. For example, it is possible for one
particular test to be analyzed from two different standpoints:
~1! whether or not the algorithm is working correctly; and ~2!
whether or not the result is clinically acceptable.
For each test, the radiation oncology physicist should
know how well the calculations are expected to work. This is
important so that decisions can be made about whether the
agreement ~1! is the best that can be expected; ~2! can be
improved; or ~3! indicates the existence of a problem. This
determination depends on knowledge of the physics of the
algorithm and its implementation, knowledge of the user’s
parametrization and use of the model, and knowledge of the
accuracy of the data against which the calculations are compared.
4.6.2. Required and/or achievable accuracy. The dosimetric accuracy required or achievable for treatment planning
purposes has been the subject of much discussion.
Cunningham47 and others have indicated that an overall accuracy of 5% in dose delivery may be a good goal on radiobiological grounds. He concludes that an accuracy of 2.5%
may be achievable in beam calibration, 3%-4% may be possible in relative dose calculations and perhaps 3%-4% in
treatment delivery, resulting in between 5% and 6% overall
accuracy. The Canadian group led by Van Dyk spent a great
deal of effort to determine ‘‘Criteria for Acceptability’’ for a
whole series of dosimetric situations.18 Their suggestions are
quite useful when applied to the situations considered in their
report and may be a good guide for the user. However, each
planning system, institution, and dosimetric situation will
have its own requirements, capabilities, and limitations.
There is an extremely wide range of accuracies of which
various calculation algorithms are capable, and it is important that the user determine the accuracy which can be expected in his/her particular implementation and situation.
In this report, we propose a method for characterization of
the accuracy of a dose calculation method similar to that
used by Van Dyk et al.18 For analysis of agreement between
calculations and measurements, the dose distribution due to a
beam is broken up into several regions, illustrated in Fig.
4-1:
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

FIG. 4-1. Regions for photon dose calculation agreement analysis. See text.

• The inner beam ~central high-dose portion of the beam!
• The penumbral region ~0.5 cm inside and outside each
beam/block edge!
• The outside region ~outside the penumbra!
• The buildup region ~from the surface to dmax, both
inside and outside the beam!
• The central axis
• Absolute dose at the beam normalization point
These regions should be analyzed separately, so that reasonable characterization of the agreement between calculations and data can be performed without combining the regions of large dose gradients with those which have small
gradients.
Table 4-4 illustrates the suggested analysis and includes
examples of acceptability criteria. These criteria are only an
example of the kinds of variations in dose calculation agreement with measurements that might be expected for a sophisticated dose calculation algorithm. For each situation, the
accuracy of any particular algorithm or dataset may affect
these expectations. The radiation oncology physicist in each
institution must evaluate the expectations for each situation
and determine the criteria to which the particular beam and
algorithm will be compared. The criteria shown as examples
in Table 4-4 are based on the collective expectations of the
members of the task group and are not to be used as goals or
requirements for any particular situation.
4.6.3. Photon calculation verification experiments. A
general photon calculation test plan is described in detail in
Appendix 3. This plan consists of a series of tests that range
from basic checks of depth dose curves to much more sophisticated dose calculation situations including heavily
blocked fields and inhomogeneous phantoms. The radiation
oncology physicist should evaluate the importance of each
class of tests and prioritize the verification checks so that the
clinically most important checks are performed first. This
listing is intended to act as an example, rather than a prescription, for the testing that should be performed.
4.6.4. Electron calculation verification experiments. Appendix 4 contains a summary of the experiments that might
be required for verification and clinical testing of an electron

1804

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1804

TABLE 4-4. Suggested Format for Acceptability Criteria for External Beam Dose Calculations, with Example Criteria*
(The criteria shown are based on the collective expectations of the members of the task group and are not to be used as goals or requirements for any
particular situation.)

Situation
Homogeneous phantoms:
Square fields
Rectangular fields
Asymmetric fields
Blocked fields
MLC-shaped fields
Wedged fields
External surface variations
SSD variations
Inhomogeneous phantoms***:
Slab inhomogeneities
3-D inhomogeneities

Abs. Dose
@normpt
~%!**

Central
Axis
~%!

Inner
Beam
~%!

Penumbra
~nm!

Outer
Beam
~%!

Buildup
Region
~%!

0.5
0.5
1
1
1
2
0.5
1

1
1.5
2
2
2
2
1
1

1.5
2
3
3
3
5
3
1.5

2
2
2
2
3
3
2
2

2
2
3
5
5
5
5
2

20
20
20
50
20
50
20
40

3
5

3
5

5
7

5
7

5
7

-

*Percentages are quoted as a percent of the central ray normalization dose. The criteria shown as examples in the table are based on the collective expectations
of the members of the task group and are not to be used as goals or requirements for any particular situation.
**Absolute dose values for the dose at the beam normalization point are relative to a standard beam calibration point. They do not include all the uncertainties
associated with determining the absolute dose under standard calibration conditions.
***Excluding regions of electronic disequilibrium.

beam dose calculation algorithm. A subset of these measurements is also required for initial commissioning of each particular electron beam.

4.7. Brachytherapy calculation verification
Brachytherapy dose calculation verification should be approached with many of the same concerns as that for external
beam calculations. Here, however, the situation is often more
straightforward than for external beams. Reasons include:
• Standard sources with universal characteristics are used.
• Most dosimetric parametrizations are obtained from the
literature, rather than individual measurements.
• Calculation algorithms are often quite simple.
• Often, more than one calculation model is available to
the user. Great care must be exercised to determine the
correct coefficients for use in these models, as they are
source type dependent.
• Some calculation complexities ~e.g., the effects of bone
and air inhomogeneities or of applicator shielding! are
typically ignored. Note, however, that when these effects are ignored, the user must understand the implications of those approximations.
A number of published reports contain a large amount of
useful information relevant to forming a QA program for
brachytherapy treatment planning, and we recommend the
review and consideration of the following references:
• The NCI-funded Interstitial Collaborative Working
Group report.40
• AAPM Task Group 43 report on brachytherapy
sources.41
• AAPM Task Group 56 report on the AAPM Brachytherapy Code of Practice.48
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

• Various other published books and articles on brachytherapy QA.49–53
Appendix 5 includes examples of a number of brachytherapy test procedures, including tests of dose calculations
and source localization methods. The task group recommends that a dose calculation verification test should be performed for each type of brachytherapy source used, and that
each method of source localization also be checked.

4.8. Absolute dose output and plan normalization
How each treatment plan is normalized is one of the most
critical parts of a treatment planning system, since it determines how the monitor units should be calculated, which in
turn determines the actual doses delivered to the patient.
Study of all the different methods of plan normalization
which are available in the RTP system is critical to confirm
that ~1! they work as expected; and ~2! the treatment delivery
system in the department uses them correctly. This section
deals primarily with external beam planning, while parallel
issues in brachytherapy such as dose specification criteria
and dwell time normalization are addressed in Appendix 5.
4.8.1. General guidelines for QA for normalization and
MU calculation. The first and most basic recommendation
of the task group on this subject is the following:
A complete check of the entire treatment plan normalization and monitor unit calculation process must be performed
for a series of different kinds of plans. Each plan should be
normalized in a number of different ways, and for each
method, the user should utilize the available methods to calculate the monitor units required to treat the plan. The different methods should then be compared to assure that (1)
the correct monitor units and doses are always achieved;
and (2) the results of the different methods are the same
(within tolerance).

1805

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

Study of the normalization/MU calculation process should
be performed in each clinic. Clinics should of course attempt
to standardize this process, to minimize the complexity and
possibility for misinterpretation of input data or results. The
radiation oncology physicist should attempt to ensure that
the process will perform as expected for any likely combination of situations, even in the face of deliberate errors or
misuse of the system functions. A careful analysis of the
possible hazards associated with this aspect of the system
should be performed at each institution, since plan prescription, normalization, and monitor unit calculation methods
vary quite a bit from institution to institution. A detailed
knowledge of the design, methodologies, algorithms, and
safety checks which are part of the RTP system design is
required. The task group recommends that vendors provide
enough information so that the user can carry out such an
analysis of the normalization/MU calculation process.
The task group also recommends that vendors incorporate
into the RTP system design automated checks of geometric
and dosimetric information to be performed during beam and
plan normalization.13 Such checks can detect not only software errors but also incorrect system use and errors in judgment in choice of normalization points and/or methods. Error
or warning messages generated by the system can help users
avoid inappropriate or incorrect normalization situations that
might lead to incorrect treatment.
4.8.2. Verification of the steps in the process. In order to
determine the monitor units required to give a prescribed
dose to a particular treatment plan, various steps in the planning process are involved, including:
• The relative beam weights are set as part of the plan
technique.
• The overall relative plan normalization method is chosen for the treatment plan.
• The total dose and fractionation are prescribed by the
physician.
• A particular prescription point or isodose level is chosen by the physician.
• Monitor units are calculated so that the prescribed dose
is delivered.
Each step in this process should be carefully studied and
appropriate testing carried out.
Relative beam weights. In order to add the doses from
several beams together, some method of determining the
relative beam weight of each beam is used in each RTP
system. This relative weight may be the dose defined at the
beam normalization point, the relative number of MU for the
field, or may be related to the energy fluence. Typically, the
RTP system calculates the relative dose to be delivered to the
normalization point ~beam norm-pt! chosen for each beam
~in older systems, this point may be at d max on the central
axis for each beam, or it may be the isocenter for an isocentric plan!. In more complex systems, the beam normalization
point may be different for each beam, since d max or isocenter
may not always be appropriate. After the point is identified,
some relative dose ~called the beam weight! is delivered to
this point for each beam, and then individual beam dose
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1805
TABLE 4-5. Relative Beam Weight Issues
How is the beam norm-pt chosen? Are different norm-pts allowed for different beams?
Does the identification of the beam norm-pt agree with the coordinates
chosen, for all options available?
What happens if the beam norm-pt is near or under a block or MLC
edge? How close to the beam edge can the norm-pt be placed?
What happens if the beam norm-pt is within or behind an inhomogeneity?
What happens if the beam norm-pt is outside the patient external surface?
What happens if objects such as the CT couch are in the patient
representation? What happens if there are serious CT artifacts?
How is the norm-pt dose calculated? Dose it take into account effects of
blocks/MLC, beam modifiers, inhomogeneity corrections?
Are warnings given when inappropriate norm-pts are chosen?

distributions are summed to yield the dose distribution for
the plan. Table 4-5 lists some beam weight issues to be
checked. Comparable questions must be asked for any of the
methods used for beam weights inside the RTP system.
Overall relative plan normalization. After the relative
dose distribution is obtained, most RTP systems allow the
normalization of the entire distribution to give a specified
dose at some defined point ~the plan normalization point, or
plan norm-pt!. The value at the plan norm-pt might be in
terms of relative dose, absolute dose for one fraction, or dose
for the entire treatment. Testing issues are listed in Table
4-6.
Isodose level chosen for dose prescription. A common
use of plan normalization features is to normalize the plan to
100% at the isocenter of the plan, and then to choose a mini-

TABLE 4-6. Overall Plan Normalization Issues
How is the plan norm-pt chosen?
Does the identification of the plan norm-pt agree with the coordinates
chosen, for all options available?
What happens if the plan norm-pt is near or under a block or MLC edge?
What happens if the plan norm-pt is within or behind an inhomogeneity?
What happens if the plan norm-pt is outside the patient external surface?
How is the norm-pt dose calculated, for each normalization method
available? Does it take into account effects of blocks/MLC, beam
modifiers, inhomogeneity connections?
Are dose units handled correctly?
Does the plan normalization cause appropriate changes in other related
parameters ~e.g., dose at beam norm-pts!?
Are warnings given when inappropriate normalization choices are made?

1806

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

TABLE 4-7. MU/Normalization Process Issues
Each permutation in types of beam normalization, plan normalization, isodose level prescription and MU calculation must be verified.
A series of standard clinical protocol cases should be planned, and MUs
calculated for each field. The doses actually delivered by these fields and
plans can then be verified independently, either by measurement or
through use of standard MU calculation data. Note that hand MU
calculation methods are likely to be less accurate than modern RTP
system dose calculations and so cannot necessarily be used as the gold
standard for complex cases.
For these standard cases, as many permutations of the normalization/MU
calculation process should be used as possible, and derived MUs should
be compared. These results should be analyzed not only to detect errors or
misinterpretation, but also to obtain the approximate accuracy of the
different methods which could be used in the same case.
If possible, the RTP system computations should be checked using a hand
dose calculation method ~although as noted above, this will not always be
possible!.

mum isodose line ~isodose surface! that encloses the planning target volume ~PTV!, and to use this isodose level as
the prescription dose. It is critical that this part of the prescription process be included in any monitor unit calculation
methods. Alternately, the same result can be accomplished
by increasing the dose at the plan normalization point ~e.g.,
to 105%! so that the 100% isodose level covers the PTV.
Calculation of monitor units (MU) to deliver prescribed
dose for a plan. QA for the calculation of monitor units for a
particular plan is of course very dependent on the methods
used inside the RTP system and any external MU calculation
program or techniques, if used. It is here that all of the questions about exactly how the planning system calculates and
displays dose to the beam normalization points and the plan
normalization point become most important. The MU calculation methodology must be completely tied to the methods
of normalization used inside the RTP system, or incorrect
doses delivered to the patient will result. Table 4-7 contains
several additional recommendations.

4.9 Clinical verification
A reasonable final check on the systematic behavior of the
RTP system and the RTP process includes a series of clinical
tests. These tests should be designed to check most of the
important functions involved in planning through performance of the entire planning process, including dose prescription and the final dose distribution and monitor unit setting calculations. Commissioning data and/or special
measurements made in appropriate phantoms can be used to
verify the dose and MU results. Test cases with graded levels
of complexity can be selected, for example:
• Square manual contour with several blocked fields.
• Tangential breast plan with manual contour.
• CT-based plan for phantom with density connections.
• 3D CT-based plan for phantom involving nonaxial and
noncoplanar fields with conformal blocking.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1806

Brachytherapy planning should be tested similarly, with
plans involving single and multiple source configurations
and different source strength specification and source localization methodologies. Such a series of clinical tests can also
be used for routine testing, dosimetric checks, and review of
actual RTP activities ~when appropriate!.
Chapter 5: Periodic quality assurance testing

In this chapter we discuss testing that should be performed periodically at specified time intervals. This testing is
not associated with commissioning the new RTP system or
accepting or commissioning a new version of the software.
Just as the AAPM Task Group 40 report2 suggests time intervals for many different parts of the QA process in a radiotherapy department, this task group also suggests various
tests that should be performed at certain intervals. The periodic QA needs of the RTP process should be considered
before the initial system commissioning because it may
prove possible to use a subset of the commissioning tests for
these routine tests, avoiding the need to repeat the test design
process.
All components of the RTP system and RTP process need
to be considered when developing the QA program, although
some may not require much periodic testing. For a software
device such as a RTP system, one must be concerned about
data files, integrity of the software executables, failures or
problems in hardware peripherals and general system configuration, as well as the process that uses the software. The
main aims of a routine periodic QA program for the RTP
system include the following:
• Confirm the integrity and security of the RTP data files
that contain the external beam and brachytherapy information used in dose and monitor unit calculations.
• Verify the correct functioning and accuracy of peripheral devices used for data input, including the digitizer
tablet, CT, MR, video digitizer, simulator control system and devices for obtaining mechanical simulator
contours. One must separately consider the devices
themselves and the networks, tape drives, software,
transfer programs, and other components which are involved in the transfer of the information from the device to the RTP system.
• Check the integrity of the actual RTP system software.
• Confirm the function and accuracy of output devices
and software, including printers, plotters, automated
transfer processes, connections to computer-controlled
block cutters and/or compensator makers, etc.
Ongoing QA for several additional aspects of the RTP process has been described in the 1991 ACMP symposium on
Quality Assurance in Radiotherapy Physics.12,17
Recently, two articles2,18 have made similar recommendations regarding the frequency of routine reliability testing.
Using this information as a basis, this task group recommends periodic testing of various parts of the RTP system as
specified in Table 5-1. Commercial manufacturers often
make their own recommendations regarding ongoing QA of
their planning systems. Each radiation oncology physicist

1807

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1807

TABLE 5-1. Periodic RTP Process QA Checks
Recommended
Frequency
Daily

Item
Error log

Change log
Weekly

Digitizer
Hardcopy output
Computer files

Review clinical planning

Monthly

CT data input into RTP system

Problem review
Review of RTP system

Annual

Dose calculations
Data and I/O devices

Critical software tools

Variable

Beam parameterization
Software changes, including operating system

should review all the recommendations and develop a program of periodic testing that will match the planning system
characteristics and its user base. The frequency of testing of
each specific feature of the RTP system should depend on
how that feature is used in the clinic and how critical that
feature is from a safety point of view.
One of the recommendations above involves recommissioning checks for each beam as required after major repairs,
tuning, or other changes to beam parameters or machine.
One possible recommissioning protocol is shown in Table
5-2. The amount of work involved can vary from a few hours
to many days work, per beam, for a complex 3D dose calculation algorithm. Note that the annual QA of each treatment
machine, recommended by AAPM Task Groups 402 and
45,54 should be performed in conjunction with the QA for the
RTP system use of that machine in order to minimize the
amount of new work which is necessary.
The more different treatment machines and beams there
are ~involved in the QA program!, the more time will be
required for QA testing, so a systematic review spaced over
the entire year should be considered. Careful prioritization of
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

Comments/Details
Review report log listing system failures, error messages, hardware
malfunctions, and other problems. Triage list and remedy any serious
problems that occur during the day.
Keep log of hardware/software changes.
Review digitizer accuracy.
Review all hardcopy output, including scaling for plotter and other
graphics-type output.
Verify integrity of all RTP system data files and executables using
checksums or other simple software checks. Checking software
should be provided by the vendor.
Review clinical treatment planning activity. Discuss errors,
problems, complications, difficulties. Resolve problems.
Review the CT data within the planning system for geometrical
accuracy, CT number consistency ~also dependent on the QA and use
of the scanner!, and derived electron density.
Review all RTP problems ~both for RTP system and clinical
treatment planning! and prioritize problems to be resolved.
Review current configuration and status of all RTP system software,
hardware, and data files.
Annual checks. Review acceptability of agreement between
measured and calculated doses for each beam/source.
Review functioning and accuracy of digitizer tablet, video/laser
digitizer, CT input, MR input, printers, plotters, and other imaging
output devices.
Review BEV/DRR generation and plot accuracy, CT geometry,
density conversions, DVH calculations, other critical tools,
machine-specific conversions, data files, and other critical data.
Checks and/or recommissioning may be required due to machine
changes or problems.
Checks and/or recommissioning may be required due to changes in
the RTP software, any support/additional software such as image
transfer software, or the operating system.

issues specific to each clinic is critical, otherwise the ongoing QA work on the system will become quite time intensive
and difficult to fund or accomplish.
A series of reviews and training sessions is recommended
to be included as part of the periodic QA program, as listed
in Table 5-3.
Chapter 6: QA as part of the daily planning process

Even after all quality assurance tests for the RTP system
and process have been developed, there is still a major segment of the QA process to be considered. Experience with
complex treatment planning and its associated QA has led to
the conclusion that the most important part of the QA program is neither the dosimetric or nondosimetric tests; it is the
design and implementation of a clinical planning/delivery
process that incorporates QA elements to comprehensively
check all aspects of the planning and delivery for each patient and each plan.
There are several reasons for carefully designing the
planning/delivery process to include QA checks:

1808

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1808

TABLE 5-2. Recommendations for Beam Recommissioning

TABLE 5-3. Periodic Training and Review

Make the dataset used for the RTP system recommissioning as similar as
possible to the dataset that is remeasured as part of the annual linear accelerator recommissioning.

Topic

Store these standard data, related treatment plans and other necessary
information together to minimize the time spent hunting for data, creating
new test cases, etc.

Staff training

Each clinic should develop a procedure for training
~and re-training! staff in the use of its specific RTP
system and process.

Clinical plan review

A formal review of clinical plans should be
developed, with a specific set of parameters to be
reviewed. A planning library with examples of
planned treatments can be useful when questions
arise regarding particular plans.

Error review

A formal review of any errors found should be
presented to representatives of the entire staff.

QA program review

Documentation of the quality assurance program
and the continued efforts to improve the planning
process should be part of the institution’s efforts to
reduce patient treatment errors.

Use a checksum program or other software analysis tool to confirm the
constancy of the data, datafiles, and other related information used in
recommissioning tests.
Verify new tables of TPR, TMR, or FDD data at the standard SSD.
Verify the phantom scatter factor, collimator scatter factor, wedge and
tray factors, and any other factors which contribute to monitor unit
calculations performed inside the RTP system. Verify off axis beam
profiles for open and wedged fields.

Description

Use a standard set of square and rectangular field sizes to reproduce
isodose curves.
Verify a subset of FDD, profile and isodose curve data at two other
clinically relevant SSDs.
Calculate the dose for standard square and shaped fields using irregular
field entry methods ~if different than the normal mode of operation!.
Verify the dose distribution from blocked fields for several standard block
shapes for each energy.
Verify the dose distribution from MLC-shaped fields for several standard
shapes for each energy.
Verify the standard SSD depth dose and output factors for each electron
energy and applicator.
Verify the dose profiles and isodose curves for a standard set of applicator
sizes ~small, medium, and large! for each electron energy at the standard
SSD.
Verify the dose distribution from shaped electron fields for several
shape/energy combinations.
Review the results from density correction algorithms for each photon and
electron energy, if using an energy dependent density correction
algorithm.
Review CT-based and bulk density calculations for a selection of energies
and anatomical models.
Perform a series of procedural checks of monitor unit calculations based
on treatment plans.

• A modern planning system may be the result of 30–50
person-years of work and may consist of as many as a
million lines of code. It is well known in the software
engineering world that even well-designed and implemented software systems still usually contain at least
one software error in every 100–1000 lines of code.16
Therefore, there will always be software errors, some of
which will be significant in certain clinical situations.
• Modern RTP systems contain complex data structures
and algorithms and offer a great deal of flexibility. It is
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

impossible to perform exhaustive testing on any one
section of such a system, let alone the entire system.
Therefore, other QA tools must be used to help assure
the correct behavior of the system.
• The entire treatment planning/delivery process involves
a complex series of procedures and decisions. Ongoing
QA for the process can ensure that the user makes correct decisions and uses the planning software correctly.
• Since the optimal way to use patient information or to
design a treatment plan for a particular patient may not
be obvious, many variations of standard planning procedures may be used. In fact, new techniques that have
never before been considered will likely appear during
the planning process. Continual QA of the planning
process will help confirm the reasonability of these new
developments and flag those plans that may require additional verification checks before implementation.
Several examples of ways to incorporate quality assurance into the daily treatment planning process are listed below in Table 6-1. Some of these reviews are also recommended by AAPM Task Group 40.2
Chapter 7: System management and security

In earlier years, the RTP system was a stand-alone computer system, sometimes based on proprietary hardware.
Now, however, most modern planning systems consist of
standard computer hardware systems and system software,
standard peripheral equipment, and the RTP software. The
RTP system can be a complex system consisting of networked or clustered graphics workstations, servers, and peripheral devices, all of which require sophisticated system
management to keep the system operating. Correct management of these systems must be a part of any overall QA
program for treatment planning.
Machine and patient data stored on the RTP system computer should be considered to have the same status regarding
maintenance and security as this data when it is stored in a
logbook or patient’s chart. For the physicist in charge of

1809

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1809

TABLE 6-1. QA During the Treatment Process
Test

Reasons

Multiplanar reconstructed images

• Inconsistencies in the image dataset will produce inconsistencies or artifacts in the reconstructed
images.
• Beam orientation and patient anatomy which is difficult to visualize on axial images is often easily
seen on non-axial planes.
• Contours cut from 3-D structures onto reconstructed images may show inconsistencies or problems
in 1! the original axial contours; 2! the 3-D structure; 3! the way the structure was identified on
different imaging studies.

3-D surface displays

Surface displays help verify that component 2-D contours are consistent and realistic.

Dataset registration review

The responsible physician should review the accuracy of registration of multiple datasets and the
transfer of information such as tumor or critical normal structure delineation between datasets.

Target definition checks

Projection of a CT-defined target volume onto BEV images, which are then compared to simulator
films, can help physicians and staff check target location, patient positioning, and beam orientation.

Point dose calculations

Hand calculations of dose to the prescription point and/or normalization point help verify correct
delivery of dose to the patient.

Plan visualization and documentation techniques

Plots in appropriate non-axial planes can be used to show beam, wedge, and block orientations for
non-axial beams, electron cutout accuracy.

Treatment plan review

The physician and a second treatment planner/physicist should review the plan, including all
treatment parameters, before implementation.

Monitor unit review

Monitor unit calculations should be reviewed by a second physicist, preferably before treatment
starts, but certainly before the third fraction or 10% of the dose has been delivered.

SSD Checks

SSD to the central axis of each treatment field should be measured during simulation and
periodically during treatment and compared to that used in the treatment plan.

External beam plan implementation review

• The physicist or therapist should confirm before the first treatment that all treatment parameters
were transferred correctly from plan to patient chart and/or record and verify system.
• Periodic port films or port images help verify the correct positioning of the patient and correct
orientation of the blocks.
• Consider feasibility of treatment plan ~re: interference or collision of machine gantry with table
and/or patient and/or immobilization devices!.

Brachytherapy plan implementation review

• The physicist or therapist should confirm before the brachytherapy sources are placed into the
patient that all source and plan information was correctly transferred from treatment plan to the
treatment documentation or patient chart.
• Dose calculations and prescription should be verified as accurate and appropriate before treatment
begins.
• Confirmation of source location and loading, if possible, should be performed as soon after loading
as possible.

treatment planning to ensure that such information is secure
and adequately maintained, care must be taken so that the
data are not corrupted, lost, or used inappropriately. The following guidelines and responsibilities can aid the physicist in
developing a set of procedures for management and security
of the RTP system.

7.1. Management personnel
Overall management of treatment planning includes two
distinct areas of responsibility: ~1! overall responsibility for
all aspects of treatment planning and the RTP system; and
~2! technical responsibility for the hardware and software of
the RTP system. Typically, but not necessarily, these responsibilities may be handled by two different people.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

7.1.1. Responsible physicist. The ‘‘responsible physicist’’ or ‘‘treatment planning system manager’’ should be a
radiation oncology physicist with a large amount of experience in the field of treatment planning. This individual is
responsible for the overall maintenance, use, and security of
the planning system. Decisions about release of new versions, quality assurance testing needs, commissioning, clinical use, and the resolution of planning problems are all made
by the planning system manager. This person also supervises
the activities of the computer systems manager when they
affect the planning system and computer~s!.
7.1.2. Computer systems manager. The management of
modern computer systems, such as those used for RTP, requires experienced computer systems management person-

1810

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

nel, even for a PC-based system. The systems manager is in
general responsible for system hardware and software maintenance, backups of planning system data and patient information, maintenance of the relevant computer networks and
other kinds of intercomputer communication, security of the
computer systems, and other such tasks. The computer systems manager must work under the general supervision and
responsibility of the responsible physicist, so that computer
system management is in agreement with the general needs
of the clinical use of the planning system.
The computer systems manager should be knowledgeable
about the most commonly used operating system commands.
Even with the turnkey treatment planning systems which are
in use in many radiation oncology clinics, a working knowledge of the computer’s operating system commands is
needed to maximize the usefulness of the treatment planning
computer. File management tasks such as copying files and
performing backups can often be simplified when performed
within the context of the computer’s operating system. In
addition, the systems manager should become familiar with
all software present on the treatment planning computer, including that which is not necessarily part of the treatment
planning system.

7.2. Computer system management tasks
One of the most important tasks involved in computer
systems management is hardware and software maintenance
for the computer system. Hardware maintenance may involve service contracts or dedicated hardware service personnel. The systems manager will advise the responsible
physicist on the necessity and economic feasibility of a service contract, and is usually the individual authorized to contact the service organization for unscheduled repairs as well
as for scheduled maintenance. Software maintenance is in
many respects a much more complicated task. Decisions
about upgrading new system software are not trivial, as it is
possible for the planning software to have some level of
incompatibility with the new system software, potentially
causing program errors or other problems. The computer system manager should additionally monitor disk space, user
accounts, memory, and other resources.
Another task of the computer systems manager is acquisition of necessary supplies for system operation. A variety
of printer and plotter supplies and magnetic media may be
required for routine functioning of a treatment planning system. The system manager is likely to be best qualified to
determine the exact supply needs for the system. Much critical information is stored on system hard disks, from the systems software and the RTP software to specific beam and
patient data. Periodic backup of all this information is essential in case the files on the computer become corrupted or the
hard disk fails. The frequency of backups should be determined according to ~1! the effort needed to recreate the lost
information; and ~2! the frequency of changes in the information. A typical backup schedule is given below:
• Daily: Incremental backups of all new or altered files.
This assures that all the work done each day is not lost.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1810

• Weekly: Backups of all treatment plan-related files.
Many treatment plans are started, optimized, and completed within a week’s time.
• Monthly: Backup of the entire system, including the
system software, RTP software, beam data files, and
treatment plan files.

7.3. Data management tasks
Noncurrent patient data should be archived to appropriate
media when available disk space is filled. The archived data
may be necessary for legal reasons, for research studies,
and/or for future use if the patient returns later for further
treatment. The ability to accurately restore and use treatment
plan data from archives, and its merger with current data,
must be tested, as it can be a significant source of problems.
Compatibility of archived data with the current version of
treatment planning system is another source of problems. It
is important that the RTP system developers ensure availability of a migration path.
Before an archival medium is chosen, consideration
should be given to the amount of memory required. For 3D
planning with CT and possibly MR images and multiple 3D
dose distributions, the data for a single patient can take between 50 and 100 MBytes of space. Careful records should
be maintained to facilitate retrieval of archived data. Documented policies and procedures for archiving and retrieving
patient information should be developed, followed, and
maintained. Bootable backups containing the appropriate
systems and RTP software should be kept. Procedures should
also provide for archiving of magnetic tape every 5–10 yr to
preclude loss of information due to degeneration of the medium and possibly for off-site storage of important backup
tapes.

7.4. Computer networks
The use of computer networks has become an important
part of the RTP process in many institutions. CT and/or other
imaging data are often input into the treatment planning system over a computer network connection. Multiple workstations are often linked by network so that all the workstations
can share the same patient data. Communication with other
parts of the departmental computer system, including record
and verify systems, is also made possible with the use of
network connections. Each of these links may be critical to
the planning process and must be maintained by the computer systems manager. Security for all of these network connections will be discussed below.

7.5. System security
Security for the treatment planning system hardware, software, networks, and patient and beam data is an important
issue which should be carefully managed by the planning
system and computer systems managers. Procedures should
be present to limit access to the treatment planning application software and treatment planning system data. The use of
passwords for access to any treatment planning system or its

1811

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

TABLE 7-1. Security Issues
Access to the RTP software should be limited, although it should be available to all individuals entitled to use the system, including dosimetrists
and physicians. Much more stringent security is required for access to
basic datasets used by the system.
Records should be kept of all individuals who have changed RTP system
basic data, indicating the reason for changing the data as well as the
changes made in the data.
Patient planning data must be protected, both against undesired
modification and for protection of patient confidentiality.
Security for the planning software, the data files associated with the dose
calculation algorithms and the patient treatment planning data require that
significant security controls be designed into the system.
Network security must prevent all unwanted incursions into the planning
system hardware, software, or patient data.
The RTP system computers should be secure against unexpected network
accesses, particularly in light of the history of viruses appearing on the
Internet as well as cases of unauthorized entry into computer systems.

patient and beam data should be implemented for all systems
and is a requirement for networked computers.
As RTP systems have become more sophisticated, security issues have become significantly more complex. Several
security issues are listed in Table 7-1.
True security for the RTP system requires a combined
hardware/software strategy, with continuous review of new
situations such as network access and/or capabilities changes
as they occur.
Chapter 8: Summary of recommendations

This chapter summarizes some of the important recommendations of the task group. The appropriate section of the
report for further details is listed in the parentheses at the end
of each bullet.
• Adequate resources must be allocated to successfully
implement an appropriate quality assurance program for
treatment planning. The radiation oncology physicist
must be given adequate time and resources to design,
implement, and carry out the QA program. ~Preface!
• To meet the goals of the RTP QA program, adequate
equipment and staffing of all the specialties, including
radiation oncologists, radiation oncology physicists,
medical radiation dosimetrists and radiation therapists,
is necessary. ~Part A!
• It is important to realistically assess the staffing required for the QA program, particularly when new sophisticated systems are introduced into a department.
Increasingly sophisticated treatment planning will likely
call for more support for RTP QA to ensure the systems
are used safely and that the QA procedures can be performed. ~Part A!
• Various certifications should be required for the staff
involved in radiotherapy treatment planning ~Part A!:
- Radiation oncologists should be certified by the
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1811

American Board of Radiology or equivalent and hold
the appropriate medical licenses.
- Radiation oncology physicists should be certified in
Radiation Oncology Physics by the American Board
of Radiology or American Board of Medical Physics
~or the Canadian College of Physicists in Medicine, if
applicable! and hold an appropriate state license,
where applicable.
- Medical dosimetrists should be certified by the Medical Dosimetry Certification Board.
- Radiation therapists should have credentials in Radiation Therapy Technology as defined by the American
Registry of Radiologic Technologists, and hold an unrestricted state license in radiation therapy technology, where applicable.
• The radiation oncology physicist in each clinic should
review this report, use its guidelines to determine those
issues that are of most importance, and then concentrate
the RTP QA program on those issues. ~Chap. 1.2!
• This report is not a prescriptive listing of everything
that must be done to perform adequate RTP QA, but is
intended to give a summary of issues to be considered
when creating the RTP QA program for a particular
institution. ~Chap. 1.4!
• Users of a particular commercial treatment planning
system should band together, with or without the assistance of the vendor of that system, to help each other
create and perform the comprehensive QA which is required for that particular planning system. ~Chap. 1.4!
• It is critical that each institution name one radiation
oncology physicist to be the ‘‘responsible physicist’’
for treatment planning in that institution, with overall
responsibility for implementation, quality assurance,
clinical use of treatment planning, and vendor contacts.
~Chaps. 1.4 and 7.1.1!
• The radiation oncology physicist must determine the accuracy of the RTP system for a range of clinical situations and how that expectation of accuracy must be
modified to account for local situations. ~Chap. 1.7!
• The radiation oncology physicist must carefully design
a rigorous set of specifications for acquisition of a RTP
system if one wants to create a formal acceptance test
which can verify that the system works as specified.
~Chap. 2.1!
• Specifications must be written with particular acceptance tests in mind. An acceptance test procedures
document should then be written and agreed to by both
user and vendor. ~Chap. 2.3!
• Most commissioning test procedures and priorities need
to be individualized due to dependence on the RTP system and on individual institution’s use of the various
features. ~Chap. 3!
• The AAPM should form another task group specifically
charged to develop a report on use and quality assurance of dataset registration techniques.
• As treatment planning in the institution becomes more
sophisticated, the range of dosimetric testing must expand and the physicist must carefully organize the testing and define appropriate limits for the testing. ~Chap.
4.1!

1812

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

• Complex anthropomorphic tests are useful for evaluating the overall system precision, but their usefulness in
explaining discrepancies is limited. ~Chap. 4.1!
• Some commissioning tests and data are used to test
multiple aspects of the planning system. These tests
should be designed to be as independent as possible, so
that appropriate analysis is performed. ~Chap. 4.1!
• The verification of external beam and brachytherapy
dose calculations for clinical use is a very important
part of RTP system commissioning. A comprehensive
series of test cases must be planned, measured, calculated, compared, analyzed, and evaluated before any
dose calculations are used clinically. ~Chap. 4.1!
• The particular test cases designed as part of the commissioning and QA programs for any particular institution depend on the RTP system involved, the way the
system is ~or will be! used clinically, and many other
clinic- and system-dependent factors. Optimizing the
test procedure for each clinic is essential if the QA program is to be effective yet achievable. ~Chap. 4.1!
• Self-consistency within the measured dataset ~to be
used for dose calculation commissioning and verification checks! is of primary importance and can be
achieved by acquiring a set of relative measurements
which are then interrelated by a small subset of either
relative or absolute measurements. ~Chap. 4.2.1!
• The task group recommends that vendors of RTP systems provide sophisticated data input, storage, analysis,
renormalization, display, and other capabilities inside
their RTP systems to help users utilize the measured
data. ~Chap. 4.2.3!
• Vendors should specify the data required by their system in the system documentation, and make this information available to users before purchase of the system.
~Chap. 4.3!
• Only data that has been measured on the specific treatment machine being commissioned into the RTP system
should be used, unless it is known that the treatment
units in question have exactly the same characteristics.
Other beam data or ‘‘representative’’ data provided by
an accelerator vendor ~or by others! should never be
used for dose calculation verification testing. ~Chap.
4.3!
• A data log book for documenting data acquisition, data
handling, renormalization, and/or data smoothing procedures used in preparation and analysis of the beam
data should be maintained. The source of the data, the
date that the measurements were done, and the person
or persons involved in the measurements should be
logged. The log book should be maintained for the lifetime of the treatment planning system. ~Chap. 4.3!
• Vendors should provide information on the required
data and/or file structures to users and WPS vendors, so
that direct data transfer is available from all water phantom systems to RTP systems. ~Chap. 4.3.2!
• The user should review any beam model data files or
similar data used by the calculation algorithm and
verify that the final parameters are correct. ~Chap. 4.4!
• The user should document the dose calculations, fits,
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1812

and other checks that were used during the process of
parameter determination and the results of those activities. ~Chap. 4.4!
• The user should summarize data sources, methods used
for parameter determination, the presumed accuracy or
sensitivity of the parameters, and any other salient information. This information should be stored in the
RTP system log. ~Chap. 4.4!
• Vendors should include extensive data analysis and display features in their RTP systems. ~Chap. 4.5!
• The radiation oncology physicist must analyze the clinical needs, dose calculation algorithms, treatment machines, and treatment techniques specific to his/her
clinic and then modify the task group commissioning
outlines to fit the situation. ~Chap. 4.6.1!
• The radiation oncology physicist in each institution
must evaluate the expectations for each situation and
determine the criteria to which the particular beam and
algorithm will be compared. ~Chap. 4.6.2!
• The radiation oncology physicist should evaluate the
importance of each class of tests and prioritize the verification checks so that the clinically most important
checks are performed first. ~Chap. 4.6.3!
• Various brachytherapy task group reports should also
be consulted when forming the brachytherapy commissioning and QA programs. ~Chap. 4.7, Appendix 5!
• A dose calculation verification test should be performed
for each type of brachytherapy source used, and each
method of source localization should be checked.
~Chap. 4.7, Appendix 5!
• A complete check of the entire treatment plan normalization and monitor unit calculation process must be
performed for a series of different kinds of plans. Each
plan should be normalized in a number of different
ways, and for each method the user should use the
available methods to calculate the monitor units required to treat the plan. ~Chap. 4.8!
• Vendors should incorporate automated checks of geometric and dosimetric information used for beam and
plan normalization into the RTP system design. ~Chap.
4.8.1!
• Each step in the MU/normalization process should be
carefully studied and tested. ~Chap. 4.8.2!
• Systematic behavior of the RTP system and the RTP
process should be tested with a series of clinical tests.
~Chap. 4.9!
• Global brachytherapy planning behavior should be
tested similarly to external beam planning, with plans
involving single and multiple source configurations and
different source strength specification and source localization methodologies. ~Chap. 4.9!
• Each radiation oncology physicist should review all the
recommendations of this task group and the vendor of
the RTP system and develop a program of periodic testing that will match the planning system characteristics
and its user base. ~Chap. 5!
• A systematic review of all machine data spaced over the
entire year should be considered. Careful prioritization
of issues specific to each clinic is critical. ~Chap. 5!

1813

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

• A series of reviews and training sessions for planning
staff is recommended. ~Chap. 5!
• The most important part of the QA program is neither
the dosimetric or nondosimetric tests; it is the design
and implementation of a clinical planning/delivery process that incorporates QA elements to comprehensively
check all aspects of the planning and delivery for each
patient and each plan. ~Chap. 6!
• The computer systems manager must work under the
general supervision and responsibility of the responsible
physicist, so that computer system management is in
agreement with the general needs of the clinical use of
the planning system. ~Chap. 7.1.2!
• Security is critical for treatment planning software and
data. Procedures must be implemented to limit access to
the RTP software, system data, and patient data. ~Chap.
7.5!
• Numerous responsibilities of vendors and RTP system
users ~listed in Appendix A1! must be followed. ~Appendix A1!
• A comprehensive photon beam dataset, useful for algorithm verification, should be generated by the AAPM
for use by vendors, users groups, and individual institutions as they perform their algorithm verification tests.
~Appendix A3!
Chapter 9: Conclusions

The creation of a comprehensive and practical quality assurance program for modern radiotherapy treatment planning
is a large and uncompleted task. This task group report has
as its goal the description of one way to approach that task,
along with the description of many of the issues which must
be considered while creating the QA program. A critical recommendation of this task group is that any RTP QA program
must be individualized for the particular institution which is
creating the program, so that it concentrates its effort on the
high priority issues for that institution. It is hoped that the
guidance provided by this report will make creating QA programs easier for the radiation oncology physicists who are
responsible for this task.
Just as treatment planning use evolves in a clinic, it is
clear that the QA program for treatment planning must also
evolve so that it handles the evolving planning capabilities
and uses. The task group clearly understands that as RTP
evolves, particularly including the use of advanced 3D planning capabilities, so will the requirements of RTP QA. We
look forward to ongoing reevaluation and revision of our
recommendations as the field of treatment planning continues its advances and evolution.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The task group would like to gratefully acknowledge the
assistance of a number of consultants to the task group who
have contributed significantly to the quality of this report.
We particularly thank Jon Jacky, Ph.D., for his assistance in
getting the work of the task group started, and Iain Bruinvis,
Ph.D., for contributing his extensive clinical experience with
treatment planning quality assurance, as well as supplying
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1813

connections with the European approaches toward this subject. We would also like to thank Jeff Williamson, Ph.D., and
Glenn Glasgow, Ph.D., who helped immensely in making the
brachytherapy portions of this report more useful and more
consistent with other ongoing quality assurance work in that
area. Finally, the task group thanks Jatinder Palta, Nick
Detorie, John Kent, Eric Klein, Rock Mackie, Radhe Mohan,
and Mike Schell for helpful comments and suggestions.
Appendix 1: Vendor and user responsibilities

In this appendix we describe some of the responsibilities
of the vendor and the user toward each other, in relation to
QA for the treatment planning software. Detailed discussion
of QA methodology typically used during development of
software such as a RTP system is beyond the scope of this
report. However, the more general topic of the responsibilities of the vendors or providers of the RTP software and the
responsibilities of the users of that software is an important
part of this report.

A1.1. Vendor responsibilities
Most radiation treatment planning systems are purchased
by a clinic from a commercial vendor, although some centers
with significant research programs may develop their own
RTP systems. In general, for both commercial and noncommercial RTP systems, the basic quality of the software and
the quality assurance procedures applied during its development and testing should be the responsibility of the vendor
~or provider!. In Sec. A1.2, the analogous responsibilities of
the user of the software are delineated.
A1.1.1. Documentation. Extensive documentation on
how the RTP software works should be provided by the vendor, including a description of the overall design, the theory
of operation, the limitations and detailed explanations of
what happens as each step of the planning process is performed. The documentation requirements are summarized in
Table A1-1. Van Dyk18 and Dahlin55 also give recommendations for vendor documentation requirements.
A1.1.2. User training. The vendor must provide highquality training for the user. For sophisticated planning systems, this training should involve more than simply teaching
the user the functions of the software buttons. It should also
include useful planning strategies and other high-level issues
that only the experienced user will encounter. Often, one
kind of training is necessary for the treatment planner while
the physicist who deals with beam data, calculation verification, and resolution of problems may require different or
additional training.
A1.1.3. Software quality assurance. The vendor should
provide details of the software quality assurance program
used to design, develop, test, document, and release the software. The vendor should attempt to give the user a clear
basic description of the QA methodologies used, so that the
user has a realistic idea of the types of QA testing that the
vendor has performed. For general discussions of some of
the issues involved in software QA, see, e.g., Refs. 56 and
57.

1814

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

TABLE A1-1. Vendor-Provided Documentation
User’s manual

Theory of operation
manual

1814
TABLE A1-2. Suggested Vendor Documentation for Version Updates

The user’s manual should describe ~from the user’s
point of view! how to perform every operation that
the system provides.

Detailed list of bugs or problems fixed.

• The theory of operation manual should describe
how the system works. This description should
include details on all algorithms ~dose
calculations, surface creation, etc.! including all
formulas, diagrams necessary for complete
understanding.
• The manual should present ~or cite! data that
provide some indication of the range of situations
where the calculations produce clinically
acceptable results ~or not!.
• The manual should explain any non-obvious
geometric calculations of renderings in sufficient
detail so users can correctly interpret graphic
depictions. In particular, the meaning of all
scaling factors should be explained.

List of new features.

System design

The system design should be described completely,
including constraints, expectations, and possibly
future plans. This information can help answer
many user questions or concerns.

Quality assurance
documentation

QA documentation should include useful
summaries of testing, beta test results, and other
such internal QA procedures. This information can
allow users to make their own assessment of the
QA used during development of the RTP system.

System management
guide

The system management guide should contain
information to help the user assure correct
installation and use of the system.

Data requirements

The data ~measurements and other! required by
each calculation algorithm will help the user make
an accurate assessment of the work which
commissioning will require.

Test dataset

A test dataset should be provided so that the user
can verify the correct functioning of the system.
This dataset should include data files and a test
script. The expected test results should be provided,
showing exactly the results of dose calculations and
the appearance of graphic displays and other
hardcopy.

Users of commercial products have the ability to affect
the software quality assurance programs of vendors. As suggested in the AAPM Task Group 35 report on Accelerator
Safety for Computer-Controlled Medical Accelerators,58 the
user should require sufficient documentation from the provider of the software so that the user can be convinced that
the system design, implementation, and quality assurance
program are robust enough for the intended clinical use. This
kind of documentation can be of significant assistance to
users as they design their own QA programs. The user must
pressure the vendor to provide as much information as can
reasonably be provided by the vendor or assimilated by the
user. One of the many motivations for this approach is that
the user should be aware that there are usually errors in large
software systems such as treatment planning systems.16
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

Possible implications of those fixes.

List of components that work differently from before.
Suggestions for tests that might be performed by the user.
Relevant results from beta testing of the new release.
Provide well-documented procedures and software to convert the old
patient and/or treatment machine data to any new formats required by the
new version.
List of known bugs and limits, with work-arounds, if available.

Vendors can assist users in assessing the QA efforts expended on the RTP products in a number of ways:
• Vendors should maintain a record of each problem
found in the RTP system, either by users or internal
staff, and how that problem was resolved. This record
should be available to all customers and prospects.
• Vendors should be willing to let their customers know
why they believe the QA program for their product is
sound.
• Vendors should follow a rational software development
process which can be explained to users.
• Although many development materials may be proprietary, vendors should be prepared to show that they
exist and to release parts of those documents if they
address important user concerns.
• Vendors should respond accurately and openly to users’
questions about the number of staff, their training and
experience, and the effort devoted to developing and
maintaining the product.
A1.1.4. Version updates. The arrival of a new software
update for the treatment planning system always causes difficulty from a QA point of view, as the user always has to
decide whether to implement the new version and how much
testing to do before releasing it for clinical use. Old bugs
may be fixed, but new bugs have probably been introduced.
Usually there are also new functions to analyze and test.
Table A1-2 lists some suggestions for vendor-supplied documentation that may help the user physicist determine what
specific tests or other activities are required before a new
version of the RTP system can be released for clinical use.
The vendor must provide enough information so that the user
can make intelligent choices about what needs to be tested
without expecting to recommission the entire system.
A1.1.5. Release of data formats. We strongly recommend that vendors adopt a standardized format convention
such as DICOM-RT59 for all files which are used for data
import and export. Regardless of convention, vendors should
release detailed descriptions of the formats and contents of
these files, along with examples of correct implementation of

1815

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

TABLE A1-3. Additional Suggestions for Vendors
Create a users group to design and perform clinical QA testing and disseminate results for the vendor’s RTP system.
Encourage each user institution to designate a Responsible Physicist who
will be responsible for the planning system and its use at that institution.
Assure that this person is adequately trained to handle most planning
system problems and issues.
Support the creation and use of a standardized dataset for algorithm
verification.
Suggest test procedures that could be performed by radiation oncology
physicists to verify system operation and/or dose calculation accuracy.
Develop and implement tools inside the RTP system to assist in clinical
QA testing, including:
• batch mode calculation tests
• tools to input and use measured data
• analysis tools for calculation verification testing ~for example, tools in
Table 4-3!
• redundant checks of critical calculations
• tools to create phantom image datasets
• tools for testing validity and protections of data files and RTP software
• provide information so the user can carry out analysis of the
normalization—MU calculation process
• incorporate automated checks of geometric and dosimetric information
into the beam and plan normalization process into the system design13

their data transfer mechanism. We also recommend that vendors use ~and release information about! the DICOM image
format for all images, and that the data formats used for
input of data from water phantom systems also be released.
Other general use formats, such as the AAPM data exchange
format,60 should be maintained until the DICOM-RT convention becomes widely accepted.
A1.1.6. Communication with users. Vendors should keep
in touch with their users. Each vendor or system provider
should establish an error-reporting procedure. This procedure
should include not only a way for users to report errors to the
vendor but also a method for the vendor to rapidly inform all
users of errors, potentially confusing behavior of the planning system, or other information that the user should know.
Each vendor should also establish a procedure for the users
to obtain timely technical support. Both of these procedures
should be documented and should be explained thoroughly
to the users during initial RTP system training.
A1.1.7. Additional suggestions for vendors. In order to
design a good QA program for a software package, it is
helpful to have information about its design. Since the design
of the system is certainly well-known to the vendor, vendors
may assist the RTP QA efforts of their users by suggesting
sets of tests that could be performed and by providing tools
inside their RTP systems to help the users perform these
tests.
Table A1-3 lists a number of suggestions for vendors of
RTP systems to aid the users. Perhaps the most important of
these is the first, which recommends vendor assistance in
forming a users group with the express purpose of cooperating in performing clinical QA testing. As this report makes
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1815

clear, the scope of testing that should be performed is much
larger than any one particular clinic can manage, especially
in these days of strong financial pressure on hospitals and
health care in general. The only realistic way to carry out a
reasonably complete clinical QA program may be for users
to share information, divide up the required testing, and
share the results of those tests.

A1.2. User responsibilities
The user of the RTP system also bears a large amount of
the responsibility for the QA of the software system and its
use.
A1.2.1. Responsible physicist. It is essential that each
institution designate a responsible physicist to supervise and
manage all aspects of the RTP system installation, implementation, testing, and use at that site and to act as the interface for communication with the vendor. This person is a
key part of the QA program. The responsible physicist
should receive extra training so that he/she can fulfill this
responsibility.
A1.2.2. Documentation. We have all experienced the
situation where a software user says in desperation: ‘‘I guess
I’ll have to break down and read the documentation.’’ The
responsible physicist at each site is responsible for assuring
that all users have adequately read and understood the vendor’s documentation. The vendor’s documentation of course
needs its own quality assurance program, and cooperation
among the user’s group may be the best way to identify
missing or inadequate parts of the vendor’s documentation.
A1.2.3. User training. The above statement also applies
to training. The user is the one who is responsible for learning how to use the RTP system correctly. No amount of
vendor effort can overcome lack of effort on the user’s part.
A1.2.4. Software quality assurance. We stated previously that the vendor must provide the user with as much
information as possible about the software QA procedures in
order to convince the user of the correctness of the methods
used. The user must attempt to assimilate and use the provided information correctly.
A1.2.5. Version updates. Testing and implementation of
a new RTP system software update are an important part of
the physicist’s clinical responsibilities. As was stated in
Chap. A1.1.4, determining the testing required for a new
version of software is a difficult problem. The user must
analyze all the information about the update which is provided by the vendor and must prioritize the kinds of testing
which are suggested by that analysis. Changes to critical
parts of the system, such as monitor unit calculations, dose
calculations, machine and beam functionality, or changes in
the anatomical modeling or contour and image input features
may require detailed testing, as they may affect important
results from the system. Other changes may not require as
much testing, although the radiation oncology physicist must
always analyze how the RTP system is used in his/her particular clinic and make decisions about testing based on that
knowledge.

1816

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

A1.2.6. Use of data formats. User-developed software
that uses vendor-provided data formats to export or import
data into the RTP system must adhere to the same kinds of
QA testing and verification as the vendor’s software. It is the
user’s responsibility to carefully check all data transfer functions to insure that both sets of code and the interface between them actually work as intended.
A1.2.7. Education and communication with vendor. It is
the responsibility of the responsible physicist to assure that
all communication with the vendor and all documentation
and training provided by the vendor are appropriately used
by the users. Software bugs and other problems should be
promptly reported to the vendor, and vendor information
about errors or problem fixes should be quickly disseminated
to all appropriate staff in the clinic.

Appendix 2: Nondosimetric tests

The purpose of this appendix is to give some simple examples of test formats for those who have not created formal
test procedures for software-based tasks. These tests are not
intended to be generic tests ~independent of the RTP system!, rather, they are an example of the system-specific detail which must be incorporated into many of the test procedures which formal RTP system testing requires. Therefore,
any real testing of these particular subjects ~e.g., testing of
mechanical contour entry with a digitizer, Test 2.1.1. which
follows directly below! must be designed specifically for the
RTP system to be tested. Use these test procedures as an
example of how to design a specific series of tests, not as a
cookbook approach to the testing required at any site.
Test: 2.1.1
Subject: Mechanical Contour Entry with Digitizer
File: nondosim – 2 – 1 – 1.w
Author: xxxx
Last Change: 14 October 1993
Revisions:
23 March 1993 xxxxxx Initial Draft
14 October 1993 xxxxxx Procedure
1. Purpose
The purpose of this test is to verify the accuracy of the
electromagnetic digitizer for input of mechanical contours.
Several functions are tested simultaneously, including the
digitizer calibration, program use of the digitizer input data,
creation of multiple cuts, and the entry of z locations of those
cuts.
2. Related Tests
Tests 2.1.2 ~keyboard contour entry!, 2.4 ~surface generation!, 2.5 ~capping!, 2.7 ~contour extraction!, 4.2 ~bulk density matrix generation!, 6.2.2 ~measure option!, 7.2 ~BEV
anatomy projection!, 15.1–15.3 ~hardcopy output! are based
on the anatomy entered in this case.
3. Theory of Test
A number of simple manual contours, placed on three
cuts, are used to test the contour entry, surface generation,
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1816

and other features. Check coordinate accuracy using mouse/
cursor readout ~internal to system! and then also by measuring to-scale BEV plots and hardcopy plots of cuts.
4. Test Procedure
1. Create new case: Test – Manual – 1
2. Create structures External, Tumor, Bone
~density 2.0!, Lung ~density 0.2!. Use
bulk density.
3. Select digitizer entry for contours. Tape the
graph paper with all the contours/cuts onto
the digitizer, and enter all the contours without
moving the graph paper.
4. Axial cut 1. Cut z50.
External is rectangular contour, 30320 cm centered
about origin.
Bone is triangle, 5 cm sides, centered at ~25,5!.
Tumor is 737 square centered on origin.
Lung is 10-cm-diam circle centered at ~6,0!.
5. Axial cut 2. Cut z510.
External is square contour, ~25,10!, ~15,10!,
~15,210!, ~25,210!
Bone is triangle, 5 cm sides, centered at ~0,5!.
Tumor is 535 square centered on origin.
Lung is 6-cm-diam circle centered at ~6,0!.
6. Axial cut 3. Cut z528.
External is circular contour, 20-cm-diam centered
about origin.
Bone is triangle, 5 cm sides, centered at ~25,5!, but
inverted with respect to the triangles in cuts 1
and 2.
Change the input mode to keyboard.
Tumor is 10310 square centered on origin: ~25,5!,
~5,5!, ~5,25!, ~25,25!
Lung is 636 cm square centered at ~6,0!:
~3,3!,~9,3!,~9,23!,~3,23!
7. Use reference point editor to move a point to
each defined point on each contour, and read
out the slice and reference coordinates of
all line end points. Verify the diameter of the
circles.
8. Save the anatomy. Print out the anatomy and
verify the coordinates of the contours, and the
z positions of the cuts.
5. Test Results and Evaluation
Verification of input is performed qualitatively using
mouse/cursor editing of reference point position to verify
structure end points. Quantitative check is documented using
the anatomy file output. If end point locations of structures
made with straight lines are more than 2 mm incorrect, reenter the contour and verify that error is not just poor digitizer technique.
6. Analysis and Summary
Summary should automatically compare anatomy file coordinates and expected coordinates. If done by hand, document points which are more than 1 mm incorrect.

1817

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

Test: 2.4.
Subject: Surface Generation
File: nondosim – 2 – 4.w
Author: xxxxx
Last Change: 23 March 1993
Revisions:
19 January 1993 xxxxxx Initial Draft
23 March 1993 xxxxx Change capping methods
1. Purpose
The purpose of this test is to verify the accuracy of the
general behavior of the surface generation algorithm. This
test is not designed to test the algorithm for detailed behavior, such as complex contour shapes, etc. This test also
checks capping ~2.5!, orthogonal cut generation ~2.11!, and
contour extraction ~2.7!.
2. Related Tests
Tests 2.1.1 ~digitizer contour entry!, 2.1.2 ~keyboard contour entry!, 2.4 ~surface generation!, 2.5 ~capping!, 2.7 ~contour extraction!, 2.11 ~creation of orthogonal cuts!, 4.2 ~bulk
density matrix generation!, 6.2.2 ~measure option!, 7.2 ~BEV
anatomy projection!, 15.1–15.3 ~hardcopy output! are based
on the anatomy entered in this case.
3. Theory of Test
Generation of the surface from a number of simple contours is tested. 3D views are used for qualitative inspection
of the surface. Extraction of contours from the surfaces are
used for quantitative checks.
4. Test Procedure
1. Enter case: Test – Manual – 1
2. Check the surface creation attributes of each
structure:
External5CLOSE at 5 cm.
Bone5CAP at 2 cm.
Tumor5top: EXTEND at 2 cm. Bottom: Open.
Lung5CAP at 4 cm.
3. Make all surfaces.
4. Make views with AP, Lateral, and other
projections as needed to qualitatively inspect all
structures for general agreement with
desired structure attributes.
5. Create orthogonal planes to allow inspection
of structures: coronal at origin, sagittal at
origin, coronal at cut coordinate Y 515
~through bone!.
6. Cut all contours onto all new cuts.
7. Save and print out the anatomy file. Verify
cut coordinates of the contours, and the z
positions of the cuts.
8. Review location of new cuts using 3D views
from AP, lateral, and other projections to
qualitatively inspect the cuts and structure
contours. Check capping for each structure.
9. Inspect the saved anatomy file. Verify cut to
dataset transforms of orthogonal cuts and z
of the cuts.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1817

10. In the anatomy file, verify the extracted
contours on the orthogonal cuts.
5. Test Results and Evaluation
Verification of input is performed qualitatively using
mouse/cursor editing of reference point position to verify
structure endpoints. Quantitative checks are documented using anatomy file output.
6. Analysis and Summary
Summary should automatically compare anatomy file coordinates and expected coordinates. If done by hand, document points which are more than 1 mm incorrect and inspect
3D views for reasons.
Test: 4.2.
Subject: Bulk Density Generation
File: nondosim – 4 – 2.w
Author: xxxx
Last Change: 23 March 1993
Revisions:
23 March 1993 xxxxxxxxx Initial Draft
1. Purpose
The purpose of this test is to verify the accuracy of the
bulk density matrix generation.
2. Related Tests
Tests 2.1.1 ~digitizer contour entry!, 2.1.2 ~keyboard contour entry!, 2.4 ~surface generation!, 2.5 ~capping!, 2.7 ~contour extraction!, 2.11 ~creation of orthogonal cuts!, 4.2 ~bulk
density matrix generation!, 6.2.2 ~measure option!, 7.2 ~BEV
anatomy projection!, 15.1–15.3 ~hardcopy output! are based
on the anatomy entered in this case.
3. Theory of Test
Generation of the bulk densities from simple manual contours is checked by ~1! using the density cursor utility, ~2!
using grayscale display of images obtained the density files.
4. Test Procedure
1. Enter case: Test – Manual – 1
2. Check the surface creation attributes of each
structure:
External5CLOSE at 5 cm.
Bone5CAP at 2 cm.
Tumor5top: EXTEND at 2 cm. Bottom: Open.
Lung5CAP at 4 cm.
3. Generate the surfaces.
4. Go to the external beam module, make an
isocentric 20320 beam, with a 180 degree
~AP! gantry angle.
5. Do a simple dose calculation to force the
system to generate the density matrix.
6. Use the depth/density readout in the utilities
menu to verify the densities inside the
inhomogeneities on all cuts.

1818

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

7. Return to Anatomy Definition module, and
change the image displayed for each of the
cuts so that the correct density matrix image is
displayed. Verify by eye and use of grayscale
window/level that the density matrix
uniformly covers the correct areas with
appropriate densities.
5. Test Results and Evaluation
The density values displayed in the density measurement
option depend on the assigned density as well as the CT
number to electron density lookups which are used, so this
translation must be documented for the assigned densities.
One way to document the checks is to use the hardcopy
output from the plan, and to note in pencil on the plot the
verified points and densities.
6. Analysis and Summary
Summarize and investigate any unexpected behavior in
the density results.
Test: 7.2.
Subject: BEV Anatomy Projection
File: nondosim – 7 – 2.w
Author: xxxx
Last Change: 23 March 1993
Revisions:
23 March 1993 xxxxxx Initial Draft
1. Purpose
The purpose of this test is to verify the accuracy of BEV
projections of anatomy.
2. Related Tests
Tests 2.1.1 ~digitizer contour entry!, 2.1.2 ~keyboard contour entry!, 2.4 ~surface generation!, 2.5 ~capping!, 2.7 ~contour extraction!, 2.11 ~creation of orthogonal cuts!, 4.2 ~bulk
density matrix generation!, 6.2.2 ~measure option!, 7.2 ~BEV
anatomy projection!, 15.1–15.3 ~hardcopy output! are based
on the anatomy entered in this case.
3. Theory of Test
This test uses the anatomy defined in case
TEST – MANUAL – 1 ~test 2.4! to perform some basic checks
of the BEV projection algorithm.
4. Test Procedure
1. Enter case: Test – Manual – 1
2. Check the surface creation attributes of each
structure:
External5CLOSE at 5 cm.
Bone5CAP at 2 cm.
Tumor5top: EXTEND at 2 cm. Bottom: Open.
Lung5CAP at 4 cm.
3. Create the following beams:
Beam 1: Isocenter at origin. 20320, gantry 180
~AP!.
Beam 2: Copy beam 1, then set SSD580.
Beam 3: Copy beam 1, then set z5110, and field
size to 20340.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1818

4.

5.
6.
7.

Beam 4: Copy beam 1, then set gantry to 90
degrees.
Do a simple dose calculation of some type so
that valid doses exist so a hardcopy print out
is valid.
Create a hardcopy printout of the plan,
including BEVs and plots for each cut.
Compare the BEV displays ~on the graphics
screen! to the hardcopy BEV plots.
Quantitatively compare the hardcopy BEV
plots to the calculated position of each of
the contour positions.

5. Test Results and Evaluation
Qualitative agreement between BEV displays and hardcopy are checked by eye. In addition, the gradicule on the
BEV plot can be used to verify the correct location of various points on the contours.
6. Analysis and Summary
Summarize and investigate any unexpected behavior in
the BEV contour locations.
Test: 15.1–15.3
Subject: Hardcopy Output Checks
File: nondosim – 15 – 1.w
Author: xxxxxx
Last Change: 23 March 1993
Revisions:
23 March 1993 xxxxxx Initial Draft
1. Purpose
The purpose of this test is to verify the consistency of the
hardcopy output with the data as displayed inside the system.
2. Related Tests
Tests 2.1.1 ~digitizer contour entry!, 2.1.2 ~keyboard contour entry!, 2.4 ~surface generation!, 2.5 ~capping!, 2.7 ~contour extraction!, 2.11 ~creation of orthogonal cuts!, 4.2 ~bulk
density matrix generation!, 6.2.2 ~measure option!, 7.2 ~BEV
anatomy projection!, 15.1–15.3 ~hardcopy output! are based
on the anatomy entered in this case.
3. Theory of Test
This test uses the anatomy defined in case
TEST – MANUAL – 1 ~test 2.4!, and the beams from plan 2 to
perform some basic checks of the hardcopy output functionality.
4. Test Procedure
1. Enter case Test – Manual – 1 for external beam
planning.
2. Copy the original plan 1 ~as in test 7.2! to
plan 2. Delete beams 2–4. Then copy
beam 1 to beam 2, and change the gantry
angle to 90 degrees.
3. Add the following calc points: ~0,0,0!,
~28,0,0!, ~28,0,28!, ~0,5,0!, ~0,5,10!.

1819

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

4. Set calc grid to default ~contour! size with
grid 0.5 cm, normalize plan to isocenter,
giving 100% to the isodose reference point.
Perform calculation for all cuts.
5. Display isodose lines from 10 to 190 by 10s
for all cuts.
6. Create hardcopy output for all cuts.
7. Display isodose curves, use hardcopy display
option to check all the planning system output
information against the hardcopy printout,
and against the known ~or at least desired!
information inside the system.

1819
TABLE A3-2. Depth Dose Data
FDDs at standard SSD FDD curves for a number of open field sizes at a
standard SSD:
• SSD: 90 cm
• Norm depth: 10 cm
• Field sizes: 333, 434, 535, 636, 737,
838,10310, 12312, 14314, 17317, 20320,
25325, 30330, 35335, 40340
• Rectangular fields for various equivalent squares

5. Test Results and Evaluation
Document any differences between displayed values,
hardcopy values, and known plan parameters.

FDDs at other SSDs

FDD tables at other SSDs that cover the clinical
range used:
• SSDs: 80 and 110 cm
• Field sizes: 535, 10310, 20320, 30330

TPR, TMR

TPR or TMR for a number of field sizes and
depths. Since these measurements are quite time
intensive, limit to:
• Field sizes: 535, 10310, 20320, 30330, and
40340
• Depths: nominal d max, 5, 10, and 20 cm
• Norm Point: 10310, d510 cm
• For all other field sizes, calculate TPR/TMR from
FDD and verify calculation

6. Analysis and Summary
Summarize and investigate any unexpected behavior in
the output.

Appendix 3: Photon dose calculation commissioning

This photon dose calculation test plan is suggested as an
example of one way to organize the bulk of the testing associated with clinical commissioning of photon beam calculations. The tests are laid out according to test situations ~e.g.,
open fields!, rather than grouped by type such as algorithm
tests or clinical verification tests. However, Table A3-1 gives
a summary of the types of check made for each test situation.
The body of this appendix gives descriptions of the kinds of
tests which might be required for commissioning for each
test situation.
This test plan is meant only as an example and not a
prescription of the testing required. The test plan for a given
institution should be based on that institution’s particular requirements and should be developed only after the radiation
oncology physicist carefully evaluates the importance of
each class of experiments and prioritizes the commissioning
procedures so that the clinically most important checks are
performed first.

TABLE A3-1. Photon Commissioning Test Situations

Situation

Data Algorithm Calculation
Input Verification Verification

Open square fields
Rectangular fields
SSD variations
External shape variations
Fields with wedges
Shaped blocked fields
MLC-shaped fields
Asymmetric jaw fields
Inhomogeneities
Compensators
Clinical tests

Y
Y
M
M
Y
-

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
-

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y5Yes, M5Maybe
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

Beam Model
Parameter
Checks
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

A3.1. Depth dose
One of the most critical and basic tests of any dose calculation algorithm is the ability to accurately predict the
depth dose for standard open field situations. Here, calculations of the fractional depth dose ~FDD! and tissue phantom
ratio/tissue maximum ratio ~TPR/TMR! are compared
against measured data, as in Table A3-2.
TABLE A3-3. Output Factors
Phantom Scatter Factor (Sp)

These data are typically obtained at the
same field sizes used for the standard FDD
data:
• SSD: isocentric
• Norm pt: 10310, at 10 cm depth

Collimator Scatter Factor (Sc) These data are typically obtained at the
same field sizes used for the standard FDD
data:
• SSD: isocentric
• Norm pt: 10310, at 10 cm depth
Wedge factors

As required and/or used by the planning
system.
• SSD: isocentric
• Norm pt: 10310, at 10 cm depth
• Wedge factors at various field sizes
~535, 10310, 20320, max!

Tray factors

As required and/or used by the planning
system.
• SSD: isocentric
• Norm pt: 10310, at 10 cm depth

Other factors

As required and/or used by the planning
system.
• SSD: isocentric
• Norm pt: 10310, at 10 cm depth

1820

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

TABLE A3-4. Open Field Data
Square fields, standard SSD

Square fields, extended SSD

Rectangular fields

1820
TABLE A3-6. Wedges

2-D dose distributions at standard SSD:
• Field sizes for axial planes: 333, 535,
10310, 20320, 30330, 40340
• Field sizes for sagittal planes: 535,
20320, 40340
2-D dose distributions:
• SSDs: 90 and 110 cm
• Field sizes: 535, 10310, 20320,
30330
The behavior of the depth dose for
rectangular fields should be tested. Check at
least that the equivalent square is
reproduced. For example, use a series of
rectangular fields with equivalent square
equal to 6 and 12 cm2.

Input data

The minimum set of input data must include 2-D isodose distributions in the axial and sagittal planes for
the largest wedged field size.

Depth dose

Wedged field depth dose curves must be verified as a
function of field size, SSD, etc., for each wedge.
• 535, 10310, 20320, max field size, at least.

Field size checks

2-D isodose distributions:
• Axial plane: 535, 10310, 20320, max field size
• Sagittal plane: 10310, max field size
• Coronal planes at d5d max, d510, d520 cm ~or full
3-D distribution!: 10310, max field size

Extended SSDs

Axial 2-D isodose distributions:
• SSDs: 80 and 110 cm
• Field sizes: 10310, 20320

Asymmetric and
shaped fields

Wedged asymmetric and/or shaped fields also should
be verified, at least at a standard SSD.

A3.2. Output factors
Correct use of output factors is essential for extracting
monitor units from the RTP system. Table A3-3 describes
some of the necessary checks of the various required output
factors, in which calculated results should be compared
against the measured data.

A3.4. Patient shape effects
The effect of the shape of the patient is studied with
simple phantom studies in which the specific effects caused
by the shape differences are easy to study ~Table A3-5!.

A3.5. Wedges
A3.3. Open field data
The basic starting condition for any dose calculation modeling and/or verification is open fields. Table A3-4 lists open
field checks which can be made with 2D isodose curves and
charts, or with full 3D comparisons if the data and the analysis tools are available.

Verify dose calculations using measurements for each
physical ~or dynamic! wedge and each photon beam ~Table
A3-6!. If a 3D dose matrix is calculated, the dose distribution
must be checked ~at a minimum! in both the axial and sagittal planes. For all situations, the phantom is placed at a
standard SSD and all measurements are normalized at a
specified depth, usually isocenter. Axial and sagittal isodose
measurements are made in planes containing the central axis.
Further extended SSD calculations should also be verified.

TABLE A3-5. Patient Shape Effects

A3.6. Blocks

Oblique incidence

Block tests are listed in Table A3-7. Blocked field dose
calculations are often used in two ways in a RTP system: ~1!

Surface irregularity

Tangential geometry

Square phantom

The oblique incidence data should be obtained at
the largest angle possible. A 30330 field at 30
degree oblique incidence may be barely possible in
some water tanks, and a 10310 field at a 40 degree
oblique angle may also work.
Use a step phantom to look at the effects of non-flat
surface contours using a 30330 field incident on a
large ~5 cm! step in the surface of the phantom.
Repeat the calculation with the beam displaced
laterally by half of the dose grid spacing to assess
effect of dose grid size.
Measure dose delivered to axial plane for square
phantom by 10320 tangential fields. Normalize the
MU so absolute dose at isocenter is known.
Compare isodose lines.
20320 or 25325 beam normal to a large square
phantom. Compare measurements with beam
centered on phantom and with beam off-center and
flashing off one edge.

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

TABLE A3-7. Blocks
Input data

• 15315 blocked to 4315
• 30330 blocked to 20320, 10310, 535
• 30330 with island blocks of size 20320,
10310, 535

SSD checks

30330 blocked to 10310 at SSD of 80 and 110
cm

Conformal blocks

Oval, C and squiggle shapes ~shown in Fig. A3-1!.

Transmission blocks

10310 island block in 30330 field, but with calc’d
primary transmission through island block of 10%,
25%, 50%. Also do 100% transmission calculation.

Clinical checks

• Mantle field blocks
• Spinal cord block

1821

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

TABLE A3-8. MLC

1821
TABLE A3-9. Asymmetric Field Tests

Input data

Same as that for conventional blocks.

Standard shapes

• Circular field (r53 cm).
• Diagonal Edge test: 15, 30, 45, and 60 degrees to
MLC edges

SSD checks

Circle shape at SSD 80 cm and 110 cm.

Conformal shapes

Oval, C and squiggle shapes ~shown in Fig. A3-1!.

Leaf transmission

Jaws open, leaves closed to small field (535).
Deliver.1000 cGy or so, so leaf transmission can be
measured.

Clinical checks

• Mantle field block or other large commonly-treated
MLC shape
• Spinal cord block
• Others

Jaw
X1

Jaw
X2

Jaw
Y1

Jaw
Y2

5
0
25
210
5
5
5
0
25
210
210
210
210

5
10
15
20
5
5
5
10
15
20
20
20
20

5
5
5
5
0
25
210
210
210
210
210
210
210

5
5
5
5
10
15
20
20
20
20
20
20
20

Other
W45
Block
MLC
shape

A3.8. Asymmetric fields
to predict the relative dose distribution ~i.e., isodose curves!;
and ~2! to calculate the change in the dose to the plan normalization point due to the blocking. In order to perform
dose verification checks of both features simultaneously, the
data for each test case should be normalized to the value
obtained at the normalization point without the block ~but
including the tray!, so that the dose at the normalization
point reflects the effect of the block. These normalization
conditions thus require that ion chamber normalization measurements be made for each blocked field case, with and
without the block in place ~but including the tray!, so that the
absolute dose difference due to the blocks is known. Normalize the dose at a fixed depth beyond d max so that surface
contamination effects are minimized. Each case is performed
at a standard SSD unless otherwise noted. For all checks,
measure axial and sagittal dose distributions in the plane
containing the central axis, and coronal dose distributions at
depths of d max , 10, and 20 cm.

A3.7. Multileaf collimator
Testing of the multileaf collimator ~Table A3-8! is similar
in principle to the verification checks used for blocked fields.

These tests check asymmetric use of MLC and/or jaws,
including use with wedges and blocks/MLC ~Table A3-9!.
One way to approach this is to use a 10310 field which is
scanned from the center of the field to one of the corners of
the collimator ~as listed below!. A larger field could also be
checked in a similar manner.
All measurements are taken at a standard SSD and are
normalized to the central-axis value at a specified depth for a
10310 symmetric field. Field directions are based on the
IEC standard values of X1 and X2 for the normally transverse direction and Y 1 and Y 2 for the normally longitudinal
collimator motions. The minimum testing required for asymmetric fields is quite dependent on the sophistication of the
dose calculation algorithm used for these fields. In some algorithms, testing for asymmetric fields should include most
of Tables A3-3, A3-4, and A3-6.

A3.9. Density corrections
The purpose of these tests is to validate the algorithm for
density corrections, so the tests must be based on the nature
of the correction method used. For example, if the algorithm
uses a simple equivalent path length approach, the verifica-

FIG. A3-1. MLC Shapes.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1822

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1822

TABLE A3-10. Density Corrections

TABLE A3-12. Anthropomorphic Phantom

Algorithm verification tests

Mantle field

Verify dose in coronal midline plane of phantom using TLD or film.

Tangential breast fields

Include lung. Verify dose in axial plane.

3-field non-coplanar plan

Verify dose in axial, sagittal, and/or coronal
planes.

Benchmark data

Square phantoms with various inhomogeneities are used. These tests are verifications that the algorithm is working correctly
and have nothing to do with analysis of
clinical results.
To document the accuracy of the correction
method in a number of basic but clinically
relevant geometries, the dataset measured
and reported by Rice61 is used. Check
results with all 4 geometries included in the
Rice dataset, with both 4 and 15 MV.
Further benchmark data, especially 2-D and
3-D data for various geometries, are
needed.

2-D and 3-D inhomogeneity
checks

Measure depth dose and profiles for layer,
partial layer, complex 2-D and 3-D
inhomogeneity geometries. These tests can
be performed on benchmark data, if
available, but the beam definition/
parameterization for the beam used must be
carefully completed in the same fashion that
the user’s clinical beams are fit.

tion of the algorithm can be performed with very simple 1D
phantom tests. More complicated algorithms will require
more complicated tests.
In addition, however, it is important to document the accuracy of the calculational algorithm with a series of geometries that are more clinically relevant. The basis of the current correction tests ~Table A3-10! is the benchmark set of
inhomogeneity correction measurements made by Rice
et al.61 These data are generally limited to measurements
along the central axis of the beam only, with several different
geometries and two different beam qualities having been
tested. When more general 2D and 3D inhomogeneity data
are available, those test cases should also be included in this
testing.

formed ~Table A3-11!. Missing tissue compensation uses
only the patient shape to create the compensator for each
field, then creates in the anatomical model a flat surface for
dose calculations which approximates the expected behavior
of the compensator. Dose compensation is more complex, as
the algorithm uses calculated dose distributions and not just
patient shape to design the compensator. Dose compensation
algorithms may also optimize dose for several beams at the
same time.

A3.11. Anthropomorphic phantoms
Several anthropomorphic phantom tests can be used for a
final complete test of the entire calculation algorithm ~Table
A3-12!. These test cases should be similar to treatment techniques used in the clinic.
Appendix 4: Electron dose calculation commissioning

In this appendix, as in Appendix 3 for photon beams, we
give an example test plan which might apply to electron
beam dose calculation commissioning. Tests include both algorithm verification and commissioning of individual beams.
With planning, the same test can often be used to serve both
purposes. Determination of exactly what tests are required
will depend on careful analysis of the specific algorithm~s!
involved, the kinds of electron beams and their energies, and
how these beams are used in that particular clinic.

A4.1. Depth dose and open fields

A3.10. Compensators

Data are obtained at the standard treatment distance ~typically SSD5100 cm!. Table A4-1 lists basic fractional depth
dose ~FDD! and profile/2D dose distribution comparisons for

The kinds of tests which are used for compensators depends a great deal on the kind of compensation that is per-

TABLE A4-1. Open Fields
FDD on Cx

FDD curves for each energy for a number of field
sizes at a standard SSD.
• SSD: 100 cm
• Norm depth: d max
• Field sizes: 434, 636, 10310, 15315,
20320, 25325

Profiles/2-D dose
distribution

2-D isodose distributions in the axial plane for each
energy.
• SSD: 100 cm
• Field sizes: 434, 636, 10310, 15315,
20320, 25325

Coronal or 3-D data

For 3-D algorithms, 3-D verification checks should
be performed. Measure multiple coronal plane dose
distributions or generate 3-D distributions.

TABLE A3-11. Compensators
Missing tissue
compensation

Only a few simple phantom tests are needed:
• Lateral Head/Neck field
• Anterior Mantle field with lung blocks

Dose compensation

Many different geometries of patient and
compensator need to be checked, particularly if
density corrections are used. The complexity of the
algorithm should be the main guide in designing
the tests. Typical geometries include:
• Lateral Head/Neck field
• Anterior Mantle field with lung blocks
• Non-coplanar brain plan, 3 fields
• Non-axial abdomen plan, 3 fields

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1823

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1823

TABLE A4-2. Output Factors

TABLE A4-3. Extended Distance

Output factor

Typically obtained at same field sizes used for standard FDD data:
• SSD: 100 cm
• Norm pt: 15315, at d max .

FDD on Cx

FDD curves are measured for each energy for a subset
of field sizes at various SSDs.
• SSD: 110 cm, others used clinically
• Norm depth: d max
• Field sizes: 636, 15315, 25325

Effective source
distance ~ESD!

Measure output as a function of distance to determine
effective source distance to use for inverse square law
corrections.

Profiles/2-D dose
distribution

Output for shaped
fields

Many clinics determine output factors for a set of
standard shaped fields.

2-D isodose distributions in axial plane for each
energy.
• SSDs: 110 and others used clinically
• Field sizes: 636, 15315, 25325.

Coronal or 3-D
data

For 3-D algorithms, 3-D verification checks should be
performed. Measure multiple coronal plane dose
distributions or generate 3-D distributions.

standard field sizes which are chosen to agree with the various applicator sizes.

A4.2. Output factors
Correct use of output factors is essential for extracting
monitor units from the RTP system. If the RTP system supports monitor unit calculations then a number of factors relevant to the monitor unit calculation must be evaluated
~Table A4-2!.

A4.3. Extended distance
Open field behavior at several SSDs may need to be verified if these distances are used for clinical treatments ~Table
A4-3!.

A4.4. Shaped fields
Measurements for a series of shaped fields are necessary
for systems in which effects of blocking are taken into account, as listed in Table A4-4.

A4.5. ECWG test cases
A comprehensive set of test cases has been described by
the Electron Contract Working Group ~ECWG!.62 This
dataset was designed to be used for comparison of various

algorithms in situations illustrating both standard measurement geometries and more complicated clinical geometries.
Although not designed to cover every possible circumstance,
this dataset does address most of the normally used clinical
geometries for electron beam treatment. All test cases are
based on two electron energies ~9 and 20 MeV! obtained
from the Varian CLinac 1800 linear accelerator. The specific
data measured for each test case were determined by the
ECWG. The following general guidelines for measurements
were used for each test case: ~1! one or more depth dose
curves; ~2! five or more profiles for each transverse plane
~often both radial and axial transverse planes!; ~3! beam’s
eye view ~BEV! plane dose measurements using film in solid
water. The geometry for each of the 28 ECWG experiments
has been described,62 and the specific dose measurement
planes which were used for each of the experiments are listed
~Table A4-5!. This benchmark dataset, which is available to
the community ~see Ref. 62!, is a good choice for basic algorithm verification testing.
Appendix 5: Brachytherapy dose calculation
commissioning

This test plan is suggested as an example of one way to
organize the testing associated with clinical commissioning

TABLE A4-4. Shaped Fields

Shape

Applicator

SSD

FDD
(x,y)

2D
planes

25325

stnd

Cx

Yes

636

stnd

Cx

y50
x50
y50

636

stnd110

Cx

y50

Yes

20320

stnd

Cx

y50

Yes

4

max circle,
r512 cm
circle,
r52 cm
circle,
r52 cm
Oval
8320
‘‘C’’ shape

25325

stnd

Cx

Yes

5

Squiggle shape

25325

stnd

Cx

6

ECWG House
Block

15315

stnd

~0,3!
(0,23)

y50
x50
y50
x50
y53
y523
x50

Expt #
1
2
2 – S110
3

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

BEV,3D

Yes

Yes
Yes

1824

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1824

TABLE A4-5. ECWG Tests
1. Basic Standard Geometry
Tests

Experiments 1–4 are standard baseline experiments: 636 and 15315 field sizes using an SSD5100 cm. Additional
experiments 5–8 consisted of the same field sizes and energies at an SSD of 110 cm. These eight experiments illustrate the
basic fit between the calculated and measured dose.
ECWG 1-1
9 MeV 15315
100 SSD
ECWG 2-1
9 MeV 636
100 SSD
ECWG 3-1
20 MeV 15315
100 SSD
ECWG 4-1
20 MeV 636
100 SSD
ECWG 5-2
9 MeV 15315
110 SSD
ECWG 6-2
9 MeV 636
110 SSD
ECWG 7-2
20 MeV 15315
110 SSD
ECWG 8-2
20 MeV 636
110 SSD

2. Field Shaping

Experiments 9–12 investigate dose from various shaped fields.
ECWG 9-3
9 MeV
ECWG 10-3
20 MeV
ECWG 11-4
9 MeV
ECWG 12-4
20 MeV

3. Cranio-Spinal Treatment
Fields

15315 blocked to 3312
15315 blocked to 3312
House Block
House Block

Experiment 13 simulates cranio-spinal treatments.
ECWG 13-5

20 MeV

25325 Blocked to 5330 Diagonal at
110 SSD

4. Small Eye Blocks

Experiment 14 tests a small circular radiation field (d55 cm) with a d51 cm eye block, as is often used in treatment of the
orbit.
ECWG 14-6
20 MeV
5 cm Diam. Field with Eyeblock

5. Oblique Incidence and
Irregular Patient Surfaces

Experiments 15–20 check the behavior in non-perpendicular situations: oblique incidence, a step phantom, and a ‘‘nose’’
phantom.
ECWG 15-7
9 MeV Oblique Incidence.
ECWG 16-7
20 MeV Oblique Incidence.
ECWG 17-8
9 MeV Step Phantom.
ECWG 18-8
20 MeV Step Phantom.
ECWG 19-9
9 MeV Nose Simulation.
ECWG 20-9
20 MeV Nose Simulation.

6. Heterogeneous Phantoms

A slab inhomogeneity ~chest wall cases! is tested in Experiments 21–22. A long thin air inhomogeneity ~neck or sinus! is
tested in Experiments 23–24. A similar bone inhomogeneity ~rib, facial bones! is tested in Experiments 25–26. A 3-D
~L-shaped! bone inhomogeneity is studied in Experiments 27–28.
ECWG 21-10
9 MeV Slab Inhomogeneity.
ECWG 22-11
20 MeV 1/2 Slab Inhomogeneity.
ECWG 23-12
9 MeV Linear Bone Inhomogeneity.
ECWG 24-12
20 MeV Linear Bone Inhomogeneity.
ECWG 25-13
9 MeV Linear Air Inhomogeneity.
ECWG 26-13
20 MeV Linear Air Inhomogeneity.
ECWG 27-14
9 MeV L-Shaped Bone Inhomogeneity.
ECWG 28-14
20 MeV L-Shaped Bone Inhomogeneity.

of brachytherapy dose beam calculations. This proposal covers the most typical brachytherapy sources and procedures
which are used. For those clinics that perform more complex
or specialized procedures, or those that use new and/or different source types, additional tests will be required. The
general types of tests recommended for commissioning various brachytherapy sources are listed in Table A5-1.
Brachytherapy commissioning tests are divided into ~1!
source entry methods; ~2! source library contents; ~3! source
strength and decay; ~4! single source dose calculation tests;
~5! multiple source calculation tests; and ~6! miscellaneous
tests.

A5.1. Source entry methods
The methods used to enter sources into the RTP system
must be tested carefully. Some examples are listed in Table
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

A5-2. Note that handling changes in source location inside
the patient, as a function of time, is clearly beyond the scope
of the present report.

A5.2. Source library
Correct implementation of sources in the library which
contains the inventory of sources known to the RTP system
is critical to accurate brachytherapy planning and dose calculations. This is a critical issue both for initial commissioning, and for routine QA checks:
• During commissioning, and also in later checks, each
property or attribute described for each source in the
source library should be verified.

1825

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1825

TABLE A5-1. General Brachytherapy Dose Calculation Commissioning Tests
137

Test

Cs

192

125

I

Others

Ir

Source entry tests

Orthogonal film linear
source entry

Orthogonal film seed entry,
seed strings

Orthogonal film seed entry,
random seeds

Stereo film seed entry,
CT source and seed entry,
3-film seed entry methods

Source library description

Various linear
source configurations

Must maintain inventory
for ‘‘transient’’ seeds

Must maintain inventory
for ‘‘transient’’ seeds

Specialized inventory
procedures may be required

Source strength 1 decay

Y

Y

Y

Y

Single source tests

Y

Y

Y

Y

2-plane breast boost

volumetric implant

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Low-Dose Rate Afterloader

Hi-Dose Rate Afterloader

• Stereotactic brain implant
• Eye Plaque
• Planned Prostate volume implants

Others

Multiple source implant tests Gyn, Fletcher-Suit Applicator
Mixed source type tests
Miscellaneous

Y5Yes

• Source information should be checked not only in the
library itself but also in calculated dose distributions.
• Compatibility of algorithm and underlying dataset with
the clinical application should be assessed ~e.g., conTABLE A5-2. Source Entry Methods
Orthogonal films

• Generate sample source distributions, project
them onto two films ~different Source-Film Distances!, enter sources with digitizer.
• Make some random misidentifications of sources
on the two films to make sure the system responds to this issue correctly.
• Set the magnification factor incorrectly to check
this functionality.
• Misalign sources to determine how that system
handles possible misalignment problems.

sider the appropriateness of isotropic point source approximations, applicator shielding corrections, whether
an anisotropy constant should be used, whether special
protocols require special data, etc.!.
• Consider the compatibility of source strength quantities,
units and conversion factors with vendor and institutional calibration practices.
• Table A5-3 lists some of the relevant information that
should be checked inside the source library.

A5.3. Source strength and decay
Since nearly all brachytherapy dose calculations are used
in an absolute dose or dose rate mode ~typically as total dose
delivered, or dose/hour!, the verification of the components
of the calculation which directly affect the absolute dose are
critical. Many older RTP systems will use factors such as

Stereo shift films

Use same kinds of tests as for orthogonal films.

Keyboard entry

Verify keyboard entry.

TABLE A5-3. Source Library Information

CT-based source
localization

If CT-based brachytherapy source localization is
available and will be used clinically, then this
method must be tested. Complete tests may require
CT scans of a phantom implanted with dummy
seeds in known positions to ensure that CT artifacts
or other problems do not interfere with the source
identification and localization.

Radionuclide

Active length

Source type

Overall length

Model number/vendor

Capsule thickness

Source strength

Capsule composition

Modern RTP systems for high and low-dose
afterloader machines often have algorithms which
reconstruct the trajectory~s! of the catheter~s! used
for the afterloaded sources. These algorithms
deserve separate and careful verification checks.

Source strength units

Filtration

Name

Algorithm type

Coding

Algorithm parameters

If CT-based stereotactic brachytherapy treatment is
available and will be used clinically, then this
process must be carefully tested. Numerous issues
must be considered, including slice thickness and
separation, partial volume effects, etc.

Availability

Anisotropy correction

Decay constant

Other features

Catheter Trajectory
Geometry

Stereotactic implants

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

Half life

1826

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

1826

TABLE A5-4. Source Strength, Activity, and Decay

TABLE A5-5. Brachytherapy Dose Calculation Issues

Source strength
specification

For each source and source type, check specification of source strength:
• Reference air-kerma rate
• Air kerma strength
• Apparent activity ~mCi!
• Apparent activity ~MBq!
• Equivalent mass of radium in mg Ra Eq

Confirmation of dose model used for each type of source. Point sources,
line sources, line source models representing end effects, anisotropy, etc.,
are all used.

Verify all conversions between source strength
specifications of source suppliers and the RTP
system. Must be done for each source type
individually.

Verification checks of the source library ~see section A5.2!.
Comparison of single point, 2-D and 3-D dose distributions with hand
calculations for a single source, for each source type in the source library.

Specification of decay
constants, dose
constants, and
related parameters

For each source type, check specification of decay
constant, half life, average life, dose constants, and
other related parameters.

Comparison of point, 2-D and 3-D dose distributions with hand
calculations for multiple source configurations, for at least one source
type.

Source strength decay

Verify that source strength decay calculations work
correctly, for each source-type individually.
Determine at what time during the implant ~e.g.,
beginning, midpoint! the source strength is
specified.

Source strength
conversions

Source inventory
functionality

Absolute dose
and dose rate

Verify correct functioning of source library or
inventory of the RTP system:
• Does decay work correctly for inventory sources?
• How are sources which are not typically
maintained in inventory, but are ordered specially
for each case ~Iridium, Iodine, others! handled?
Use a series of plans, source strengths, etc., to
verify that all dose output methods are in
agreement. Consider total dose, initial dose rate,
average dose rate at time of implant, permanent
implant total dose, and any other methods of dose
display/specification which are available.

activity and exposure rate constant, while the AAPM Task
Group 43 recommendation for the dose calculation formalism for small seeds and other point sources41 depends on air
kerma strength and dose rate constant. Needle and tube
sources typically are often handled in a different way, with
rectangular lookup tables and/or Sievert integral formalisms.
Therefore, one must carefully understand the methodology
used in the calculation, for each source, to relate source
strength specified by supplier to that specified in the RTP
system. Some issues are listed in Table A5-4.

A5.4. Single source dose calculations
For brachytherapy, it is useful to separately consider the
algorithm verification and clinical commissioning tests
which should be used:
• Each dose calculation algorithm used should be
checked against independent computer calculations or
exact or approximate manual calculations across the expected clinical range of use.
• In addition, each implementation of an algorithm for a
specific source type should be checked, ideally against
published reference data ~Monte Carlo or measured
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

Confirmation of dose model input data ~from publications! for each type
of source. The basic literature datasets selected for use and comparisons
should be identified.

Checks of any anisotropy or orientation-dependent features of the dose
distribution for each type of source. If anisotropy is being neglected, it
should be so noted in the dose distribution documentation.
Confirmation of absolute dose or dose rate values with changes in activity,
decay constant, units for source strength, dose specification ~e.g., dose rate
or total dose!.
Any applicator shielding effects included or neglected should be explained
and documented.
Verify correct behavior of dose calculations, sometimes including tissue
multiple scattering and attenuation, at selected distances from the source.

data! if available, or against manual approximations if
the other data are not available. Note that both algorithm verification and calculation verification checks are
occurring here. If there is lack of good agreement between calculation and data, it does not necessarily mean
that the system is functioning incorrectly.
In addition, general planning of brachytherapy dose calculation tests should include consideration of the issues
listed in Table A5-5.
Each source type which is modeled inside the RTP system
must have its basic dosimetric calculation results verified
TABLE A5-6. Single Source
Isotropic dose distribution Place the source at a defined coordinate, calculate a 2-D isodose distribution about that
source and compare the results to known literature data. Manual calculations can be used to
estimate doses at larger distances from sources.
Anisotropic factors

If the calculation method models anisotropic
dose distributions, the basic isotropic tests
should be repeated with carefully designed
source orientation.

Geometry factors

Confirm proper use of geometry factors by
performing calculation for sources of same type
and strength but different length.

Shielding effects

Confirm the location and attenuation of
shielding.

1827

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

TABLE A5-7. Multiple Source Implants and Optimization
137

Create standard test case for 3 sources ~like tandem!, use to confirm correct addition behavior with
multiple source configuration.

192

Create a standard multi-string implant. Verify
correct behavior of string bookkeeping and dose
calculations.

Cs

Ir strings

125

I volume implant

Create a standard volumetric implant. Verify
correct seed bookkeeping, dose calculations, and
dose prescription tools.

Source optimization

If available, use standard anatomical and dose
constraints to verify that optimization algorithm
behaves as expected over a series of situations and
constraints.

HDR dwell time
optimization

Use expected anatomical and dose constraints to
confirm the correct behavior of the dwell time
optimization algorithm contained in some RTP
systems used with HDR systems.

1827
TABLE A5-9. Other Tests
125

I eye plaques

• Location and definition of the position of the tantalum rings attached to the eye to help localize
the plaque.
• Inclusion of backscatter and other effects of the
plaque on the dose distribution from the sources.

High dose rate
afterloaders

• Definition of the source trajectory.
• Verification that the optimization and dwell time
algorithms work correctly.
• Output of source position-dwell time data.
• Transfer of source position-dwell time data to the
afterloader machine.
• Special calculational model for the high dose rate
source.
• Special recommissioning requirements for routine
source changes; make sure that source strength is
correctly set, and that source strength changes
between patient treatment fractions are correctly
implemented.

Stereotactic implants

• Additional source localization checks.
• Verification that source coordinates are accurately
translated into stereotactic frame coordinates.
• Verification that source loading and location
optimization codes work correctly, with proper
constraints.

~Table A5-6!. Issues such as geometric factors, anisotropy
connections, and the possible use of average anisotropy factors for isotropic calculations need to be thoroughly understood by the user.

A5.5. Multiple source dose calculations and
optimization algorithms
Due to the importance of the absolute dose for most
brachytherapy plans, it is important to verify the behavior of
multiple source implants and to assure that the summations
of contributions from various sources is correct. Table A5-7
lists some suggested kinds of tests for different source types,
selected due to their widespread use.
In addition to simply adding multiple sources, RTP systems for standard implants and particularly for high-dose rate
afterloaders may contain optimization algorithms which assist the user in determining the location and loading ~or
dwell times! of the source~s! to be used in the implant. These
TABLE A5-8. Global System Tests
137

Cs: Fletcher-Suit
Gyn implant

Create standard Gyn implant, using both tandem
and ovoids. Verify source identification and location, dose calculations, dose prescriptions, plan
evaluation, including effects of source shields, etc.

192

Create a 2-plane breast boost implant. Verify
source identification and location, dose
calculations, dose prescriptions, plan evaluation.

Ir breast boost

125

I volume implant

Mixed source tests

Create a volumetric 125I implant ~e.g., for prostate!.
Verify source identification and location, dose
calculations, dose prescriptions, plan evaluation.
Various mixed source tests should also be included.
Any clinically used protocols could serve as the
basis for these tests.

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

algorithms, which may contain fairly complex use of dose
volume histogram analysis or other rather new algorithms,
should be carefully tested, not only to test the robustness of
the optimization, but also to check the understanding and
training of the user in making appropriate use of the optimization features.

A5.6. Global system tests
After verification that multiple source implants work correctly, it is appropriate to perform a number of global system
tests, some examples of which are shown in Table A5-8.
These tests, modeled after common clinical brachytherapy
procedures, are designed to test the overall behavior of the
system, including source input, identification of sources from
the source library, source arrangement, dose calculation, and
evaluation of the dose distribution. The procedure for each of
these system tests should follow, as closely as possible, the
normal procedures used in the clinic.

A5.7. Other Tests
Several additional procedures or types of brachytherapy
planning must be commissioned and tested if they will be
clinically used ~Table A5-9!.
a!

Electronic mail: bfraass@umich.edu
APPM Report # 55, ‘‘Radiation Treatment Planning Dosimetry Verification, Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group #23,’’ edited by D.
Miller ~American Institute of Physics, College Park, MD, 1995!.
2
G. Kutcher et al., ‘‘Comprehensive QA for radiation oncology: Report of
AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 40,’’ Med. Phys. 21,
581–618 ~1994!.
1

1828

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

3

ICRU: ICRU Report 29, ‘‘Dose specifications for reporting external beam
therapy with photons and electrons,’’ Bethesda, MD, International Committee on Radiation Units and Measurements, 1978.
4
ISCRO: Report of the InterSociety Council for Radiation Oncology,
1992.
5
D. Lepinoy et al., ‘‘~SFPH! quality assurance program for computers in
radiotherapy,’’ progress report IEEE 322–327, 1984.
6
E. McCullough and A. Krueger, ‘‘Performance evaluation of computerized treatment planning systems for radiotherapy: External photon
beams,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 6, 1599–1605 ~1980!.
7
U. Rosenow, H.-W. Dannhausen, K. Luebbert, F. Nuesslin, J. Richter, B.
Robrandt, W.-W. Seelentag, and H. Wendhausen, ‘‘Quality assurance in
treatment planning. Report from the German Task Group,’’ in The Use of
Computers In Radiation Therapy, edited by I. A. D. Bruinvis, P. van der
Giessen, H. van Kleffens, and F. Wittkamper ~North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1987!, pp. 45–58.
8
O. Sauer, G. Nowak, and J. Richter, ‘‘Accuracy of dose calculations of
the Philips treatment planning system OSS for blocked fields,’’ in The
Use of Computers In Radiation Therapy, edited by I. A. D. Bruinvis, P.
van der Giessen, H. van Kleffens, and F. Wittkamper ~North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1987!, pp. 57–60.
9
C. Westmann, B. Mijnheer, and H. van Kleffens, ‘‘Determination of the
accuracy of different computer planning systems for treatment with external photon beams,’’ Radiother. Oncol. 1, 339–347 ~1984!.
10
R. Wittkamper, B. Mijnheer, and H. van Kleffens, ‘‘Dose intercomparison at the radiotherapy centers in The Netherlands. 2. Accuracy of locally
applied computer planning systems for external photon beams,’’ Radiother. Oncol. 11, 405–414 ~1988!.
11
C. Burman, G. Kutcher, M. Hunt, and L. Brewster, ‘‘Acceptance testing
criteria for a CT based 3D treatment planning system,’’ Med. Phys. 16,
465 ~1989! @Abstract#.
12
B. Curran and G. Starkschall, ‘‘A program for quality assurance of dose
planning computers,’’ in Quality Assurance in Radiotherapy Physics, edited by G. Starkschall and J. Horton ~Medical Physics Publishing, Madison, WI, 1991!, pp. 207–228.
13
B. A. Fraass, ‘‘Quality assurance for 3-D treatment planning,’’ in Teletherapy: Present and Future, edited by J. Palta and T. Mackie ~Advanced
Medical Publishing, Madison, WI, 1996!, pp. 253–318.
14
B. A. Fraass and D. L. McShan, ‘‘Three-dimensional photon beam treatment planning,’’ in Medical Radiology ~Springer, New York, 1995!, pp.
43–94.
15
B. A. Fraass, M. K. Martel, and D. L. McShan, ‘‘Tools for dose calculation verification and QA for conformal therapy treatment techniques,’’ in
Proceedings of the XIth International Conference on the Use of Computers in Radiation Therapy, edited by A. R. Hounsell, J. M. Wilkinson, and
P. C. Williams ~Medical Physics Publishing, Madison, WI, 1994!, pp.
256–257.
16
J. Jacky and C. White, ‘‘Testing a 3-D radiation therapy planning program,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 18, 253–261 ~1990!.
17
R. K. Ten Haken, M. Kessler, R. Stern, J. Ellis, and L. Niklason, ‘‘Quality assurance of CT and MRI for radiation therapy treatment planning,’’
in Quality Assurance in Radiotherapy Physics, edited by G. Starkschall
and J. Horton ~Medical Physics Publishing, Madison, WI, 1991!, pp. 73–
103.
18
J. Van Dyk, R. Barnett, J. Cygler, and P. Shragge, ‘‘Commissioning and
quality assurance of treatment planning computers,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 26, 261–273 ~1993!.
19
G. Leunens, C. Menten, C. Weltens, J. Verstraete, and E. van der
Schueren, ‘‘Quality assessment of medical decision making in radiation
oncology: Variability in target volume delineation for brain tumors,’’
Radiother. Oncol. 29, 169–175 ~1993!.
20
R. K. Ten Haken, A. F. Thornton, H. M. Sandler, M. L. LaVigne, D. J.
Quint, B. A. Fraass, M. L. Kessler, and D. L. McShan, ‘‘A quantitative
assessment of the addition of MRI to CT-based, 3D treatment planning of
brain tumors,’’ Radiother. Oncol. 25, 121–133 ~1992!.
21
K. Podmaniczky, R. Mohan, G. Kutcher, C. Keslter, and B. Vikram,
‘‘Clinical experience with a computerized record and verify system,’’ Int.
J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 11, ~1985!.
22
N. Suntharalingam, ‘‘Quality assurance of radiotherapy localizer/
simulators,’’ in Quality Assurance in Radiotherapy Physics, edited by G.
Starkschall and J. Horton ~Medical Physics Publishing, Madison, WI,
1991!, pp. 61–72.
23
J. Van Dyk and K. Mah, ‘‘Simulators and CT scanners,’’ in Radiotherapy
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1828
Physics in Practice, edited by J. Williams and D. Thwaites ~Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1993!, pp. 113–134.
24
P. Lin et al., AAPM Report 39: Specification and Acceptance Testing for
Computed Tomography Scanners ~American Institute of Physics, New
York, 1993!, p. 95.
25
J. Och, G. Clarke, W. Sobol, C. Rosen, and S. Mun, ‘‘Acceptance testing
of magnetic resonance imaging systems: Report of AAPM Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Task Group No. 6,’’ Med. Phys. 19, 217–229 ~1992!.
26
D. Loo, ‘‘CT acceptance testing,’’ in Specification, Acceptance Testing
and Quality Control of Diagnostic X-ray Imaging Equipment, edited by J.
Siebert, G. Barnes, and R. Gould ~American Institute of Physics, New
York, 1991!, pp. 1042–1066.
27
J. Balter, C. Pelizzari, and G. Chen, ‘‘Correlation of projection radiographs in radiation therapy using open curve segments and point,’’ Med.
Phys. 19, 329–334 ~1992!.
28
B. A. Fraass, D. L. McShan, R. F. Diaz, R. K. Ten Haken, A. Aisen, S.
Gebarski, G. Glazer, and A. S. Lichter, ‘‘Integration of magnetic resonance imaging into radiation therapy treatment planning,’’ Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 13, 1897–1908 ~1987!.
29
M. L. Kessler, S. Pitluck, P. L. Petti, and J. R. Castro, ‘‘Integration of
multimodality imaging data for radiotherapy treatment planning,’’ Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 21, 1653–1667 ~1991!.
30
C. Pelizzari and G. Chen, ‘‘Registration of multiple diagnostic imaging
scans using surface fitting,’’ in The Use of Computers in Radiation
Therapy, edited by I. A. D. Bruinvis, F. H. van der Giessen, H. J. van
Kleffens, and F. W. Wittkamper ~North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1987!, pp.
437–440.
31
P. Petti, M. Kessler, T. Fleming, and S. Pitluck, ‘‘An automated imageregistration technique based on multiple structure matching,’’ Med. Phys.
21, 1419–1426 ~1994!.
32
A. F. Thornton, H. M. Sandler, R. K. Ten Haken, D. L. McShan, B. A.
Fraass, M. L. LaVigne, and B. Yanke, ‘‘The clinical utility of MRI in 3D
treatment planning of brain neoplasms,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol.,
Phys. 24, 767–775 ~1992!.
33
Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine ~DICOM!, National
Electrical Manufacturers Association ~NEMA! DICOM PS 3 ~Set!, 1998.
34
IEC: IEC 1217, ‘‘Radiotherapy equipment: Coordinates, movements and
scales,’’ 1996.
35
B. A. Fraass, D. L. McShan, and K. J. Weeks, ‘‘Computerized beam
shaping,’’ in Proceedings of the 1988 AAPM Summer School, Computers
in Medical Physics, Austin, TX 1988 ~unpublished!, pp. 333–340.
36
L. Brewster, G. Mageras, and R. Mohan, ‘‘Automatic generation of beam
apertures,’’ Med. Phys. 20, 1337–1342 ~1993!.
37
D. L. McShan, B. A. Fraass, and A. S. Lichter, ‘‘Full integration of the
beam’s eye view concept into clinical treatment planning,’’ Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 18, 1485–1494 ~1990!.
38
R. Mohan, ‘‘Field shaping for three-dimensional conformal radiation
therapy and multileaf collimation,’’ Sem. Rad. Oncol. 5, 86–99 ~1995!.
39
A. van’t Veld and I. A. D. Bruinvis, ‘‘Influence of shape on the accuracy
of grid-based volume computations,’’ Med. Phys. 22, 1377–1385 ~1995!.
40
L. Anderson et al., Interstitial Brachytherapy: Physical, Biological, and
Clinical Considerations ~Raven, New York, 1990!, p. 360.
41
R. Nath, L. Anderson, G. Luxton, K. Weaver, J. Williamson, and A.
Meigooni, ‘‘Dosimetry of interstitial brachytherapy sources: Recommendations of the AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No.
43,’’ Med. Phys. 22, 209–234 ~1995!.
42
R. K. Ten Haken, B. A. Fraass, and K. Lam, ‘‘Dosimetry and data acquisition,’’ in Teletherapy: Present and Future, edited by J. Palta and T.
Mackie ~Advanced Medical Publishing, Madison, WI, 1996!, pp. 191–
219.
43
R. Stern, B. A. Fraass, A. Gerhardsson, D. L. McShan, and K. L. Lam,
‘‘Generation and use of measurement-based 3-D dose distributions for
3-D dose calculation verification,’’ Med. Phys. 19, 165–173 ~1992!.
44
A. Ahnesjo, ‘‘Collapsed cone convolution of radiant energy for photon
dose calculation in heterogeneous media,’’ Med. Phys. 16, 577–592
~1989!.
45
T. R. Mackie, J. W. Scrimger, and K. K. Battista, ‘‘A convolution method
of calculating dose for 15-MV x-rays,’’ Med. Phys. 12, 188–196 ~1985!.
46
T. R. Mackie, A. F. Bielajew, D. W. O. Rogers, and J. J. Battista, ‘‘Generation of photon energy deposition kernels using the EGS Monte Carlo
code,’’ Phys. Med. Biol. 33, 1–20 ~1988!.
47
J. Cunningham, ‘‘Quality assurance in dosimetry and treatment planning,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 10, 105–109 ~1984!.

1829

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

48

R. Nath, L. Anderson, J. Meli, A. Olch, J. Stitt, and J. Williamson, ‘‘Code
of practice for brachytherapy physics: Report of the AAPM Radiation
Therapy Committee Task Group No. 56,’’ submitted, 1997.
49
P. Feroldi, M. Galelli, and S. Belletti, ‘‘A comparison of accuracy of
computer treatment planning systems in brachytherapy,’’ Radiother. Oncol. 24, 147–154 ~1992!.
50
A. Visser, ‘‘An intercomparison of the accuracy of computer planning
systems for brachytherapy,’’ Radiother. Oncol. 15, 245–258 ~1989!.
51
J. Williamson, ‘‘Practical quality assurance in low-dose rate brachytherapy,’’ in Quality Assurance in Radiotherapy Physics, edited by G.
Starkschall and J. Horton ~Medical Physics Publishing, Madison, WI,
1991!, pp. 139–182.
52
J. Williamson, G. Ezzell, A. Olch, and B. Thomadsen, ‘‘Quality assurance for high dose rate brachytherapy,’’ in Textbook on High Dose Rate
Brachytherapy, edited by S. Nag ~Futura, Armonk, NY, 1994!, pp. 147–
212.
53
J. Williamson, B. Thomadsen, and R. Nath, Brachytherapy Physics,
~Medical Physics Publishing, Madison, WI, 1994!, p. 715.
54
R. Nath, P. Biggs, F. Bova, C. Ling, J. Purdy, J. van de Geijn, and M.
Weinhous, ‘‘AAPM code of practice for radiotherapy accelerators: Report of AAPM Radiation Therapy Task Group No. 45,’’ Med. Phys. 21,
~1994!.
55
H. Dahlin, I. Lamm, T. Landberg, S. Levernes, and N. Ulso, ‘‘User requirements on CT based computerized dose planning systems in radiotherapy,’’ Acta Radiol.: Oncol. 22, 398–415 ~1983!.
56
B. Littlewood and L. Strigini, ‘‘The risks of software,’’ Sci. Am., 62–75
~November 1992!.
57
N. Leveson, ‘‘Software safety: Why, what and how,’’ Comput. Surveys
18, ~1986!.
58
J. Purdy et al., ‘‘Medical accelerator safety considerations: Report of
AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 35,’’ Med. Phys.
20, 1261–1275 ~1993!.
59
Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine ~DICOM!, Supplement
11, Radiotherapy Objects, ACR-NEMA Sup 11, ~Final Draft, June 1997,
unpublished!.
60
B. Baxter, L. Hitchner, and G. Maguire, AAPM Report No. 10: A Standard Format for Digital Image Exchange ~American Institute of Physics,
New York, 1982!.
61
R. Rice, B. Mijnheer, and L. Chin, ‘‘Benchmark measurements for lung
dose corrections for x-ray beams,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 15,
399–409 ~1988!.
62
A. Shiu et al., ‘‘Verification data for electron beam dose algorithms,’’
Med. Phys. 19, 623–636 ~1992!.
63
A. L. Boyer, ‘‘Basic applications of a multileaf collimator,’’ in Teletherapy: Present and Future, edited by J. Palta and T. Mackie ~Advanced
Medical Publishing, Madison, WI, 1996!, pp. 403–444.
64
B. A. Fraass, D. L. McShan, M. L. Kessler, G. M. Matrone, J. D. Lewis,
and T. Weaver: ‘‘A computer-controlled conformal radiotherapy system.
I. Overview,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 33, 1139–1157 ~1995!.
65
B. A. Fraass, D. L. McShan, G. M. Matrone, T. A. Weaver, J. D. Lewis,
and M. L. Kessler, ‘‘A computer-controlled conformal radiotherapy system. IV. Electronic chart,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 33, 1181–
1194 ~1995!.
66
ICRU: ICRU Report 50, ‘‘Prescribing, recording, and reporting photon

Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1829
beam therapy,’’ Bethesda, MD, International Committee on Radiation
Units and Measurements, 1993.
67
M. L. Kessler, R. K. Ten Haken, B. A. Fraass, and D. L. McShan, ‘‘Expanding the use and effectiveness of dose-volume histograms for 3D
treatment planning, I. Integration of 3-D dose-display,’’ Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 29, 1125–1131 ~1994!.
68
E. E. Klein, W. B. Harms, D. A. Low, V. Willcut, and J. A. Purdy,
‘‘Clinical implementation of a commercial multileaf collimator: Dosimetry, networking, simulation and quality assurance,’’ Med. Phys. 33,
1195–1208 ~1995!.
69
D. D. Leavitt, M. Martin, J. H. Moeller, and W. L. Lee, ‘‘Dynamic wedge
field techniques through computer-controlled collimator motion and dose
delivery,’’ Med. Phys. 17, 87–91 ~1990!.
70
G. Leunens, J. Verstraete, W. Van den Bogaert, J. Van Dam, A. Dutreix,
and E. van der Schueren, ‘‘Human errors in data transfer during preparation and delivery of radiation treatment affecting the final result: ‘Garbage
in, garbage out,’ ’’ Radiother. Oncol. 23, 217–222 ~1992!.
71
T. R. Mackie, P. Reckwerdt, T. McNutt, M. Gehring, and C. Sanders,
‘‘Photon beam dose computations,’’ in Teletherapy: Present and Future,
edited by T. Mackie and J. Palta ~Advanced Medical Publishing, Madison, WI, 1996!, pp. 103–135.
72
D. L. McShan and B. A. Fraass, ‘‘3D treatment planning. II. Integration
of grayscale images and solid surface graphics,’’ in The Use of Computers in Radiation Therapy, edited by I. A. D. Bruinvis, F. H. van der
Giessen, H. J. van Kleffens, and F. W. Wittkamper ~North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1987!, pp. 41–44.
73
D. L. McShan, B. A. Fraass, M. L. Kessler, G. M. Matrone, J. D. Lewis,
and T. A. Weaver, ‘‘A computer-controlled conformal radiotherapy system. II. Sequence processor,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 33,
1159–1172 ~1995!.
74
I. Rosen and R. Lane, ‘‘Positional accuracy of isodose lines as a function
of dose matrix resolution,’’ Phys. Med. Biol. 35, 423–427 ~1990!.
75
I. Rosen, R. Lane, and C. Kelsey, ‘‘Accuracy of a two-sensor sonic digitizer,’’ Med. Phys. 6, 536–538 ~1979!.
76
S. Schoeppel, M. LaVigne, M. K. Martel, D. L. McShan, and B. A.
Fraass, ‘‘Computed tomography-based dosimetry of gynecological intracavitary brachytherapy: A new method for source localization,’’ Endocurie Hypertherm. Oncol. 8, 137–143 ~1992!.
77
R. K. Ten Haken, R. F. Diaz, D. L. McShan, B. A. Fraass, J. A. Taren,
and T. W. Hood, ‘‘From manual to computerized planing for 125-I stereotactic brain implants,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 15, 467–480
~1988!.
78
J. van de Geijn and B. Fraass, ‘‘The net fractional depth dose: A basis for
a unified analytical description of FDD, TAR, TMR, and TPR,’’ Med.
Phys. 11, 784–793 ~1984!.
79
M. van Herk and H. Kooy, ‘‘Automatic three-dimensional correlation of
CT-CT, CT-MRI, and CT-SPECT using chamfer matching,’’ Med. Phys.
21, 1163–1178 ~1994!.
80
M Weinhous, Z Li, and M. Holman, ‘‘The selection of portal aperture
using interactively displayed beam’s eye sections,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 22, 1089–1092 ~1992!.
81
D. A. Low, W. B. Harms, S. Mutic, and J. A. Purdy, ‘‘A technique for
quantitative evaluation of dose distributions,’’ Med. Phys. 25, 656–661
~1998!.

