Quality assurance for computed-tomography simulators and the computedtomography-simulation process: Report of the AAPM Radiation Therapy
Committee Task Group No. 66
Sasa Mutica)
Department of Radiation Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110

Jatinder R. Palta
Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610

Elizabeth K. Butker
Department of Radiation Oncology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia

Indra J. Das
Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104

M. Saiful Huq
Department of Radiation Oncology, Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107

Leh-Nien Dick Loo
Department of Medical Physics, Kaiser Permanente, Los Angeles, California 90039

Bill J. Salter
Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas Health Sciences Center, San Antonio, Texas 78229

Cynthia H. McColloughb)
Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905

Jacob Van Dykb)
Department of Clinical Physics, London Regional Cancer Center, London, Ontario N6A 4L6, Canada

共Received 21 April 2003; revised 1 July 2003; accepted for publication 25 July 2003; published 24
September 2003兲
This document presents recommendations of the American Association of Physicists in Medicine
共AAPM兲 for quality assurance of computed-tomography- 共CT兲 simulators and CT-simulation process. This report was prepared by Task Group No. 66 of the AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee.
It was approved by the Radiation Therapy Committee and by the AAPM Science Council. © 2003
American Association of Physicists in Medicine. 关DOI: 10.1118/1.1609271兴
PREFACE
The purpose of this document is to provide the medical
physicist with a framework and guidance for establishment
of a comprehensive quality assurance 共QA兲 program for
computed-tomography- 共CT兲 scanners used for CTsimulation, CT-simulation software, and the CT-simulation
process. The CT-simulator is a CT scanner equipped with a
flat tabletop and, preferably, external patient positioning lasers. The scanner is accompanied with specialized software
which allows treatment planning on volumetric patient CT
scans in a manner consistent with conventional radiation
therapy simulators.1–12 The CT scanner used in the CTsimulation process can be located in the radiation oncology
department or in the diagnostic radiology department. Depending on the CT-scanner location and primary use, acceptance testing, commissioning, and QA can be the responsibility of a therapy medical physicist, diagnostic physicist, or
a joint responsibility of diagnostic and therapy physicists.
The commissioning and periodic QA of the accompanying
software and the QA of the CT-simulation process is always
the responsibility of the therapy physicist. This report does
not address each of the two scenarios individually 共scanner
located in diagnostic radiology or radiation oncology兲, but
2762

Med. Phys. 30 „10…, October 2003

rather establishes a set of QA procedures that are applicable
to scanners used for CT-simulation regardless of their location and primary purpose. It is the responsibility of the respective diagnostic and therapy physicists to determine how
the QA program is implemented and how the responsibilities
are assigned. The primary responsibility for implementation
of recommendations for QA of scanners used for CTsimulation in this document rests with the radiation oncology
Quality Assurance Committee 共QAC兲 as specified by the
AAPM Task Group 40.13 Further discussion of QA program
responsibilities is provided in Appendix A. If the scanner is
located in the radiation oncology department, a therapy
medical physicist can perform QA of the CT-scanner and of
the simulation process independently. It is recommended that
the therapy physicist solicit help from a diagnostic physicist
for the establishment of a QA program and scanner commissioning if he or she has limited CT experience. Likewise, if
the CT-scanner is located in the diagnostic radiology department, the primary responsibility for the scanner QA rests
with the diagnostic physicist. It is then the responsibility of
the radiation oncology physicist to assure that the recommendations of this task group are implemented by either diagnostic radiology or the radiation oncology physicist or a
designate.

0094-2405Õ2003Õ30„10…Õ2762Õ31Õ$20.00

© 2003 Am. Assoc. Phys. Med.

2762

2763

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

2763

FIG. 1. Block diagram showing relevant components of CT-simulation and
treatment planning systems.

Figure 1 shows the place of CT-simulation in the treatment planning process. CT-simulation includes the CTscanner and components of treatment planning system and
provides input for dose calculation. Therefore, the subject
matter addressed in this document overlaps with the AAPM
Diagnostic X-Ray Imaging Committee Task Group 214 report
共Specification and acceptance testing of computed tomography scanners; AAPM Report No. 39兲 and the report of the
AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 5315
共Quality assurance for clinical radiotherapy treatment planning兲. The aim of the current task group was not to duplicate
material presented in the other two reports, but to develop a
set of QA guidelines specific to CT-simulation, and to
complement the recommendations presented in the other two
reports. This document was prepared with the intent that it
would be used in conjunction with the other two reports.
When a topic is discussed by the current task group, which is
also addressed in Report No. 39 or the TG53 report, this
document provides a description of the QA requirements and
the reader is then referred to the report in which this topic
was discussed in greater detail. In situations when the other
two reports do not address a topic regarding QA requirements for CT-simulation, this document discusses these requirements. The current report was primarily intended for
radiation oncology physicists who may have limited CT experience; therefore, the description of QA procedures for CTscanners is substantially more extensive than our discussion
of CT-simulation software QA. It is expected that the therapy
physicist is familiar with the TG53 QA recommendations
and procedures for testing of treatment planning software.
Most of the QA procedures presented in this document have
already been described in literature. Whenever possible we
refer the reader to appropriate references. A summary of recommended QA tests, frequencies, and tolerances is presented

in Tables I, II, and III. These tables are intended as an overview of topics included in this document and respective recommendations.
This report also does not address QA requirements for the
scanner nor for software vendors. The QA tasks associated
with the scanner design, simulation software engineering,
testing, validation, upgrades, preventive maintenance, or
other tasks performed by vendors are numerous and differ
significantly among each other and are beyond the scope of
this task group. The report also does not address CTscanning and related QA procedures for special procedures in
radiation oncology like stereotactic radiosurgery or imageguided brachytherapy. The procedures outlined in the report
are designed primarily for purposes of external beam radiotherapy.
The report refers to several commercially available devices. These descriptions are intended to be examples of
available equipment. This should not be interpreted as our
recommendation or endorsement of these products. It is the
responsibility of the medical institution and medical physicist to research the market when purchasing equipment.
Terminology used in this report is modeled after that used
in other AAPM task group reports:
• Shall or must are used when the activity is required by
various regulatory agencies,
• Recommend is used when the task group expects that
the procedure should normally be followed as described. However, there may be instances where other
issues, techniques or priorities could force the modification of the task group recommendation.
• Should is used when it is expected that local analysis of
the situation may change the way a particular activity is
performed.
The tests described in this document address issues of
patient, staff, public, and medical center safety. The tests are
designed to assure proper equipment and program operation,
which is directly related to the quality of patient care. Medical physicists and the medical center should make every effort to implement procedures outlined in this document. We
have tried to design a CT-simulation QA program that is
economically feasible and practical and one that should not
be unreasonably burdensome to implement. The QA program
should improve quality and efficiency of the treatment plan-

TABLE I. Test specifications for radiation and patient safety.
Performance
parameter

Test objective

Frequency

Tolerance limits

Shielding survey

To verify exposure
levels around the
CT-scanner room

Initially

NCRP
recommendations
or applicable
regulatory limits

Patient dose from
CT-scan, CTDI

To verify safe dose
delivered from the
scanner

Annually or after
major CT-scanner
component
replacement

⫾20% of
manufacturer
specifications

Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2764

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

ning process and avoid mistakes costly to both patients and
the medical institution.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. OVERVIEW. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2764
A. CT-simulation process. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2764
1. CT-scan, patient positioning and
immobilization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2766
2. Treatment planning and CT-simulation. . . . . 2766
3. Treatment setup. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2767
B. Quality assurance program goals. . . . . . . . . . . . . 2767
1. Safety of patients, public, and hospital
staff. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2767
2. Accurate target localization and treatment
simulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2768
II. FUNCTIONAL PERFORMANCE
CHARACTERISTICS OF CT EQUIPMENT. . . . . 2768
A. Overview of a CT-scanner and a virtual
simulation system. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2768
1. X-ray tube. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2768
2. Collimator and attenuator. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2768
3. Patient support table. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2768
4. Computer and workstation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2769
5. External patient marking /positioning
lasers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2769
B. Conventional and spiral CT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2769
C. Multislice scanners. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2769
D. Large bore scanners. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2769
E. CT performance parameters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2770
III. QUALITY ASSURANCE FOR CT-SCANNERS
USED FOR CT-SIMULATION AND ITS
FREQUENCY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2770
A. CT dosimetry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2770
B. Radiation/patient safety. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2770
C. Performance of electromechanical
components. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2770
1. Patient marking /positioning lasers. . . . . . . . . 2770
2. Couch and tabletop. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2771
3. Gantry tilt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2772
4. Scan localization from scout image
共topogram, pilot image兲. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2772
5. Collimation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2772
6. X-ray generator. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2773
D. Image quality tests. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2773
1. Random uncertainty in pixel value
共noise兲. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2773
2. Systematic uncertainty—field uniformity. . . 2773
3. Quantitative CT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2774
4. Spatial integrity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2775
5. Spatial resolution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2775
6. Contrast resolution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2775
IV. QUALITY ASSURANCE FOR
CT-SIMULATION SOFTWARE AND ITS
FREQUENCY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2776
A. Spatial/geometry accuracy tests. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2776
1. Image input tests. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2776
2. Structure delineation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2776
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2764

3. Multimodality image registration. . . . . . . . . . 2776
4. Machine definition. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2776
5. Isocenter calculation and movement. . . . . . . 2778
6. Image reconstruction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2778
B. Evaluation of digitally reconstructed
radiographs 共DRRs兲. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2778
1. Spatial and contrast resolution. . . . . . . . . . . . 2778
2. Geometric and spatial accuracy. . . . . . . . . . . 2778
3. Hardcopy quality. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2778
C. Periodic quality assurance testing. . . . . . . . . . . . 2778
V. EVALUATION OF THE CT-SIMULATION
PROCESS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2779
A. Overall process tests. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2779
B. Data transfer tests. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2780
VI. CONCLUSIONS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2781
APPENDIX A: INFORMATION FOR HOSPITAL
ADMINISTRATION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2781
1. Information for radiation oncology
administration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2781
2. Information for diagnostic radiology
administration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2783
APPENDIX B: CT DOSIMETRY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2783
1. CT dose descriptors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2783
2. CT dose measurements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2784
APPENDIX C: RADIATION SAFETY SURVEY/
SHIELDING EVALUATION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2785
APPENDIX D: CT-SIMULATOR LASER QA. . . . . . 2785
APPENDIX E: SCANNER TABLE TESTS. . . . . . . . 2788
APPENDIX F: X-RAY GENERATOR TESTS. . . . . . 2789
APPENDIX G: SAMPLE OVERALL
CT-SIMULATOR PROCESS TEST. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2790

I. OVERVIEW
A. CT-simulation process

A CT-simulator consists of a CT-scanner with a flat table
top, laser patient positioning and marking system 共preferably
external lasers兲, CT-simulation/3D treatment planning software, and various hardcopy output devices 共Fig. 2兲. The CTscanner is used to acquire a volumetric CT-scan of a patient,
which represents the ‘‘virtual’’ or digital patient. The CTsimulation software provides virtual representations of the
geometric capabilities of a treatment machine. This software
can be a special virtual simulation program or it can be a
component of a treatment planning system. Often, CTsimulation is referred to as virtual simulation and the two
terms tend to be used interchangeably. Virtual simulation is
used to define any simulation based on software created ‘‘virtual simulator’’ and a volumetric patient scan. The scan does
not necessarily have to be CT and other imaging modalities
can be used. A virtual simulator is a set of software which
recreates the treatment machine and which allows import,
manipulation, display, and storage of images from CT and/or
other imaging modalities. CT-simulator components and
their features are described in Secs. II, III, and IV. CTsimulation process has been described by several
authors.1– 4,6,9–12,14,16 This process and its implementation

2765

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

2765

TABLE II. Test specifications for electromechanical components.a
Performance
parameter

Test objective

Frequency

Tolerance limits

Alignment of gantry
lasers with the
center of imaging
plane

To verify proper
identification of
scan plane with
gantry lasers

Daily

⫾2 mm

Orientation of
gantry lasers with
respect to the
imaging plane

To verify that the
gantry lasers are
parallel and
orthogonal with the
imaging plane over
the full length of
laser projection

Monthly and after
laser adjustments

⫾2 mm over the
length of laser
projection

Spacing of lateral
wall lasers with
respect to lateral
gantry lasers and
scan plane

To verify that lateral
wall lasers are
accurately spaced
from the scan plane.
This distance is used
for patient
localization
marking

Monthly and after
laser adjustments

⫾2 mm

Orientation of wall
lasers with respect
to the imaging plane

To verify that the
wall lasers are
parallel and
orthogonal with the
imaging plane over
the full length of
laser projection

Monthly and after
laser adjustments

⫾2 mm over the
length of laser
projection

Orientation of the
ceiling laser with
respect to the
imaging plane

To verify that the
ceiling laser is
orthogonal with the
imaging plane

Monthly and after
laser adjustments

⫾2 mm over the
length of laser
projection

Orientation of the
CT-scanner tabletop
with respect to the
imaging plane

To verify that the
CT-scanner tabletop
is level and
orthogonal with the
imaging plane

Monthly or when
daily laser QA tests
reveal rotational
problems

⫾2 mm over the
length and width of
the tabletop

Table vertical and
longitudinal motion

To verify that the
table longitudinal
motion according to
digital indicators is
accurate and
reproducible

Monthly

⫾1 mm over the
range of table
motion

Table indexing and
position

To verify table
indexing and
position accuracy
under scanner
control

Annually

⫾1 mm over the
scan range

Gantry tilt accuracy

To verify accuracy
of gantry tilt
indicators

Annually

⫾1° over the gantry
tilt range

Gantry tilt position
accuracy

To verify that the
gantry accurately
returns to nominal
position after tilting

Annually

⫾1° or ⫾1 mm from
nominal position

Scan localization

To verify accuracy
of scan localization
from pilot images

Annually

⫾1 mm over the
scan range

Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2766

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

2766

TABLE II. 共Continued.兲
Performance
parameter

Test objective

Frequency

Tolerance limits

Radiation profile
width

To verify that the
radiation profile
width meets
manufacturer
specification

Annually 共This test
is optional if the CTDI
accuracy has been
verified兲

Manufacturer
specifications

Sensitivity profile
width

To verify that the
sensitivity profile
width meets
manufacturer
specification

Semiannually

⫾1 mm of nominal
value

Generator tests

To verify proper
operation of the xray generator

After replacement
of major generator
component

Manufacturer
specifications or
Report No. 39
recommendations

a

Depending on the goals and prior clinical experience of a particular CT-simulation program, these tests,
frequencies, and tolerances may be modified by the medical physicist.

vary among institutions. The simulation process design is
dependent on available resources 共equipment and personnel兲,
patient workload, physical layout and location of system
components, and proximity of team members. The
CT-simulation process can be grouped into three major
categories:
TABLE III. Test specifications for image performance evaluation.a
Performance
parameter

Frequency

Tolerance limits

CT number
accuracy

Daily—CT number for
water
Monthly—4 to 5 different
materials
Annually—Electron
density phantom

For water, 0⫾5 HU

Image noise

Daily

Manufacturer
specifications

In plane spatial
integrity

Daily—x or y direction
Monthly—both directions

⫾1 mm

Field uniformity

Monthly—most commonly
used kVp
Annually—other used
kVp settings

within ⫾5 HU

Electron density
to CT number
conversion

Annually—or after
scanner calibration

Consistent with
commissioning results
and test phantom
manufacturer
specifications

Spatial resolution

Annually

Manufacturer
specifications

Contrast resolution

Annually

Manufacturer
specifications

1. CT-scan, patient positioning and immobilization
The CT-simulation scan is, in many respects, similar to
conventional diagnostic scans. The primary differences are
the requirements for patient positioning and immobilization,
treatment specific scan protocols, often increased scan limits,
use of contrast, placement of localization marks on the patient skin, and some other special considerations. These are
discussed in Sec. V.

2. Treatment planning and CT-simulation
Beam placement and treatment design is performed using
virtual simulation software. The simulation typically consists
of contouring of the target and normal structures, placement
of the treatment isocenter and the beams, design of treatment
portal shapes, generation of DRRs2,11 and documentation.
Methods for simulating specific treatment sites have been
described by several authors.1,2,4,12,17–19
Contouring: The treatment planning portion of the CTsimulation process begins with target and normal structure

a

Depending on the goals and prior clinical experience of a particular CTsimulation program, these tests, frequencies, and tolerances may be modified by the medical physicist.

Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

FIG. 2. CT-simulator room drawing showing wall lasers and the overhead
sagittal laser. 共Courtesy Philips Medical Systems兲.

2767

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

delineation. Other imaging studies 共prior CT, MR, PET兲 may
be registered 共fused兲 to the CT-scan to provide information
for improved target or normal structure delineation.
Treatment isocenter placement: Based on target volumes
and treatment area, a treatment isocenter location is identified in the CT study. The isocenter may be placed manually,
based on patient anatomy, or the CT-simulation software may
automatically position the isocenter at the centroid of the
contoured target volume. Once the isocenter is determined or
‘‘marked,’’ this coordinate becomes part of the treatment
plan and may be used as a reference location in subsequent
dose calculations. There must be a set of localization marks
on the patient’s skin so that the patient can be accurately
repositioned on the treatment machine. The placement of localization marks may be performed using two different CTsimulation methods.
Final isocenter (setup-point) marked during the CT-scan:
for this method, the patient is scanned and, while the patient
is still on the CT-scanner couch, the physician with possible
dosimetrist/medical physicist assistance determines the location of the isocenter. The software’s previously mentioned
ability to define the centroid of the contoured target volume
can be used for this task. During this time, the patient must
remain still on the CT couch in treatment position. The isocenter coordinates are then transferred to the scanner and
localization marks are accordingly placed on the patient. On
the first day of treatment, the patient will be positioned using
these marks on the treatment machine.
This method requires that the physician be available during the CT-scan, and the procedure time is longer. However,
the marks made for the CT-scan can be used for positioning
on the treatment machine without any shifts.
A reference point marked during the CT-scan: this method
does not require the radiation oncologist to be available for
the CT-scan. Prior to the scan procedure, based on the diagnostic workup studies, the physician instructs the CT-scanner
staff where to place a set of reference marks on the patient.
For example, ‘‘place localization marks at the level of carina,
4 cm left from patient midline, and midplane.’’ The intent is
to place these initial marks as close to the final treatment
isocenter as possible. Prior to the CT-scan, the reference
marks are marked on the patient and radio opaque markers
are placed over the skin marks. The radio opaque markers
allow the reference marks to be visible on the CT study.
After the scan, the patient can leave and images are transferred to the virtual simulation workstation. Later, the physician contours target volumes and determines the treatment
isocenter coordinates. Shifts 共distances in three directions兲
between the initial reference marks and the final treatment
isocenter are then calculated. On the first day of treatment, or
on conventional simulator if also available, the patient is first
aligned to the initial reference marks using the treatment machine’s lasers and then shifted to the CT-simulation isocenter
using the calculated shifts. Initial reference marks are then
removed and the isocenter localization marks are placed on
the patient.
This method is commonly used when the CT-scanner is
not located in the radiation oncology department or when the
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2767

radiation oncologist is not available for the CT-scan. With
proper planning 共from diagnostic workup兲, the initial marks
can be placed very close to the center of target volume and
thus avoiding the need for shifts for the majority of patients.
Alternatively, for certain treatment sites, the localization
marks are placed on a stable anatomical location which will
reduce daily setup variations. The second method can be
used for stimulation of these treatment sites. The setup marks
are placed on a stable anatomical location and then shifts are
applied to the treatment isocenter for every treatment. For
example, patients with breast cancer can have setup marks
placed on sternum rather than on breast tissue.
Placement of the beams and design of treatment portals:
Based on target geometry, treatment beams are placed and
treatment portals designed. CT-simulation data 共images, contours, treatment beams兲 are then communicated to treatment
planning software, which has dose calculation capabilities.
Printing of DRRs and documentation: The final products
of the CT-simulation are DRRs and patient setup instructions. Patient setup instructions may include possible shifts
from the initial skin localization marks, if final isocenter
marking procedures were not used.

3. Treatment setup
On the treatment machine, the patient is setup according
to instructions created from the CT-simulation software. Port
films are acquired and compared with CT-simulation DRRs.
In some cases, the patient may undergo treatment setup verification on a conventional simulator prior to the treatment.
This can be valuable for treatment sites in the thorax and
abdomen, for example, due to the CT-simulation process’
inability to display breathing motion. In such cases, the physician may wish to observe patient breathing on a conventional simulator using fluoroscopic imaging, with treatment
blocks in place.
A well-designed CT-simulation process can cause all of
these steps to appear relatively seamless, and the duration of
the entire process relatively short. Conversely, inadequately
defined procedures and a lack of communication can lead to
inefficiencies and treatment errors.

B. Quality assurance program goals

The goals of a CT-simulation QA program are to assure
safe and accurate operation of the CT-simulation process as a
whole. The QA program design should include tests which
will assure accurate target and critical structure localization
and accurate placement of treatment beams with respect to a
volumetric CT-scan of a patient.

1. Safety of patients, public, and hospital staff
While CT-scanners are generally regarded as ‘‘safe’’
medical devices they are radiation producing equipment and

2768

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

as such capable of harming patients, staff, and public. The
QA program must assure that radiation levels from the CTscanner are safe, and that they comply with applicable regulatory limits.

2. Accurate target localization and treatment
simulation
For accurate patient treatment planning, the CT-scanner
must provide high quality images, with geometrical and spatial integrity, and with a known CT number 共Hounsfield
unit兲20 to electron density relationship. The CT-scanner QA
program should include tests to verify that all three of the
above conditions are met. The primary areas of focus for the
CT-simulation QA program should be the imaging performance and geometric accuracy of the CT-scanner, the geometric accuracy and utility of the CT-simulation software,
accuracy and image quality of DRRs, and accuracy and integrity of information transfer between the various treatment
planning and treatment delivery systems. The tests outlined
in Secs. II, III, and IV are designed to detect potential errors
that can affect accuracy of target and normal structure delineation and treatment simulation. The suggested frequency of
these tests should ensure that critical problems are detected
in a timely fashion. The tolerance limits for QA tests recommended in this report were designed to satisfy accuracy requirements of conformal radiation therapy. They are in accordance with AAPM Report No. 39, TG53, and NCRP
Report No. 9945 recommendations and have been shown to
be achievable in a routine clinical setting. Depending on the
goals and prior clinical experience of a particular CTsimulation program, these tests, frequencies, and tolerances
may be modified by the medical physicist. Radiation therapy
procedures which require higher precision 共i.e., intensity
modulated radiation therapy兲 may demand more stringent
tolerance limits and testing frequency. Likewise, QA of CTscanners which are primarily used for less demanding procedures can be based on less stringent limits. The modified QA
program should still ensure that the QA goals and objectives
outlined in this report are satisfied and that the quality of
patient care is not compromised.

II. FUNCTIONAL PERFORMANCE
CHARACTERISTICS OF CT EQUIPMENT
A. Overview of a CT-scanner and a virtual
simulation system

A typical CT-scanner consists of an x-ray source, detector
array, patient support table, and computer workstation. The
x-ray source and the detector electronics are housed in a
donut shaped gantry through which the patient’s body is imaged transaxially while lying on the table. The coordination
of the x-ray generation, table positioning, data acquisition
and processing, and the display of the images are all under
the control of a suite of inter-connected computers. The following is a discussion of major CT-scanner components,
which are especially important in the CT-simulation process:
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2768

1. X-ray tube
Due to two predominate characteristics of the CTsimulation process, the x-ray tube must be designed to withstand high heat input and have rapid heat dissipation.
(a) Large number of images per study: CT studies for
image based radiation treatment planning and CT-simulation
usually involve larger number of images per patient than in
diagnostic radiology. As will be discussed later, DRR quality
is dependent on CT slice thickness; therefore, slice thicknesses of 3 mm to 5 mm are typically used with a possibility
of using even smaller thicknesses with multislice scanners.
Small slice thickness is also desired to delineate accurate
treatment volumes and critical structures. Depending on the
treatment site and the length of the scanned volume, typically 80 to over 200 images per patient are acquired.
(b) Rapid study acquisition time: Generally, CTsimulation studies are imaged in a single rapid acquisition.
Rapid scan time minimizes motion artifacts 共due to breathing
or patient movement兲.
The x-ray tube must have large heat anode loading and
heat dissipation capabilities to withstand the very high heat
loads associated with the large number of images acquired in
a rapid sequence. Heat anode storage is specified in millions
of heat units 共MHU兲. Anode cooling rate is specified in
MHU per minute 共MHU/min兲. CT-scanners should ideally
have an x-ray tube capable of storing 5 MHU or more with
0.5 MHU/min or more cooling rate. Tubes with higher specifications are readily available from several manufacturers
and will ease the simulation process. A review of CT tube
characteristics was given by Fox.21

2. Collimator and attenuator
Under the x-ray tube, and in the path of the x-ray beam,
filters and/or attenuators are used to harden the beam and to
limit the dynamic range delivered to the detectors due to the
range of thickness at the center and the periphery of the
human body. A pre-patient x-ray beam collimator mounted
under the x-ray tube port is used to produce a narrow beam
of radiation, which is used to ensure one thin slice of the
cross-sectional body anatomy is imaged at any given time.

3. Patient support table
The CT-simulation scanner table must have a flat top
similar to radiation therapy treatment machines. Additionally,
it should accommodate commercially available registration
devices, Fig. 3. The registration device allows the patient
immobilization device to be moved from the CT-scanner to a
treatment machine in a reproducible manner, as will be discussed later.
Even though the general shape of the two tables may be
similar, the treatment machine table usually has components
共‘‘tennis racket,’’ removable panels, table support components, etc.兲 which are not reproduced on the simulator table.
These differences can introduce setup errors due to different
sag of two tables. Treatment polices and planning target volumes should account for these differences.

2769

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

2769

data to be acquired while the table translates and the tube
rotates continuously.22 The path of the tube forms a helical
pattern around the patient, which is different from the set of
‘‘stacked rings’’ acquired in so-called conventional CT. A
comprehensive review of the spiral CT technology can be
found by Kalender.23
Modern CT-scanners are typically capable of acquiring
images in both scan modes. Due to faster scan times spiral
mode is often preferred for CT-simulation scanning. The CTscanner QA program should address image quality tests of
both scan modes. Kalender24 has discussed the image quality
differences between axial and spiral scanning.
FIG. 3. Carbon-fiber CT-simulator couch top with registration device and
use of a registration device. 共Courtesy of MED-TEC, Inc, Orange City, IA兲.

The positioning and movement of the tabletop must be
precisely controlled under constant load, this is discussed in
Sec. III C 1. The couch weight limit 共at least 400 lbs evenly
distributed兲 and table sag should be comparable to those of
medical linear accelerators.13

4. Computer and workstation
Computers are essential components of the CT-scanner.
Transmission data collected by the CT detectors in its raw
form bears no resemblance to the final cross-sectional image.
The projection data must be processed or ‘‘reconstructed,’’
by the computer before a usable image can be displayed.
Modern CT-scanners often consist of multiple dedicated microprocessors that are networked to communicate with each
other to set up the scan parameters, and to coordinate the
x-ray production and data acquisition. After the image data is
reconstructed for viewing, a computer workstation also provides the means for the analysis of the image data. As discussed in the OVERVIEW section, to complete a CTsimulator unit, virtual simulation software is also required.

5. External patient marking Õpositioning lasers
Computed tomography scanners used for CT-simulation
are usually equipped with external patient marking/
positioning lasers. Figure 2 shows a set of such lasers. External lasers are not required for patient marking and lasers
located inside the scanner gantry can be used for this procedure. However, these lasers can be difficult to use due to
small aperture of scanner. Therefore, it is desirable that scanners which are used for CT-simulation be equipped with external lasers. These lasers can be fixed or mobile. Mobile
lasers allow easier marking of patients. It is especially important that the sagittal laser be mobile as CT tables do not
move in the lateral direction. Mobile sagittal laser allows
marking away from the patient midline.
B. Conventional and spiral CT

Conventional CT acquires data one slice at a time. After
all projections of a slice are acquired, the table is incremented and another slice is acquired. Alternatively, spiral 共or
helical兲 CT, which became available in the late 1980s, allows
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

C. Multislice scanners

A recent development in CT technology allows projection
data from multiple slices to be acquired simultaneously.25–27
Such multi-slice scanners use multiple row of detectors in
the z axis. Data from one or several of the detector rows can
be combined for a given data channel.
The primary advantage of multislice scanners is the ability to acquire image studies faster than single slice scanners.
For example, a 4-slice helical CT can provide equivalent
image quality at 2 to 3 times the volume coverage speed of a
single slice helical CT.26 Due to the longer length of imaged
volume per tube rotation 共multiple slices acquired simultaneously兲, the tube heat loading for a particular patient volume is lower for multislice than for single-slice scanners.
Faster acquisition times and decreased tube loading of multislice scanners 共which will allow longer volumes to be
scanned in a single acquisition兲 can potentially provide an
advantage over single-slice systems for CT-simulation purposes. Multislice technology can be especially beneficial for
simulation of the thorax where breathing artifacts can be
minimized. This technology can also be valuable for simulation of respiratory-gated treatments.27–30 Multislice scanners
are also capable of acquiring thinner slices which can result
in better quality DRRs.
Image performance of multi slice scanners may be evaluated by the same methods as conventional CT-scanners31 and
QA procedures discussed in this report may be used.
D. Large bore scanners

Conventional radiation therapy techniques often require
patients to be in positions that can prevent them from entering the 70 cm bore opening found on the majority of CTscanners. As an example, breast treatments where the ipsilateral arm is subtended at close to a 90° angle frequently have
difficulty entering the 70 cm bore. Inability to simulate all
patients in a comfortable treatment position due to restricted
bore opening has often been cited as one of the weaknesses
of the CT-simulation process.1,3,12,32 At least one manufacturer offers a CT-scanner with an 85 cm bore opening, designed specifically for radiation oncology purposes. The
larger opening allows for greater flexibility in patient positioning and use of immobilization devices. The 85 cm bore
scanner also has increased scan field of view 共SFOV兲, 60 cm
compared to 48 cm on most 70 cm bore units. Increased

2770

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

SFOV allows for full visualization of larger patients and immobilization devices. This feature is important to fully assess
patient external dimensions which are necessary for radiation
treatment planning and monitor unit calculations. The large
bore scanner image quality is generally comparable to 70 cm
units, however, some degradation in high contrast resolution
and image noise have been observed.33
Image performance of large bore scanners may be evaluated by the same methods as conventional CT-scanners,33
and QA procedures discussed in this report are also applicable.
E. CT performance parameters

Ever since the availability of the first commercial CTscanner, nearly 25 years ago, the evaluation of CT performance has not changed significantly over time. The performance parameters being evaluated typically include the x-ray
system calibration, collimator assessment, localization laser
alignment, slice width and sensitivity profile, radiation exposure and dose, image uniformity and noise, spatial resolution,
contrast resolution, CT number calibration and linearity, and
artifact evaluation. For surgical and radiation therapy planning applications, the scanner’s internal calibration accuracy
for the orientation, dimension, and position of the threedimensional object being imaged must also be verified. Detailed discussions on the performance evaluation for acceptance testing and QA have been published on conventional
and spiral CT14,34 –37 for multi-slice scanners,31 and for largebore scanners.33 With the increasing presence of networked
electronic devices and PACS systems, network communication and file compatibility issues among various computer
workstations are additional performance parameters that
must be addressed.
III. QUALITY ASSURANCE FOR CT-SCANNERS
USED FOR CT-SIMULATION AND ITS FREQUENCY
For a successful CT-simulation process, the CT-scanner
should consistently produce patient images with the highest
possible quality and accurate geometrical information. Image
quality directly affects the physician’s ability to define target
volumes and critical structures, and the spatial integrity of
the CT study establishes how accurately radiation can be
delivered to target volumes. The CT-scanner evaluation process consists of an evaluation of patient dose from the CTscanner, radiation safety, electromechanical components, and
image quality. Testing procedures and QA devices described
here are just for illustration purposes. They are intended to
describe a general approach to CT-simulation QA. Alternative testing methods and phantoms exist and can certainly be
used in place of methods described here.
A. CT dosimetry

A primary concern of CT-simulation QA is patient safety.
Radiation doses received by radiation therapy patients from a
CT-simulation scan are insignificant in comparison with
treatment dose from primary radiation fields and scatter and
leakage radiation38 and scan doses are in general not a seriMedical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2770

ous concern. However, CT-scanner dosimetry must be a part
of initial acceptance testing and periodic scanner QA. CTscanner dosimetry evaluation has been defined by a number
of regulatory agencies, and can be a concern of the Joint
Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations
共JCAHO兲. A more detailed description of CT dosimetry is
provided in the Appendix B. Recommendations for evaluation of CT dosimetry are provided in Table I.
B. RadiationÕpatient safety

Radiation exposure from CT-simulation procedures to
hospital employees and the public must be below regulatory
limits.39 Part of the initial acceptance testing must include a
shielding survey. Appendix C includes discussion on radiation safety survey and shielding evaluation.
As with other radiation producing devices, CT-scanners
are equipped with emergency off switches. CT-scanner emergency off switches are usually located on the gantry and at
the control console. The use of emergency off switches can
damage the CT-scanner. These switches should be tested under conditions which will not harm the scanner.
CT-scanners are typically equipped with connections for
door interlocks. The use of door interlocks for CT-simulator
can potentially be harmful for the patient. If the scan is interrupted during image acquisition, the entire scan may have
to be repeated. This would expose the patient to unnecessary
radiation. A more troublesome situation would be interruption of a scan while the patient is being injected with a contrast material. Exposure to a person accidentally entering a
CT-scanner room during image acquisition is minimal and
well below regulatory limits. The interruption of a scan acquisition therefore has a potential to be much more harmful
to the patient than beneficial for a person entering the scanner room. Therefore, door interlocks should be avoided in
CT-simulator installations, unless required by other regulations. This recommendation is consistent with the International Electromechanical Commission Publication No.
60601-2-44 Amendment 1 共Medical Electrical Equipment.
Part 2-44: Particular requirements for the safety of x-ray
equipment for computed tomography兲 conclusions.
C. Performance of electromechanical components

Proper operation of electromechanical components can affect patient safety and the accuracy of CT-simulation process. This portion of the document describes testing of these
components.

1. Patient marking Õpositioning lasers
As previously described, scanners used for CT-simulation
are typically equipped with external lasers. These lasers are
used to position the patient in the treatment position assuring
that patients are straight and properly rotated. These lasers
are also used to place positioning marks on patient skin.
Just as the treatment room lasers possess a well-defined
and precise spatial relationship to the treatment machine isocenter, the CT-simulation patient marking lasers must pos-

2771

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

sess a similar relationship to the CT-scanner image center.
Thus, the accuracy of the lasers directly affects the ability to
localize treatment volumes relative to patient skin marks and
the reproducibly of patient positioning from the CT-scanner
to the treatment machine. Accuracy and spatial orientation of
lasers therefore must be comparable to treatment machine
laser accuracy.13 Laser accuracy tolerances depend on the
goals of radiation therapy and required accuracy of treatment
procedures. Tolerances recommended in Table II need to be
evaluated by individual institutions.
QA goals: CT-scanner patient marking/positioning lasers
consist of three separate components: gantry lasers, wall
mounted lasers 共which may be mobile兲, and an overhead
mobile sagittal laser 共Fig. 2兲. The gantry lasers are typically
mounted on a rotating frame within the gantry. The overhead
gantry laser defines the sagittal and axial planes, while the
two lateral gantry lasers identify the coronal and axial
planes. In addition to the gantry lasers, two lateral, or side,
lasers are mounted to the walls or rigid stands and project
lines defining the coronal and axial planes 共horizontal and
vertical, respectively兲. The vertical wall lasers are mounted
to project at a predefined, fixed distance 共usually 500 mm兲
away from the imaging plane. Last, an overhead laser
projects a laser line defining the sagittal plane. During the
CT-simulation process the wall and overhead lasers are used
for patient marking.1,2,4,12
The following are performance requirements for CTscanner lasers:
共1兲 gantry lasers should accurately identify scan plane
within the gantry opening;
共2兲 gantry lasers should be parallel and orthogonal with the
scan plane and should intersect in the center of scan
plane;
共3兲 vertical side-wall lasers should be accurately spaced
from imaging plane;
共4兲 wall lasers should be parallel and orthogonal with the
scan plane, and should intersect at a point which is coincident with the center of the scan plane;
共5兲 the overhead 共sagittal兲 laser should be orthogonal to the
imaging plane;
共6兲 the overhead 共sagittal兲 laser movement should be accurate, linear, and reproducible.
Tools needed: An alignment tool or a phantom is needed
to assess laser geometry and accuracy. There are several designs for scanner laser QA devices. Figure 4 shows an example of such a device. This QA device can be used to assess
all of the above six performance requirements for scanner
lasers. In addition, other geometric and imaging tests can be
performed with the device. The device used here is just for
illustration purposes and its use is described for testing of
other parameters throughout this document. Devices with
similar functionality are commercially available and can also
be used for these tests. In absence of such devices, the medical physicist can devise procedures that test same parameters
or use alternative testing methods.
Test method: A sample laser QA process, step-by-step proMedical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2771

FIG. 4. 共a兲 CT-simulator laser QA device attached to the table top using a
registration bar; 共b兲 diagram of the side view of the device through the
center of two pegs showing holes drilled inside the pegs; 共c兲 diagram of the
top view of the device.

cedure, and accompanying form are included in the Appendix D. Parts of this process should be performed daily, as
suggested in Table II, and the full procedure should be performed monthly or more frequently depending on laser stability.

2. Couch and tabletop
Diagnostic CT-scanners are usually equipped with only a
cradle-shaped couch top 共the tabletop is cup shaped to conform to the circular opening of the CT-scanner gantry兲. Scanners used for CT-simulation require a flat tabletop similar to
the treatment machine’s tabletop geometry. The flat tabletop
can be an insert that fits inside the cradle of the existing table
or an overlay which is mounted on the top of the cradle 共Fig.
3兲.
Relative to treatment setup accuracy, the tabletop represents a direct connection between the CT-scanner and the
treatment machine. Inaccuracies in the scanner tabletop geometry will translate into poor patient position reproducibility on the treatment machine. Additionally, inaccurate table
indexing can cause image spatial distortions,36 and vertical
and longitudinal movement errors can cause inaccuracies in
marking of the patient’s skin relative to the calculated treatment isocenter.
QA goals: The following are performance requirements
for the CT-scanner couch and tabletop:
共1兲 flat tabletop should be level and orthogonal with respect
to the imaging plane;

2772

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

共2兲 table vertical and longitudinal motion according to digital indicators should be accurate and reproducible;
共3兲 table indexing and position under scanner control should
be accurate;
共4兲 flat tabletop should not contain any objectionable artifact
producing objects 共screws, etc.兲.
Test method: A sample QA procedure for scanner table
and rationale for the above listed tests are provided in the
Appendix E. Testing frequencies and tolerances are specified
in Table II.

3. Gantry tilt
The majority of CT-scanners are capable of acquiring
nonorthogonal CT-scans by tilting the gantry. This feature is
useful for acquiring diagnostic images through certain anatomical structures which are not necessarily parallel with the
imaging plane. Scanner tilt is generally not desired in CTsimulation. However, as the majority of scanners are capable
of gantry tilt this issue must be addressed in the CTsimulation QA program.
QA goals: The digitally indicated angle of the CT-scanner
gantry with respect to the nominal vertical imaging plane,
should be accurate within ⫾1°. For scanner used for CTsimulation, it is most important that the gantry accurately
returns to the nominal vertical scan plane after being tilted to
some other angle. This is especially relevant for scanners that
are being shared with diagnostic radiology. A dedicated scanner may only rarely have its gantry tilted away from the
vertical scan plane. However, a shared scanner may frequently have its gantry tilted for, nonorthogonal, diagnostic
scans. As described in Sec. III C 2, the scanner gantry must
be level/orthogonal with respect to the couch tabletop. The
following are requirements for scanner gantry tilt:
共1兲 the angle of gantry tilt with respect to the nominal vertical imaging plane should be accurate;
共2兲 after the tilt, the gantry should return to the nominal
vertical imaging plane 共i.e., orthogonal to the tabletop兲.
Tools needed: Ready-pack film, laser QA device from Fig.
4, square acrylic or water equivalent plastic sheet from 2 to 4
cm thick.
Test method: 共1兲 The angle of gantry tilt with respect to
the nominal vertical imaging plane should be accurate. This
test has been described in detail in Report No. 39 共III A 3兲14
and by McCollough.36 A ready-pack film is taped to a square
acrylic or water-equivalent plastic sheet. The sheet is placed
on its side aligned with the sagittal gantry lasers 共orthogonal
to the imaging plane兲. The side gantry lasers should intersect
in the approximate vertical center of the film. A single scan
with the thinnest available thickness is first acquired with
gantry at 0°. The gantry is then tilted in both directions
共towards and away from the table兲 and a single scan is acquired at both gantry positions. For both gantry angles, the
gantry position should be close to the end of the range of
motion. The angles between the vertical 共nominal gantry position兲 exposure and tilted gantry exposures as measured
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2772

with a protractor on the film should agree within ⫾1° of the
digitally indicated gantry angle used for exposure.
共2兲 After tilt the gantry, the gantry should return to the
nominal vertical imaging plane (i.e., orthogonal to the tabletop). This test is performed by aligning the laser QA device
with the gantry lasers and assuring that the device is aligned
with the side vertical gantry lasers through the full range of
the vertical couch travel. The gantry is then tilted in either
direction and then returned to the vertical position. The
alignment of the laser QA device with vertical side gantry
lasers should remain within 1 mm from the side holes on
both pegs. The test should be repeated for tilting the gantry
in the opposite direction and returning it to the nominal position.

4. Scan localization from scout image (topogram,
pilot image)
Accurate scan volume and scan location as prescribed
from the scout image 共topogram, pilot image兲 is important
for accurate clinical scanning. This feature can be especially
important when performing quantitative measurements or
scans of phantoms and dosimetric equipment.
QA goals: The scan volume and scan location as prescribed from the scout image should be accurate within 1
mm. Evaluation of the radiation profile width and sensitivity
profile width has been described in detail in Report No. 39
共III A 4兲 and by McCollough.35,36

5. Collimation
The majority of CT-scanners collimate the radiation beam
in the longitudinal direction distal to the x-ray source 共prepatient collimation兲 and also immediately prior to the detector array 共post-patient collimation兲. The accuracy of both, the
pre- and post-patient collimation can significantly influence
the scan image quality. Additionally, the pre-patient collimation has direct influence on patient dose from a CT-scan. The
accuracy of the pre-patient collimation is evaluated by measuring the Radiation Profile Width emerging from the
scanner.14,31,36,40– 42 The actual width of the imaged slice,
which is affected by the post-patient collimation, is assed by
measuring the Sensitivity Profile Width.14,35,36,39,43 If the radiation profile width is wider than indicated, unnecessary
radiation will be delivered to the patient, thus increasing the
total dose from the scan. An excessively narrow radiation
profile or sensitivity profile width may cause increased quantum noise due to reduced photon count. Excessive sensitivity
profile width can result in some lose of resolution in the
longitudinal direction.
Evaluation of the radiation profile width and sensitivity
profile width has been described in detail in Report No. 39
关III A 6共a兲 and III A 6共b兲, respectively兴 and those procedures
are recommended by this report. Manufacturer supplied performance evaluation phantoms and software routinely have
the capability to evaluate sensitivity profile width. This utility should be included in the periodic QA program. During
the scanner commissioning process, the manufacturersupplied performance evaluation phantoms and software

2773

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

must be validated independently.31,33 The manufacturer sensitivity profile width test can be validated by comparison
with the test performed according to the Report No. 39 procedure.

6. X-ray generator
Similar to other radiographic equipment, proper operation
of a CT-scanner requires that quantity and quality of photons
emitted from the x-ray tube agree with settings programmed
on the control console for scan acquisition. Miscalibration or
performance errors of the x-ray generator components can
result in poor images with readily visible artifacts. The scanner software itself is often capable of detecting such errors
and aborting scanning. The tests outlined in the Appendix F
should be performed during commissioning and then annually if desired.

2773

1. Random uncertainty in pixel value (noise)
Ideally, a CT-scan of a uniform phantom would have uniform pixel values 共CT numbers兲 throughout the phantom image. In reality, the CT numbers in an image of a homogenous
phantom are not uniform. The variation in pixel intensities
has random and systematic components. The random component of image nonuniformity is noise. The standard deviation of pixel values in a region of interest 共ROI兲 within a
uniform phantom is an indication of image noise. The noise
can be expressed in terms of standard deviation of the CT
numbers in Hounsfield units 共HU兲 or as a percent of the
linear attenuation coefficient of water ( ␮ w ) and corrected for
the scanner contrast scale:14,44
Noise⫽

␦ •CS•100%
,
␮w

共1兲

D. Image quality tests

Image quality directly affects the ability to identify and
delineate target volumes and surrounding critical structures
for radiation treatment planning. Suboptimal image quality
may cause the omission of a portion of the target volume or
inadvertent delineation of normal structures as target volumes, therefore, causing serious errors. It is imperative that
the image performance of a CT-scanner used for CTsimulation be maintained as optimally as possible. The scanner QA program should be structured to detect quickly and
identify degradation in imaging performance. Optimal image
performance for the purposes of the QA program means that
the CT-scanner at least meets or exceeds minimal manufacturer specifications. The QA program goals should be to
verify that the scanner meets manufacturer specifications.
Due to significant differences in design and imaging capabilities of modern CT-scanners, common minimum standards
for image performance indicators for all scanners are not
practical. The AAPM Report No. 39 addresses in detail image performance tests. Tests and recommendations outlined
in that report are sufficient for establishment of image performance QA for scanners used for CT-simulation. Furthermore, the majority of scanner manufacturers have phantoms
and software, which are supplied with the CT-scanner, which
can be used to assess image quality as a part of a QA program. Although, the primary purpose of these vendor supplied phantoms is for scanner calibration and automated
baseline performance evaluation it is reasonable to assume
that they can be used for periodic scanner performance
evaluation. The validity of CT-scanner manufacturer supplied phantoms and software must be verified against independent test methods or phantoms before they can be used
for routine QA. During the initial acceptance testing and
commissioning, tests should be performed with both, manufacturer phantom and independent test methods.33 Portions of
this validation should be repeated during the annual scanner
QA. Commercial CT performance phantoms are well suited
for independent verification of manufacturer supplied phantoms and performance evaluation software. Image quality
tests outlined below are in order as they are presented in
Report No. 39.
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

where ␦ is the standard deviation of CT numbers within the
region of interest; CS is the contrast scale defined as CS
⫽( ␮ m ⫺ ␮ w /CTm ⫺CTw ), where ␮ m and ␮ w are the linear
attenuation coefficients for the subject material and water,
respectively, and CTm and CTw are the measured CT numbers for the subject material and water, respectively.
Image noise determines the lower limit of subject contrast
that can be distinguished by the observer 共physician, dosimetrist, etc.兲. The more uniform the background containing a
low contrast object, the greater its contrast with that background. Theoretically, minimal noise images should increase
normal structure and target delineation accuracy.
Noise is very a sensitive parameter to the overall imaging
performance of the scanner, and can usually be performed in
conjunction with uniformity tests 共next section兲. We recommend that noise be evaluated daily.
QA goals: The QA program should verify that the scanner
noise meets or exceeds manufacturer specifications. Scanner
noise should be evaluated daily as outlined in Table III.
Tools needed: Head and body water phantoms 共manufacturer provided phantoms are adequate for this purpose兲 or
commercially available phantoms.
Test method: Noise measurements should be performed as
outlined in Report No. 39 共III B 1兲. Alternatively, the manufacturer performance phantom and software may be used to
measure noise.

2. Systematic uncertainty—field uniformity
Image artifacts due to equipment design, beam-hardening,
or image reconstruction software can manifest themselves as
systematic CT number 共HU兲 variations. Scanning a uniform
phantom and sampling mean HU values for ROIs of fixed
areas throughout the phantom can quantify the presence of
systematic variations. This process is referred to as a field
uniformity test. Report No. 39 共III B 2兲 provides a detailed
discussion of various causes of field non-uniformity, and
measurement procedures. As described below, a water scan
which is used to verify CT number accuracy and field uni-

2774

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

formity should be acquired monthly for the most commonly
used kVp and annually for other kVp settings with tolerance
of ⫾5 HU.
QA goals: CT images should be free of systematic artifacts, and an image of a uniform phantom should have uniform appearance without streaking and artifacts. The difference in the mean HU values for ROIs sampled throughout a
uniform phantom should be within 10 HU. Due to the simplicity of this test and its ability to reveal major system malfunctions, field uniformity tests should be performed daily
for the most frequently used scan kVp and monthly for other
kVp values.
Tools needed: Typically, a body and a head phantom are
used 共32 cm and 16 cm diameter water-filled cylinders兲. The
manufacturer-supplied phantom should contain both of these
sections.
Test method: Field uniformity measurements should be
performed as outlined in Report No. 39 共III B 2兲. Alternatively, the manufacturer performance phantom and software
can be used to perform this test.
Both the procedure described in Report No. 39 and manufacturer test procedures require the uniformity phantom to be
centered in the scan plane. This is indeed appropriate for
diagnostic CT-scanners, as the vast majority of patients are
placed in that location for clinical scanning. CT-simulation
scans frequently require the anatomical area of interest to be
placed away from the center of the scan field. For example,
breast patients are typically placed to the side of the scan
field to allow the ipsilateral arm to pass through the scanner
opening.19 Therefore, field uniformity for the scanner used
for CT-simulation should be evaluated with the phantom
placed in the center of scan field and also with the phantom
displaced towards the edge of the field. For daily tests, the
phantom should be centered. For monthly tests, the phantom
can be shifted. The manufacturer stated uniformity specifications only apply to centered phantoms. When the phantom is
shifted, it may not be possible to maintain manufacturer uniformity specifications. Therefore, the baseline values measured at the time of scanner installation should be used for
uniformity evaluation with the shifted phantom. The evaluated area should be meaningful with respect to the size of the
scan field.
Image artifacts visible on patient images may not always
be visible on phantom images. A scanner image reconstruction algorithm is designed to compensate for certain image
artifacts. Often, this software does a very good job for phantom images as these are used in the software development.
The software may not perform as well when scanning certain
body areas, and can actually introduce artifacts. Patient images should also viewed for artifacts due to field nonuniformity.

3. Quantitative CT
Typically, images acquired by the scanner used for CTsimulation will be used for dose distribution calculations.
The majority of modern treatment planning systems can perform density-corrected dose calculations. These calculations
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2774

typically rely on relative physical or electron density 共number of electrons per unit volume兲 information contained in
the CT images. This information is obtained from CT images
using a density to CT number conversion. This relationship
is typically scanner dependent. If multiple scanners and scan
energies are used to provide treatment-planning images, density to CT number relationship for all scanners should be
evaluated for consistency. Part of the periodic CT-simulation
QA program should be an evaluation of CT number accuracy
and density to CT number relationship.
Each CT image is a two-dimensional matrix of CT numbers corresponding to mean linear attenuation coefficients of
the material in each voxel.20 Scanner software has tools
which will report the mean CT numbers for the region of
interest in a CT image. The measured mean CT number for a
given material should correspond to a value calculated based
on the mean linear attenuation coefficient for the given material and water at specific beam energy. However, this relationship depends on scanner performance and calibration and
should be verified experimentally.
When density-corrected dose calculations are used for
treatment planning, incorrect CT number to density relationship can cause dose calculation errors. This was discussed in
more detail by TG53.15
QA goals: The QA program should include verification of
CT number accuracy 共measured CT numbers should agree
with their theoretical values兲. The National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements 共NCRP兲 Report No.
9945 has discussed tolerances for CT number accuracy. In the
absence of manufacturer specifications, NCRP report recommendations can be used as tolerance limits. CT number accuracy should be verified daily at least for water. Accuracy
for three to five additional materials should be verified
monthly and after scanner recalibration or major component
replacement. The manufacturer phantom or electron density
phantom can be used for this task.
Furthermore, the density to CT number conversion relationship should be determined during initial scanner commissioning and verified at least annually. Commercially available electron density phantoms can be used for this task.
These phantoms often consists of a water-equivalent plastic
disk approximating the size of an average pelvis with holes
in the disk to hold interchangeable rods made of various
tissue and water simulating materials. Since CT images can
theoretically cover a 16-bit range of values, planning software should be checked for compatibility in handling very
low negative and very high positive numbers. Some treatment planning systems have created calculation errors when
such numbers were associated with the treatment planning
study set.
Test method: This procedure is performed with a density
phantom and is similar to the test for evaluation of field
uniformity. After scanning the uniform section of the manufacturer phantom, the ROI tool is used to measure the mean
CT number for water. This value should be within an acceptable tolerance 共usually 0 HU⫾5兲. For monthly tests, this
procedure is repeated with a phantom that contains multiple
objects of known composition. The phantom is scanned and

2775

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

2775

FIG. 5. Image performance evaluation phantom: 共a兲
line-pair section, 共b兲 MTF section, 共c兲 low contrast
resolution section.

the ROI tool is used to evaluate the mean CT number for
each of the materials. The numbers should be consistent with
theoretical and baseline values, measured at the time of commissioning.
For density to CT number conversion measurements, a
phantom with several objects of known composition is
needed. The ROI tool is again used to measure the mean CT
number for each material. These numbers can be plotted and
compared with commissioning data.

4. Spatial integrity
Radiation treatment planning relies on accurate reproduction of true patient dimensions and shape in CT images; this
includes external skin contour and internal organs. Image
distortions can potentially cause dosimetric errors by causing
delivery of inappropriate radiation doses or treatment of the
wrong area. Therefore, spatial integrity should be verified as
a part of the CT-scanner QA program.
QA goals: CT-simulation images should accurately reproduce true patient anatomy within ⫾1 mm without spatial
distortions in the entire scan field. This should be verified for
both head and body scan protocols using a phantom of
known dimensions.

5. Spatial resolution
Spatial resolution is a common parameter used for evaluation of imaging systems. It characterizes the imaging system’s ability to distinguish between two very small objects
placed closely together. Spatial resolution measurements are
performed with objects which have a high contrast 共contrast
difference of 12% or greater兲 from uniform background.20
Spatial resolution is frequently referred to as high contrast
resolution. High contrast resolution is a function of blurring
present in a CT image.14,20 High contrast resolution is most
commonly measured using either a resolution pattern 共line
pair phantom with a range of spatial frequencies兲, or by the
modulation transfer function 共MTF兲 method. Physical properties, measurement techniques and evaluation of resolution
pattern and MTF have been described in detail in the
literature.14,31,33,35,46 –52 CT image of a line pair phantom is
shown in Fig. 5共a兲. The line pair pattern in Fig. 5共a兲 ranges in
frequency from 1 lp/cm to 21 lp/cm. Fig. 5共b兲 shows a CT
image of a phantom which contains a high-density, tungsten
carbide bead which is used to create an impulse, or point
source, from which the MTF can be calculated. Manufacturers often specify the limiting spatial resolution at the 5% or
lower point on the MTF curve. The limiting spatial resoluMedical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

tion 共lp/cm兲 measured with MTF, and specified at the 5%
value, is typically higher than the resolution that can be observed with a line pair phantom. Therefore, spatial resolution
measured with a line pair phantom may not always meet
manufacturer specifications. To verify the manufacturer’s
specification, the scanner MTF should be measured. The
manufacturer supplied performance phantom and software
should be capable of measuring MTF. Spatial resolution
measured with the manufacturer phantom should be independently verified as described in Report No. 39 关III B 3共a兲兴. At
the same time a baseline measurement with a line pair phantom may be obtained, which can then be used as a reference
for periodic QA measurements.33,53
Spatial resolution is a fundamental indicator of the scanner’s imaging capabilities. The CT-scanners used for CTsimulation should be able to image and differentiate small
details in patient anatomy, as well as any implanted objects.
For example, CT-scanners are often used to image postbrachytherapy-implant prostate patients and image resolution
should be capable of distinguishing seeds located closely
together.54
QA goals: The scanner should meet manufacturer specified spatial resolution performance. The spatial resolution
should be evaluated monthly 共Table III兲.
Tools: Manufacturer phantom, line pair phantom, or a
commercial CT performance phantom.
Test method: As outlined in the AAPM Report No. 39.

6. Contrast resolution
Contrast resolution can be defined as the CT-scanner’s
ability to distinguish relatively large objects which differ
only slightly in density from background.20 Contrast resolution is often referred to as low contrast resolution. Low contrast resolution is typically evaluated with a phantom that
contains low contrast objects of varying sizes.14,20,31,33–36
Also multiple sets of objects of different contrasts can be
contained in the phantom. The phantom imaged in Fig. 5共c兲
contains three sets of cylindrical rods of various diameters
and contrast levels to measure low contrast performance. The
rod diameters at each contrast level are 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, and 15 with nominal contrast levels of 0.3%, 0.5%, and
1%.
QA goals: Quality assurance should demonstrate that the
CT-scanner meets or exceeds manufacturer specifications for
low contrast resolution. This can be evaluated using a commercially available, low contrast phantom. The manufactur-

2776

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

er’s performance phantom and software may also be used for
this task, providing that its measurements are independently
verified.
Tools: Commercial low contrast phantom or manufacturer
performance phantom.
Test method: As outlined in the AAPM Report No. 39
关III B 3共b兲兴.
IV. QUALITY ASSURANCE FOR CT-SIMULATION
SOFTWARE AND ITS FREQUENCY
CT-simulation is a geometric simulation process that provides beam arrangements and treatment fields without any
dosimetric information. For this process to be successful,
accurate beam geometry information should be maintained in
the software and accurate patient geometry should be supplied. Since the core of CT-simulation is the processing of
patient images in the virtual simulation software, the accuracy and integrity of that software should be a prime consideration. The CT-simulation software accuracy should be verified during alpha and beta testing by the manufacturer;
however, when it is released, it should be tested clinically by
the therapy physicist. A list of test parameters was published
by McGee and Das.55 The AAPM TG53 report15 also addresses in detail commissioning, acceptance testing, and periodic QA of clinical radiation treatment planning systems.
Chapter 3 of that report discusses testing of nondosimetric
aspects of treatment planning features. The majority of these
tests are related to CT-simulation software. The current task
group fully endorses the recommendations of the AAPM
TG53 for QA of treatment planning systems and we recommend that procedures outlined in that report be implemented
as a part of the CT-simulation QA program. Therefore, we
list here only a partial list of CT-simulation software function
tests and refer the reader to the TG53 report for detailed
descriptions.
Quality assurance of CT-simulation software can be simplified with the use of appropriate phantoms. These phantoms allow evaluation of imaging and geometric accuracy of
CT-simulation software. Craig et al.56 and McGee et al.53
have describedsuch phantoms. One such phantom is shown
in Fig. 6. The QA program should include verification of the
following CT-simulation software features:
A. SpatialÕgeometry accuracy tests

1. Image input test
These tests should verify that images transferred from the
CT-simulation scanner or other scanners 共CT, MRI, PET兲
have correct image geometry 共e.g., pixel size, spatial fidelity,
slice thickness and spacing兲, image orientation 共e.g., prone/
supine, head-foot orientation, and left–right orientation兲,
scan text information, and grayscale values. These objects
are transferred on most modern systems using Digital Image
Communications in Medicine 共DICOM兲 standard.57 DICOM
is a standard for representing and exchanging medical imaging data. The image transfer test should include verification
of proper transfer and processing of DICOM objects.
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2776

Correct image orientation is always a concern when images are transferred between treatment planning systems.
This is especially true when images contain symmetric
anatomy which does not indicate patients right or left side; or
if there is a concern if the patient was scanned with head or
feet towards the gantry. It is often desirable to have a landmark in the CT image that indicates patient geometry. Two
thin aluminum wires can be taped on the bottom of the CTscanner tabletop to indicate patient orientation in CT images.
The wires should be taped on the left or right side of the
tabletop and along its entire length. The two wires should
also form the letter ‘‘V’’ which is pointing towards the gantry. The letter ‘‘V’’ indicates patient’s scan orientation 共Head/
Feet first兲. The wires should be small enough to avoid image
artifacts. The right side of image in Fig. 8共a兲 contains such
wires.

2. Structure delineation
Tables 3-4 and 3-5 in the TG53 report list tests related to
anatomical structures and contouring. Anatomical contours
are one of the building blocks of conformal radiation therapy
and errors associated with manipulation and processing of
contours can cause potentially serious dosimetric errors.

3. Multimodality image registration
Treatment planning process is increasingly dependant on
input from several imaging modalities. As previously discussed, MRI and PET have much to offer in identification of
target volumes and other structures. Image registration is often part of CT-simulation process and proper operation of
software and image transfer must be verified. Image registration can be a complicated process and TG53 recommends
that AAPM form another task group specifically charged to
develop a report on the use and QA of dataset registration
techniques. Mutic et al.58 have described a phantom and process for QA of image registration.

4. Machine definition
Another important CT-simulation software feature is the
ability to create virtual treatment machines. The description,
limits, and readouts of virtual machines have to correspond
with actual treatment machines and must be machine type
specific. Tables 3-9, 3-10, 3-11, 3-12, 3-13, and 3-14 in the
TG53 report provide detailed lists of machine parameters
and appropriate tests. Some of the tests listed in these tables
are related to dose calculation and do not apply to CTsimulation. Machine definition also includes verification of
the virtual machine’s geometric resolution and accuracy. It is
reasonable to expect that geometric accuracy of a virtual
treatment machine is better than that of a real machine.
Collimator simulation: Collimator geometrical accuracy
should be similar to a treatment machine. The field size accuracy provided by CT-scanner should be within ⫾1 mm for
the entire range of field sizes. This accuracy should also be
the same for collimators with MLC. The CT-simulation software should provide the capability of independent jaws and
various MLC design. The user should verify proper opera-

2777

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

2777

FIG. 6. A quality assurance phantom for three-dimensional radiation treatment planning.

tion, size, limits, and features of a virtual MLC and compare
them with real MLC properties. Additional descriptions of
various MLCs can be found in the literature.59– 67
Collimator rotation should be within ⫾1° over full rotation 共360°兲. Accuracy of jaw positions at various collimator
angles should be tested. Comprehensive evaluation should be
at a minimum interval of 45°.
Gantry rotation: Gantry rotation should be accurate to
within ⫾1°. Combined functionality of the gantry and collimator should be tested at multiple positions. A standard convention for specifying gantry angle, collimator angle, table
angle, MLC orientation, and patient orientation is still desirable. As specified in the TG53 report, these conventions must
agree between CT-simulation software and the treatment machine. Errors in machine configuration can cause significant
difficulties in patient treatment. Virtual treatment machines
can typically be assigned limits to motion, but in certain
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

situations, the simulation software may not be able to accept
specific treatment machine configuration. This is primarily
due to the fact that software vendors can not predict all possible combinations of orientations for treatment machines. In
this situation, the treatment setup documentation created by
the simulation software will not agree with the actual treatment parameters and this may be unavoidable. The CTsimulation QA program should include steps to verify that
the printed documentation is properly corrected and that
treatments are implemented correctly.
Patient support assembly (PSA) simulation: Virtual simulation should provide the PSA movement and rotation functionality. An advantage of CT-simulation is that it can simulate and provide DRRs at angles which are not possible to
simulate with conventional simulators.68 The PSA rotation
should be accurate to within ⫾1°, which is commonly recommended for conventional simulators. Once again geo-

2778

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

metrical accuracy must be tested with the combination of
collimator and gantry rotation.

2778

resolution, ray line divergence accuracy, and spatial integrity.
Phantom described by Craig et al.56 can be used for geometric accuracy evaluation of DRRs.

5. Isocenter calculation and movement
A part of the patient CT-simulation scan is identification
of the treatment isocenter and placing of the corresponding
localization marks on the patient’s skin. As described in the
overview of the CT-simulation process, once the patient is
scanned the physician contours target volumes and simulation software calculates the treatment isocenter coordinates
based on those target volumes. The calculated or physician
selected isocenter coordinates are then used to move the CTscanner table and the overhead laser to mark the patient. The
accuracy of the isocenter calculation and shift instructions
must be verified. This should be performed with a variety of
target shapes 共e.g., sphere, cylinder兲.
Often, when abutting beams are used for patient treatment
or when multiple treatment sites are treated, there are multiple treatment isocenters. The software then creates a set of
instructions on how to shift from the initial isocenter to other
locations. The accuracy of these instructions must be verified
in all three directions.
This also applies when the treatment isocenter is not
marked during the CT-scan but only a set of initial reference
marks is placed on patient’s skin. In this situation, during the
virtual simulation the software will calculate shifts from the
initial reference to the treatment isocenter. These shifts will
be used to setup the patient on the treatment machine.

6. Image reconstruction
Multiplanar and 3D image reconstruction is another significant component of CT-simulation software. These views
are used to aid and evaluate beam placement and block design. Simulation software uses data in native axial images to
create reconstructions in arbitrary planes and various 3D
views. Typically, multiple views are displayed simultaneously. The tests should verify that the software accurately
reconstructs these displays and that beam and block projection on these views is accurate. The tests should include a set
of various geometrical shapes 共square, rectangle, circle, ellipse兲 of different dimensions. The accuracy in drawn contours at any point should be within ⫾1 mm.
B. Evaluation of digitally reconstructed radiographs
„DRRs…

One of the final products of a CT-simulation process is a
set of DRRs which is used for the verification of patient
positioning on the treatment machine. The quality and accuracy of these images affect the physician’s ability to verify
patient setup. Poor quality DRRs may not allow adequate
verification of patient positioning due to the inability to visualize anatomical details and geometrically inaccurate
DRRs will cause errors in patient setup and treatment due to
positioning errors.
McGee et al.53 described a phantom designed for this
task. The phantom consists of a 15 cm3 polystyrene block
with four test patterns to evaluate contrast resolution, spatial
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

1. Spatial and contrast resolution
It is generally understood that smaller slice thickness and
spacing produces better spatial resolution DRRs. McGee
et al.53 reported that contrast resolution is affected by the
image reconstruction area 共field of view兲. Initial commissioning of CT-simulation software should include evaluation
of DRR input parameters and possibilities for image quality
improvement. It is difficult to specify tolerance limits for
DRR spatial and contrast resolution. These are not routinely
specified by the software manufacturer, references are scarce
in literature, and image quality depends on many factors.
Therefore, it may not be practical to initially determine if the
system is operating correctly. A reasonable QA test would be
to scan a phantom which is similar to that of McGee et al.53
during the CT-scanner and simulation software commissioning and create baseline DRRs. The scan parameters and DRR
settings should be recorded with the film. Upon replacement
of major scanner components, DRR output device 共film
printer or plotter兲, and more importantly simulation software
upgrades, this process can be repeated to verify image performance consistency.

2. Geometric and spatial accuracy
Systematic or random geometrical errors associated with
DRR generation can easily translate into treatment errors.
Small DRR magnification errors 共2–5 %兲, may result in systematic errors in block manufacturing which may cause systematic treatment of smaller or larger areas than intended.
These errors can have dosimetric consequences, but due to
small magnitude may not be detected by the physician. The
majority of treatments distances are between 70 cm and 120
cm SSD, therefore, film magnification should be tested between these limits. Magnification should be within ⫾1 mm
of expected. Spatial errors 共e.g., collimator, table rotation,
incorrect jaw setting, etc.兲 can also cause errors which may
not be detected from patient port films. The QA for the CTsimulation process should include evaluation of DRR geometric errors.

3. Hardcopy quality
Performance of the DRR output device should also be
periodically evaluated. Printing of standard test patterns and
comparison with baseline data can reveal potential problems.
C. Periodic quality assurance testing

Recommendations for periodic QA testing of treatment
planning systems have been provided in chapter five of the
TG53 report. The current task group endorses those recommendations for periodic QA of simulation software. Periodic
QA should include a weekly review of any software errors,
problems, and unusual occurrences with the simulation team
members. The extent and frequency of treatment planning

2779

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

2779

TABLE IV. An example of abbreviated protocol for CT-simulation of patients with lung cancer.

SITE
LUNG

Patient
position
Supine.
Chin
extended.
Arms above
head,
folded, may
rest on 5 cm
or 7 cm
sponge

Slice
共mm兲

Index
共mm兲

Scan limits

Contrast

Special instructions

ONC MED/LG
THORAX 5⫻5

5

5

Chin to lung apex

ONC MED/LG
THORAX 3⫻3

3

3

Through target
and CAX, most
of lung

125 ml
Optiray 320
and/or
2 table
spoons
Esophocat

ONC MED/LG
THORAX 5⫻5

5

5

Through rest
of the lung

ONC MED/LG
THORAX 8⫻8

8

8

Top of kidneys or
per MD request

CAX drawn on
patient’s anterior and
lateral surfaces. Per
MD the CAX can be
placed mid depth and
midplane at highest
level of thorax.
Contrast given just
before the scan. Start
scanning after 1/2
contrast in.

Immobilization

Setup

Protocol

Alpha cradle registered
to table with
registration device.

Init. Ref. at
carina and
midplane or
per MD
instructions
on Sim
sheet.

software tests depend on the complexity and reliability of the
software and the local clinical practice. It is recommended
that extended testing 共a subset of commissioning tests兲 be
performed after installation of simulation software upgrades.
After the CT-scanner software upgrade, a smaller set of image related tests should be performed on the CT-simulation
software in addition to tests performed on the scanner.
Daily clinical operation should include a formal review of
CT-simulation plans with a specific set of parameters to be
reviewed.13 This review should be designed to detect errors
associated with CT-simulation software. Often these reviews
reveal errors in a timely fashion.
V. EVALUATION OF THE CT-SIMULATION
PROCESS
Once the individual components of a CT-simulation system are evaluated, it is necessary to look at the entire simulation process and evaluate its functionality. Tasks performed
in one step can affect accuracy of later steps and this can
only be evaluated by testing the whole process. The simulation process QA has two primary areas of concern: (1) Evaluation of the system functionality and (2) Data transfer tests.
Both areas and the QA aspects of each are addressed in this
section.
A. Overall process tests

As described in Sec. I, the CT-simulation process consists
of multiple steps. Often, to test the CT-simulation process, a
geometric phantom is scanned and treatment planning is performed on the phantom. Phantoms described in Sec. IV53,56
are well suited for this purpose. Additionally, several other
phantoms are commercially available. Appendix G provides
a list of steps for evaluation of the overall process. The test
may reveal systematic errors or incompatibilities in the treatment planning process. This is a very useful test during initial implementation of the CT-simulation program and we
recommend that commissioning includes such testing.
A component of every CT-simulation QA program is
planning of individual patient treatments. Each patient treatment plan and treatment has the potential to demonstrate
errors associated with simulation hardware and software and
the overall simulation process. The QA program should be
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

designed to include formal mechanism for reporting of errors, problems, and disagreements between treatment plans
and actual patient treatments. This process can often reveal
errors that are not included in the periodic QA program or
problems that have not been considered in the past. The response to these errors should include communication between treatment team members about error source and corrective actions.
The CT-simulation program should include written procedures. Whenever possible, these procedures should identify
sources of possible errors and suggest preventive measures.
The procedures should be reviewed annually. Annual review
of the CT-simulation program should include evaluation of
past errors and efficacy of corrective measures. All members
of the treatment planning team should be familiar with this
document. Procedures and protocols within a department alleviate the constant questioning of how to setup and acquire
data for a patient with a particular site of disease. Establishing procedures and protocols is the first step to concise CTsimulation. Procedures should be treatment site specific and
include scan protocols with patient setup and immobilization, scan protocol, scan limits, contrast, special instructions,
and possible beam arrangements. Table IV shows an abbreviated protocol for CT-simulation of patients with lung cancer. The following are some of the items that should be addressed in the procedure manual.
Patient positioning and immobilization: The success of
conformal radiation therapy process begins with proper setup
and immobilization. Positioning should be as comfortable as
possible. Patients who are uncomfortable typically have poor
treatment setup reproducibility. Patient setup design should
consider location of critical structures and target volumes,
patient overall health and flexibility, possible implants and
anatomic anomalies, and available immobilization devices.
Immobilization devices tremendously improve reproducibility and rigidity of the setup. Treatment devices should be
evaluated to assess whether they are appropriate for a particular treatment site and how well they perform that task.
Evaluation of an immobilization device should include
whether the patient is comfortable and well immobilized
through the entire course of therapy. Immobilization and
treatment devices should not produce image artifacts and dis-

2780

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

tortions. Immobilization performs two tasks: 共1兲 Conforms to
the patient’s contours in a manner that allows minimal movement and 共2兲 registers patient to the simulation/treatment
table so treatment position can be easily and accurately reproduced. With use of an immobilization device that is registered to the table, the record and verify system can monitor
treatment table coordinates with tight tolerance limits. Establishing a good immobilization protocol for each treatment
site is the first step in assuring preciseness of a CTsimulation process.
The simulation procedures should include instructions for
patient positioning. For example, depending on the target
area of the brain the head can be extended, in the neutral
position, rotated or the chin can be tucked. If this is not
specified, patient position may be suboptimal and scan may
have to be repeated. It is physician’s responsibility to provide
instructions for proper patient positioning.
Scan limits: Scan limits should be specified by the physician and should encompass volume long enough to create
DRRs with enough anatomical information. The scan volume
should be at least 5 cm or greater in the superior and inferior
direction from the anticipated treatment volumes, longer volumes may be necessary for special situations 共e.g., noncoplanar beams, vertex beams, etc.兲.
Scan protocol: The CT-scan parameters should be designed to optimize both axial and DRR image
quality.2,3,11,20,53,69,70 The parameters influencing axial and
DRR image quality include: kVp, mAs, slice thickness, slice
spacing, spiral pitch, algorithms, scanned volume, total scan
time, and field of view 共FOV兲.11,14,20,23,31,33,34,36,53,68,69,71
Modern scanners come with preset protocols. Often, these
may include ‘‘oncology’’ protocols which are designed for
the CT-simulation process. Preset protocols should be reviewed by the local facility. The scan protocols should be
reviewed at least annually for integrity, adequacy, and possible improvements.
Contrast: The use of contrast may be necessary for certain
sites to better evaluate organs and tissue. Certain contrast
materials that may have been used in conventional simulation may produce too many artifacts on the CT. For
heterogeneity-based calculations, contrast can cause dose
distribution errors due to artificial CT numbers and corresponding tissue densities. Contrast use should be reviewed
with physicians periodically.
Special considerations and instructions: Each treatment
site has unique considerations. These should be specified in
CT-simulation procedures. Special considerations include:
individual physician preferences, wiring of surgical scars for
identification on CT images, scanning of patients with pacemakers and other implants, scanning of pediatric patients,
patients under anesthesia, etc. A communication chain and
responsibilities should be established for new problems and
scans of patients with special needs.
Data acquisition: During the actual scanning of the patient it is important to observe and evaluate any voluntary or
extreme involuntary movement such as the rise and fall of
the chest. Unlike conventional simulation where the user is
able to watch the motion of the patient under fluoroscopy
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2780

and therefore make some clinical decisions based on this
movement, CT-simulation is a snapshot of anatomy. The patient should be relaxed and comfortable to improve daily
treatment reproducibility.
Localization/marking: Localization begins once the data
set has been acquired and transferred to the virtual simulation workstation. Isocenter can be placed based on the location of bony landmarks or based on structure centering. Initial observations regarding data transfer should include:
patient orientation, image indexing, and FOV. Two things are
imperative in localization: 共1兲 the isocenter localized in the
software must coincide with the isocenter marked on the patient and 共2兲 tissue delineation is accurate and representative
of the structure 共i.e., the area outlined on the CT equals the
actual area of the structure兲. System tests described in Sec.
III C 1 ensure that the lasers are aligned. The transfer of isocenter coordinates from the simulation workstation to the CT
couch should also be evaluated for accuracy. Once the CT
couch has been moved the lasers should represent the same
isocenter as localized on the workstation.
Patient marking is also a key issue in QA for CTsimulation. Along with well-designed immobilization, good
laser marking on the patient’s skin improves the patient positioning reproducibility. Long laser lines drawn on the patient’s skin can establish the appropriate plane of treatment
and minimize patient rotation and angulation on a day to day
basis. It is not sufficient to only mark three small crosses on
the patient’s skin 共one anterior or posterior and two laterals兲.
Virtual simulation: Once the isocenter has been marked
on the patient, the patient may leave and virtual simulation
can begin. This entails creating beams, placing blocks/MLC,
and shifting isocenter while viewing the patient’s imaged
anatomy. All nondosimetric beam parameters should be
tested as recommended by the TG53 and described in Sec.
IV.
DRR and setup documentation: DRRs and setup documentation should always be inspected for accuracy and consistency. They should include correct patient information,
correct treatment machine data, and correct treatment setup
parameters. Any discrepancies should be evaluated for systematic errors.
B. Data transfer tests

Modern radiation treatment planning process involves
multiple treatment planning computers often located on different networks. CT-simulation process requires accurate
transfer of images 共CT, MRI, PET, US兲, image related data,
structures, interest points 共isocenter, setup point兲, treatment
beams, blocks and MLCs, DRRs, patient treatment setup information, and other parameters. Changes in configuration
共software or hardware upgrades兲 of any scanner, computer,
or network associated with the CT-simulation have a very
strong potential of disturbing the process and introducing
errors. Prior to upgrading or modifying any of the components, there should be a communication about which process
may be disturbed and appropriate arrangements should be
made. These include backup and relocation of data and

2781

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

scheduled interruption of service. Chapter 7 of the TG53
report discusses in detail issues related to management of
treatment planning systems and networks. The CT-simulation
QA program should identify individuals responsible for system management and should include tests for verification of
proper communication after system modifications.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This task group report addresses quality assurance process
for CT-simulation. The QA program described in this report
is designed to improve accuracy of patient treatments and
efficiency of the treatment planning process. Implementation
of these recommendations will depend on circumstances of
individual institutions. The basic principles presented in this
document should be preserved whenever possible.
As with other components of radiation treatment planning
and delivery, CT-simulation is a constantly evolving process.
CT-scanners and virtual simulation software are continually
being improved and new devices are being developed. The
QA process described in this document provides a foundation for establishment of a CT-simulation QA program. This
program should evolve and adapt as the device used for CTsimulation process change. The modified QA program should
continue to ensure accurate and efficient delivery of radiation
therapy.
APPENDIX A: INFORMATION FOR HOSPITAL
ADMINISTRATION
1. Information for radiation oncology administration

Radiation oncology is reaching new pinnacles with continued advancement in treatment planning, delivery and verifications in several areas including volumetric imaging, optimized 3D dose calculations and display, computercontrolled treatment delivery equipment, and online
treatment verification. Volume imaging with CT and magnetic resonance imaging 共MRI兲, functional imaging with
positron emission tomography 共PET兲 scanning, interimage
and intraimage registration, and automatic image segmentation tools have enhanced our ability to define target volumes
and critical structures with improved accuracy. The radiation
treatment planning process that historically consisted of patient positioning and/or immobilization, patient imaging data
acquisition, target and critical structure localization, radiation
field design, and patient marking for treatment has radically
changed with the introduction of dedicated CT-simulators in
radiation therapy clinics. CT-simulator comprises of a CTscanner, a laser localization system, and computer software
that provides the capabilities of image processing and manipulation, target volume and critical structure segmentation
and beam display in three dimensions. Simply, CTsimulation combines some of the functions of image-based
three-dimensional treatment planning system and the conventional simulator. It attempts to integrate as much of the
planning process as possible using exact anatomical information of the patient obtained from the 3D imaging data-set.
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2781

The initial concept of CT-simulator was to emulate the
conventional simulation process on a contiguous CT data-set
representing the patient. This idea was first proposed by Goitein and Abrams72,73 as beam’s-eye-view 共BEV兲 planning. In
BEV planning, relevant segmented critical structures from
CT contours are projected to a plane beyond the patient from
the vantage of the radiation source to assure appropriate
three-dimensional target coverage. This concept was further
developed by Sherouse9–11 who introduced a system that
could work like a simulator but used digital information derived from the patient imaging data-set. A patient treatment
simulation could be completed on a virtual patient model
with digitally reconstructed radiographs 共DRR兲. DRR is simply a virtual radiographic projection of overlying anatomy
共bone and tissue兲 in a beam’s eye view. Therefore, the simulation process can be completed in a virtual domain without
having the patient in the simulator room. This paradigm not
only improves the accuracy of target localization but it also
provides flexibility for the radiation oncologists to complete
the simulation process at a time that is more conducive to
their schedule. There is a proliferation of dedicated CTsimulators in radiation therapy clinics. CT-simulators have
become so popular that many clinics are moving away from
conventional simulators and are relying primarily on CTsimulators.
Virtual treatment simulation in an accurate and consistent
manner is by no means easy to achieve since the virtual
simulation process encompasses a number of tasks that have
historically been done in either radiation oncology or diagnostic radiology. Scanning has been primarily performed in
diagnostic radiology. Most radiology departments have wellestablished QA guidelines for CT-scanners in the context of
diagnostic use. However, a CT-scanner used for virtual simulation has hardware requirements and priorities that differ
from those of diagnostic radiology. These include the ability
to acquire imaging data-set in exact treatment position with
appropriate treatment accessories, precise target localization
with respect to fiducial marks on skin surface, minimizing
patient motion during the scan acquisition to avoid anatomic
misalignment, and finally, adequate image storage and networking capabilities for an efficient virtual simulation setup.
Once the CT images are transferred to the virtual simulation
workstation, there are software requirements in manipulating
imaging data to localize radiation targets and design fields
accurately. Therefore, the QA of CT-simulators must include
QA of CT-scanner, QA of the virtual simulation process and
testing of the accuracy and performance of the patient marking system for setup reproducibility.
As noted by other AAPM task group reports, one of the
objectives in radiation therapy is that the radiation dose delivered to the patient be within 5% of the prescribed dose.74
To achieve this goal, the radiation oncology community has
subsequently introduced many advanced devices and procedures in the treatment planning process. The complexity of
these devices and procedures, however, makes the process
vulnerable to random and systematic uncertainties. Considering the many steps involved in delivering dose to a target
volume in a patient, each step must be performed with accu-

2782

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

racy much better than 5% to achieve an overall accuracy of
5%. It is anticipated that better than 3% accuracy is required
in tumor localization and dose calculations attain an overall
accuracy of 5%. To avoid potential errors, QA is required in
all steps of the radiation treatment process. Therefore, it is
recommended that medical centers implement a QA program
for equipment used for CT-simulation and the overall CTsimulation process. As recommended by the AAPM TG40,13
the CT-simulation QA program should be overseen by the
radiation oncology Quality Assurance Committee 共QAC兲. In
accordance with the Joint Commission on the Accreditation
of Health Care Organizations 共JCAHO兲 requirements,75,76 it
is recommended that the QAC implement a Policies and Procedure Manual for QA of CT-simulators, and an accompanying Quality Audit program.
In order to have an effective QA program, the radiation
oncology department chairman along with administration
should assure that appropriate resources are available. These
resources include: qualified personnel, QA test equipment,
available time for performance of QA program, and resources for education of involved personnel. Availability of
these resources is a prerequisite for a successful QA program. Furthermore, the department chairman and the administration should ensure that QAC guidelines for CTsimulation QA are followed, including the performance of
periodic QA, compliance with tolerance limits, and implementation of corrective maintenance actions.
The responsibilities of various team members with regard
to a comprehensive radiation oncology QA program have
already been described by the Task Group 40. We outline
here the responsibilities of these members as they pertain to
QA of the CT-simulation program.
Radiation oncologist: Radiation oncologists need to have
the precise knowledge of the image-guided treatment simulation process. This knowledge is based on their adequate
training in interpreting CT images, understanding the effects
of motion and other image artifacts, understanding threedimensional imaging reconstruction and graphic displays,
and understanding of setup and treatment uncertainties to
define adequate margins in radiation portal design. He or she
is usually in daily contact with CT images. Therefore, the
radiation oncologist is in the position to observe changes in
image quality. The physician should be attentive to image
quality changes, degradation, and artifacts. Any changes in
image appearance should be immediately brought to the
medical physicist’s attention.
Radiation oncology physicist: The radiation oncology
physicist is responsible for design, implementation, performance, and periodic review of the CT-simulation QA program. This person is also responsible for the acceptance testing and commissioning of CT-simulation equipment. The
radiation oncology physicist should help define the specifications for the purchase of the CT-simulator. The physicist
should be involved in the design of the facility and should
assure that the radiation safety survey for the facility is performed. A radiation oncology physicist, diagnostic physicist,
or a member of the radiation safety office can perform the
survey. The radiation oncology physicist shall also certify
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2782

that the CT-simulator is performing according to the specification after it is installed and outline a written QA protocol
which includes tests to be performed, tolerances and frequency of the tests. This person is responsible for assuring
that all members of the CT-simulation team are properly
trained and that ongoing training related to changes in the
equipment and process is provided on timely basis. If the
CT-scanner used for CT-simulation is located in the radiation
oncology department, the radiation oncology physicist is responsible for QA of the scanner. If the scanner is located in
the diagnostic radiology department, the radiation oncology
physicist is responsible for assuring that the CT-scanner QA
meets the requirements of the CT-simulation process. The
radiation oncology physicist is always responsible for QA of
CT-simulation software and CT-simulation process. It is
clearly important that the radiation oncology physicist have a
good understanding of the CT technology and familiarity
with the acceptance testing procedures and protocols. If the
radiation oncology physicist lacks that expertise, we recommend that the facility seek the services of a qualified diagnostic imaging medical physicist or another experienced radiation oncology physicist for acceptance testing of the CTcomponent of CT-simulator and to establish QA procedures.
Diagnostic physicist: If the scanner used for CTsimulation is located in the diagnostic radiology department,
the diagnostic medical physicist is responsible for QA of the
CT-scanner. This person is responsible for implementing recommendations of the therapy physicist and this report, to
assure that the CT-scanner QA meets the needs of the CTsimulation process. The diagnostic medical physicist is responsible for timely communication with the radiation oncology physicist or a designee about any changes in the CTscanner hardware or software or in the CT-scan process.
Radiation therapist: The radiation therapist involved in
the CT-simulation process and operation of the CT-scanner is
responsible for setup and scanning of patients according to
the radiation oncologist’s instructions. This person should
understand the CT-simulation process and proper operation
of the CT-scanner. The therapist should be able to recognize
equipment malfunctions, image distortions, and potential
problems that may affect patient safety and accuracy of radiation therapy delivery. Any of these issues should be
brought to the medical physicist’s attention. The radiation
therapist is typically responsible for the performance of some
portion of the QA associated with the CT-scanner and CTsimulation process.
Diagnostic radiologic technologist: Depending on the design and implementation of the CT-simulation process, the
diagnostic radiologic technologist may be responsible for
setup and scanning 共CT-simulation兲 of patients according to
the radiation oncologist’s instructions. In this situation, expectations for this person are the same as for the radiation
therapist. This person should receive initial and ongoing
training regarding the CT-simulation process and its requirements.
Medical radiation dosimetrist: The dosimetrist is involved in the processing of patient images, normal structure
contouring, placing of the treatment beams, and actually per-

2783

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

forming the software portion of the CT-simulation process.
The dosimetrist should be able to detect problems with patient images, CT-simulation software, and the treatment planning process. The dosimetrist may be responsible for performing various QA tasks associated with CT-simulation,
treatment planning, and delivery.
CT-simulation can significantly improve the quality and
efficiency of the radiation therapy process and patient care. It
offers improved patient positioning, target delineation, treatment beam arrangement, and dose calculation. In many instances, it can simplify the simulation process for the patient
since it utilizes patient images and relies only on a relatively
short patient presence for setup and CT-scan. The decision to
implement the CT-simulation process in a radiation oncology
department is accompanied by several requirements. These
requirements include the availability of appropriate CTsimulation equipment, qualified personnel, adequate space,
and proper training. In addition, it requires resources for assuring proper and safe operation of the CT-simulation process and its components. Due to its sophistication, CTsimulation has the potential to introduce serious errors in
patient treatment. While the tests outlined in this report do
not guarantee an error-free system, they should minimize
their probability. Without appropriate support from department administration, it is not feasible to create and maintain
a strong QA program. Therefore, equipment, time, and personnel must be made available for the CT-simulation QA
program.
2. Information for diagnostic radiology administration

Requirements for performance evaluation and QA of CTscanners have been outlined in the AAPM Report No. 1,37
AAPM Report No. 39,14 NCRP No. 99,45 and the American
College of Radiology Standard for Diagnostic Medical Physics Performance Monitoring of Computed Tomography
Equipment. These requirements should be a component of
the comprehensive QA program for CT-scanners in diagnostic radiology. As outlined in this document, CT-scanners used
for CT-simulation, as a part of the radiation treatment planning process, have special performance requirements which
must be verified for proper operation. Some of these performance requirements are in addition to the specifications already outlined for diagnostic CT-scanning; while other parameters have more stringent tolerance limits than those
required for diagnostic scanning. Among these performance
requirements are an increased need for mechanical integrity
and accuracy of the CT-scanner gantry and table, addition of
external patient positioning lasers whose accuracy must be
verified, increased need for positional and spatial integrity of
CT images, and increased need for accuracy of quantitative
CT-scanner performance. Proper periodic evaluation of these
parameters will undoubtedly add to the complexity of a diagnostic CT-scanner QA program.
Even though the number of CT-scanners located in radiation oncology departments is constantly increasing, many
centers will continue to rely on treatment planning images
from diagnostic radiology. We therefore recommend that diMedical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2783

agnostic radiology departments incorporate in their QA program tests outlined in this report for those scanners which are
used for CT-simulation. To further facilitate this process, we
recommend that the diagnostic radiology department designate a liaison to the radiation oncology QA committee
共QAC兲. This person will be responsible for proper communication between the two departments and will be responsible for ensuring that the radiation oncology QA needs are
met in the diagnostic radiology QA program. The radiation
oncology QAC and therapy medical physicist should have
input to the acceptance testing and commissioning process of
CT-scanners, and to the design of the CT-scanner QA program for those scanners which are used as CT-simulators.
The input to the QA program design should include specification of tests, test frequency, tolerance limits, corrective actions, and QA assignments. We feel that a QA program designed jointly by diagnostic and therapy physicists can
efficiently serve the needs of both departments.
In addition to the radiation oncology administration, it is
the responsibility of the diagnostic radiology chairman and
administration to ensure that the QA program for CTscanners, which are used for CT-simulation, meets the recommendations outlined in this report. This includes the requirement that the appropriate amount of time for scanner
QA be made available and that the therapy physicist and
radiation oncology staff have adequate access to scanners
which are used for CT-simulation. In general, it is assumed
that the radiation oncology department is responsible for providing test equipment, QA phantoms, and, if necessary, labor
for those tests which are not part of the routine diagnostic
radiology scanner QA and which serve treatment planning
purposes.

APPENDIX B: CT DOSIMETRY
1. CT dose descriptors

The basic CT dose descriptors have been in existence for
many years and continue to be redefined as multidetector CT
共MDCT兲 evolves. The primary measured value is known as
the CT Dose Index 共CTDI兲 and represents the integrated
dose, along the z axis, from one axial CT-scan 共one rotation
of the x-ray tube兲.77–79 All other CT dose descriptors are
derived from this primary measured value. It is important to
note that the CTDI is always measured in the axial scan
mode, and that doses for helical scan modes are calculated
from the axial information.
The Code of Federal Regulations, 21 CFR 1020.33, section 共h兲共1兲 defines CTDI 共denoted below as CTDIFDA due to
its specific condition兲 as ‘‘the integral of dose profile along a
line perpendicular to the tomographic plane divided by the
product of the nominal tomographic section thickness and
the number of tomograms produced in the single scan;’’
CTDIFDA⫽

1
nT

冕

⫹7T

⫺7T

D 共 z 兲 dz,

共B1兲

where z is the position along a line perpendicular to the

2784

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

2784

tomographic plane, D(z) is dose at position z, T is the nominal tomographic section thickness, and n is number of tomograms produced in a single scan.
Theoretically, the CTDI should be measured from plus to
minus infinity. Since in practice the ion chamber to measure
CTDI is typically 100 mm long, the IEC has specifically
defined the CTDI measured with such a method as CTDI100 .
In general, the CTDI100 is different from CTDIFDA . Readers
should be cautious of any CTDI results if they are not clearly
specified. The FDA is also moving to adopt CTDI100 .
As described later, CT dosimetry includes evaluation of
CTDI dependence on the measurement point position in the
field-of-view. For example, for body CT imaging, the CTDI
is typically a factor or two higher at the surface than at the
center of the field-of-view. The average CTDI across the
field-of-view is given by the weighted CTDI (CTDIw ),
where CTDIw ⫽2/3 CTDI共surface兲⫹1/3 CTDI共center兲.
CTDIw is defined using the ‘‘f -factor’’ for air.
When performing a volumetric scan, dose profiles from
individual scans are superimposed and summed to create a
multiple scan profile. As the number of scans contributing to
the multiple scan dose profile is increased, the average dose
of the multiple dose profile reaches a limiting value. This
limiting value is defined as the MSAD and can expressed by
the relation:78
MSAD⫽

1
I

冕

I/2

⫺I/2

D N,I 共 z 兲 dz,

共B2兲

where D N,I (z) is the dose as a function of position for a
multiple scan dose profile consisting of N scans separated by
a constant distance between scans equal to I. Similar to the
concerns regarding CTDI, the Z-axis extent of measurement
for the MSAD has not been consistently defined. Using the
CTDI100 definition, the IEC has defined the term Volume
CTDIw (CTDIvol), which is equivalent to MSAD, but is explicitly measured using the CTDI100 values,
CTDIvol⫽

N•T
•CTDIw ,
I

共B3兲

where N is the number of simultaneous axial scans per x-ray
source rotation, T is the thickness of one axial scan 共mm兲,
and I is the table increment per axial scan 共mm兲.
In spiral CT, the ratio of the table travel per rotation (I) to
the total nominal beam width (N•T) is referred to as pitch.
Therefore,
CTDIvol⫽

1
•CTDIw
pitch

共B4兲

The CTDIw represents the average radiation dose over the x
and y directions and the CTDIvol represents the average radiation dose over the x, y, and z directions. CTDIvol is useful
indicator of the dose for a specific exam protocol, because it
takes into account protocol specific information such as
pitch.
Dose-Length Product 共DLP兲 is used to define the total
energy absorbed by a scanned volume from a given protocol.
DLP represents integrated dose along the scan length,
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

FIG. 7. A body and head phantom for measurement of dose from CT-scans.
Pencil ionization chamber is inserted in the center of the body phantom.

DLP 共 mGy cm兲 ⫽CTDIvol共 mGy兲 •scan length 共 cm兲 .
共B5兲
While two scan protocols may have the same CTDIvol , their
DLP value may be substantially different due to difference in
scanned volume length. Several manufacturers include DLP
information on the scanner control console for programmed
scan protocols and scan lengths.

2. CT dose measurements

As described in the preceding section, patient dose from a
CT-scan is assessed by measuring CTDI. Two CT dosimetry
phantoms are commonly used. A 15 cm long, 16 cm diameter
transparent acrylic cylinder is used for ‘‘head’’ protocol measurements. A 15 cm long, 32 cm diameter cylinder is used for
‘‘body’’ protocols. Five to nine holes are strategically placed
in the phantoms to accept a pencil ionization chamber 共Fig.
7兲. Phantom design requirements can be found in the Code of
Federal Regulations 21 CFR 1020.23, Section 共b兲共6兲. Pencil
ionization chambers are typically ten centimeters long and
should be calibrated by accredited dosimetry laboratories.
For the CTDI measurement, the phantom is placed in the
center of the imaging plane resting on the tabletop or head
holder. The phantom should be leveled and aligned with the
central axis of the scanner. A single scan is then acquired
through the center of the ionization chamber. The measurement procedure was described in detail in the AAPM report
No. 3979 and by Cacak.40 The CTDI is calculated using the
following equation:
CTDI100⫽
where

Rdg* C tp * K el* N x * f med* 100共 mm兲
关 cGy兴 ,
Total nominal beam width共 mm兲

共B6兲

2785

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

CTDI100 is the Computed Tomography Dose Index 关 cGy兴
measured with 100 mm long ionization chamber,
Rdg is the electrometer reading,
C tp is the temperature and pressure correction factor,
K el is the electrometer calibration factor 关 C/rdg兴 ,
N x is the chamber exposure calibration factor 关 R/C 兴 ,
100 mm is the length of ionization chamber,
f med is F factor which is used to convert exposure in air to
absorbed dose in medium. At 70 keV effective energy
f med is 0.94 and 0.78 cGy/R for muscle and acrylic,
respectively. For CTDI100 , F factor is defined to be
0.87 共air is assumed兲. For comparison purposes,
it is important to know which F factor the
manufacturer uses for defining CTDI.
The measured dose will change as a function of kVp setting,
mA setting, scan time, slice thickness, beam filtration, etc.
The CTDI is typically measured for a subset of standard
combinations of scan parameters. Manufacturers commonly
provide correction factor tables which can be used to correct
CTDI measured at a standard combination of scan parameters to a desired scan parameter combination, alleviating the
need to make specific measurements. At the time of scanner
commissioning, the validity of these tables should be spotchecked.

APPENDIX C: RADIATION SAFETY
SURVEYÕSHIELDING EVALUATION
Shielding design for CT-scanner rooms has been described in the AAPM Report No. 39.14 The scanner itself
provides shielding for primary radiation and scatter is the
main source of radiation outside the scan plane. Scanner
room shielding is, therefore, designed primarily for scatter
radiation. The CT-scanner room shielding survey should be
performed with a phantom in the scan plane. The phantom
should approximate size and composition of pelvic area. Lucite or a water equivalent plastic phantom measuring 20 cm
in diameter and 40 cm in length and width is sufficient for
this procedure. Radiation exposure measurements should be
performed with scan parameters that will result in the largest
possible exposures 关i.e., the largest slice thickness and the
highest scan potential 共kVp兲兴. Measured instantaneous exposure levels are proportional to CT-scanner mA setting. A
typical survey procedure would include the following settings: 130 or 140 kVp, 10 mm collimator width, 200 mA,
and exposure time sufficiently long to achieve stable radiation measurements which can be measured with a survey
meter. As suggested in the NCRP Report No. 49,80 with the
scattering phantom in place, all walls, doors, and windows
should be first evaluated for shielding integrity 共gaps in the
barrier, absence of shielding material兲 using a Geiger–Muller
meter. Once the shielding integrity has been verified, and
locations of highest radiation levels are found, a radiation
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2785

survey meter is used to measure instantaneous exposures.
The weekly exposure level for a particular location is calculated using the following relationship:
X⫽60•Ẋ•W•T,

共C1兲

where
X is the total weekly exposure 关 mR/week兴 ;
Ẋ is the measured instantaneous exposure divided
by measurement mA 关 mR/h•mA兴 ;
X is the weekly workload 关 mA-min/week兴 as defined
in the AAPM Report No. 39; 14
T is the occupancy factor as defined in the
NCRP Report #49. 80
Shielding evaluation is performed only at the time of the
initial scanner acceptance testing and 共unless there are structural changes to the scanner room or when scanners are replaced兲 need not be performed again.

APPENDIX D: CT-SIMULATOR LASER QA
In this procedure, it is assumed that the device from Fig. 4
is used for testing. This phantom is used just as an example
and other QA phantoms can be used to accomplish the same
tests. For example, phantoms for treatment machine laser QA
can be used.
The device consists of a Lucite base and two Lucite pegs
mounted on the base. The pegs are 5 cm high, 2.8 cm wide,
and 25 cm apart. Vertical and horizontal holes are drilled
through the center of each peg 关Fig. 4共b兲兴. The two holes,
measuring 1 mm in diameter, meet inside the peg to form an
inverted letter ‘‘T’’ 关Fig. 4共b兲兴. Another vertical hole of the
same diameter is drilled in the center of the base plate 共between two pegs兲. The laser QA device is then attached to the
scanner table using a registration bar or some other form of
attachment. The device should be centered on the tabletop
and positioned perfectly orthogonal to the long axis of the
table.
Test method: (1) Gantry lasers should accurately identify
scan plane within the gantry opening—If the centers of holes
inside the pegs on the laser QA device are aligned with the
gantry lasers and a single axial scan with a 1–2 mm slice
width is acquired, an image like that shown in Fig. 8 will be
generated. In the alignment process, horizontal side gantry
lasers 共left and right兲 are aligned with horizontal holes in
pegs by raising or lowering the table. By moving the table in
or out of the gantry, the vertical side lasers are aligned with
the horizontal peg holes and the overhead axial gantry laser
is aligned with the vertical holes. If the gantry lasers are
aligned with the imaging plane then the image should show a
well-defined inverted letter ‘‘T’’ in each peg 关Fig. 8共a兲兴. If
there is a partial image of the inverted letter ‘‘T,’’ or no
image at all, then the gantry lasers are not aligned with the
imaging plane 关e.g., Fig. 8共b兲兴. If the images inside two pegs
are not the same then the QA device is rotated with respect to
the imaging plane. Most frequently, this indicates that the

2786

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

FIG. 8. CT image of laser QA device. 共a兲 lasers aligned with imaging plane.
共b兲 center of the QA device offset by 1 mm from the imaging plane.

tabletop is rotated with respect to the imaging plane 共see Sec.
III C 2兲.
(2) Gantry lasers should be parallel and orthogonal with
the scan plane and should intersect in the center of scan
plane—If the image in Fig. 8共a兲 shows a well-defined inverted letter ‘‘T’’ in each peg then, as described above, the
gantry lasers are aligned with the imaging plane. When the
table is raised and lowered from the table position used to
acquire the image in Fig. 8共a兲 the vertical side gantry lasers
and the overhead axial gantry laser should track the holes
inside the pegs. If the lasers drift away from the holes then
the lasers are not parallel with the imaging plane, or the
couch is not traveling vertically parallel with the image
plane.
The overhead sagittal gantry laser should be aligned with
the center hole on the base plate of the QA device through
the full range of couch vertical travel within the CT donut. If
this laser drifts or does not touch the center hole at all then it
may require alignment. If the horizontal gantry lasers are
aligned with side holes in the pegs, they should track the
holes the full length of the laser beam as the table is moved
in and out of the gantry. During this test, the sagittal overhead laser should also track the center hole on the base plate.
If either of the horizontal lasers, or the sagittal laser, drifts
away from peg holes, then they, or the couch, are not orthogonal with the imaging plane.
The measuring cursor option on the scanner can be used
to evaluate if the gantry lasers intersect in the center of the
imaging plane. The measuring cursor usually forms a cross.
If the horizontal line of the measuring cursor is positioned
through horizontal holes on both pegs in image in Fig. 8共a兲,
and the vertical line of the cross hair through the hole in the
center of the base plate, then the locator indicator for the
cursor can be used to assess alignment accuracy. The locaMedical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2786

tion indicator (x,y) for the cross-hair position should read
共0, 0兲. If there is a different y value, then the horizontal
gantry lasers are not aligned with the center of the imaging
plane and should be adjusted if out of tolerance. If the x
value is different, then the overhead laser is not properly
aligned or, more importantly, the tabletop itself may be improperly installed 共see Sec. III C 2兲.
(3) Vertical side-wall lasers should be accurately spaced
from imaging plane—For this test, the laser QA device, described previously, is first aligned with well-aligned gantry
lasers or directly with the image plane as described in test
method 共1兲 and Fig. 8共a兲. Using the digital longitudinal table
indicator, the table is then retracted away from the gantry
the distance equal to the predefined separation between the
gantry and wall vertical lasers 共often 500 mm兲. After the
retraction, both vertical wall lasers should bisect the side
holes on pegs. Misalignment indicates that the lasers are not
properly spaced or that the couch travel is not correctly
indicated.
(4) Wall lasers should be parallel and orthogonal with the
scan plane and should intersect at a point which is coincident with the center of the scan plane—The geometry of
side-mounted wall lasers is assessed in similar fashion as the
gantry lasers, by aligning the QA device and moving the
table vertically and longitudinally.
(5) The overhead (sagittal) laser should be orthogonal to
the imaging plane—If the table is moved towards and away
from the gantry the sagittal laser should touch the center hole
in the QA device the full length of the laser beam. This
indicates that the sagittal laser is orthogonal with the imaging
plane and that the CT couch is traveling orthogonally, as
well.
(6) The overhead laser movement should be accurate, linear, and reproducible—This can be tested by placing a ruler
against the two pegs on the laser QA device across the tabletop. One of the ruler marks should be aligned with the sagittal laser 共whose position should read zero兲 and the center
hole in the QA device. By moving the laser various distances
to the left and right, laser movement can be evaluated. For
daily QA, the sagittal laser can be moved a predefined distance from the center hole to the center of each peg 共125
mm兲. After movement, the laser should intersect the vertical
hole in each of the pegs. This is a quick way to assess daily
laser motion accuracy.
The image in Fig. 8共a兲 can also be used to daily assess CT
image spatial integrity. The separation between the vertical
holes in two pegs in Fig. 8共a兲 should measure 250⫾1 mm
using the scanner measuring tool. Shorter or longer distances
may indicate image spatial distortion. Additionally, the laser
QA device can be used to assess the table’s vertical and
longitudinal movement accuracy. If the QA device is used for
daily laser QA, the indicated table vertical and longitudinal
position should be the same day to day when the device is
aligned with lasers.

2787

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2787

2788

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

SAMPLE CT SIMULATOR LASER QA PROCEDURE
AND FORM
共1兲
共2兲

共3兲
共4兲
共5兲
共6兲
共7兲
共8兲
共9兲

共10兲

共11兲

共12兲

共13兲
共14兲
共15兲
共16兲
共17兲
共18兲

Attach the laser QA device to the simulator tabletop.
Move the couch until the side holes in pegs are
aligned with horizontal and vertical wall lasers. The
table height indicator should agree with the value on
the QA form 共i.e., 388兲. Verify that both, left and right,
wall lasers agree with holes in pegs. The tolerance for
this test is ⫾2 mm.
Note the longitudinal couch position.
Move the couch towards the gantry until holes in pegs
align with left and right vertical gantry lasers.
The longitudinal couch position should change by the
known displacement between the gantry lasers and
wall lasers, with an accuracy of ⫹2 mm.
Verify the alignment of the left and right horizontal
gantry lasers with holes in pegs. The tolerance is
⫾2 mm.
Verify the alignment of the center gantry laser with
the center hole on the QA device. The tolerance is
⫾2 mm.
Retract the couch until the vertical wall lasers are
again aligned with holes in pegs. The longitudinal
couch position should agree with the value in step 共3兲.
Align the overhead sagittal laser with the center mark
on the QA device using the remote control. The lateral
position indicated on the remote control should be
0.0⫾2 mm.
Align the overhead sagittal laser, using the remote
control, with left and right pegs. The lateral position
on the remote control should be ⫹125 mm⫾2 mm
and ⫺125 mm⫾2 mm for left and right pegs, respectively.
Move the table manually towards the gantry and away
from the gantry while observing the position of right
and left horizontal wall lasers on the pegs and the
position of the overhead sagittal laser. The lasers
should not move away from holes by more than
⫾2 mm.
Align holes in pegs with wall lasers and raise and
lower the table while observing the position of
right and left vertical wall lasers on the pegs and the
position of the overhead sagittal laser. The lasers
should not move away from holes by more than
⫾2 mm.
Align holes in the QA device with gantry lasers.
Repeat steps 11 and 12 for gantry lasers.
Move the couch towards the gantry until holes in pegs
again align with left and right gantry lasers.
Scan the registration device. The slice thickness and
spacing should be 1.5 mm and 0 mm, respectively.
The scan mode should be axial.
After the scan is complete open a cursor option on the
scanner and choose the cross tool.
Align the cursor cross with the horizontal and vertical
holes in the left peg. The X and Y values should be
⫹125 mm⫾2 mm and 0 mm⫾2 mm, respectively.

Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2788

共19兲
共20兲

Align the cursor cross with the top of the center hole
on the QA device. The X and Y values should be ⫹0
mm⫾2 mm and ⫺29 mm⫾2 mm, respectively.
Align the cursor cross with the horizontal and vertical
holes in the right peg. The X and Y values should be
⫺125 mm⫾2 mm and 0 mm⫾2 mm, respectively.

APPENDIX E: SCANNER TABLE TESTS
Testing of the following parameters should be performed
with the tabletop loaded with at least 150 lb 共75 kg兲 of distributed the weight to simulate a patient.
Tools needed: Laser QA device from Sec. III C 1, ruler,
and ready-pack film.
Test method: (1) The couch/tabletop should be level and
orthogonal with respect to the imaging plane—One of the
problems associated with scanners used for CT-simulation is
the fact that a flat tabletop is generally an addition to the
scanner, which may not have been considered during the
scanner design. This can cause the flat-tabletop installation
on the scanner couch base to be imprecise or irreproducible.
This can also apply to tabletops provided and installed by the
scanner manufacturer. Therefore, even if the scanner was installed properly and the couch base is level and orthogonal
with the imaging plane 共this should be verified during commissioning兲, the tabletop may still not be level and/or orthogonal with the imaging plane. Proper installation of the
tabletop cannot be verified with a level alone but must be
verified radiographically. A level shows only that the tabletop
is level with respect to the ‘‘world,’’ and it does not necessarily indicate whether it is orthogonal with respect to the
imaging plane.
To assure that the tabletop longitudinal axis of travel is
perpendicular to the image acquisition plane 共i.e., the tabletop is not rotated with respect to the imaging plane兲, the laser
QA device is first placed as close to the head of the tabletop
共gantry side兲 as possible. The device is then aligned with
gantry lasers and a single image through the device is acquired. The device is then positioned as far as possible towards the foot of the table and again aligned with gantry
lasers where a single image is acquired. The location of the
laser QA device in two images should be identical. Using the
scanner cursor tool, the location of the center hole in the QA
device should be measured on both images. The location of
the hole on two images should be within 2 mm agreement.
The agreement demonstrates that couch axis of travel is perpendicular to the image acquisition plane.
The position of horizontal holes in both pegs on the QA
device in both images should have the same coordinate
within 2 mm when measured by the scanner cursor tool. Any
disagreement between measured coordinates for the horizontal holes in the QA device for either one of the pegs, in either
of the images, may be an indication that the tabletop is not
level in the transverse direction, that the tabletop is not orthogonal to the imaging plane in the longitudinal direction,
that the tabletop is twisted, or that couch longitudinal travel
is introducing ‘‘roll’’ in the table as it travels.

2789

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

For above described tests, it is assumed that the couch
base is level in the axial and longitudinal direction with respect to the imaging plane and that the couch is not rotated.
As stated above, this should be verified during commissioning. To verify that the base is not rotated with respect to the
imaging plane, two small pieces of wire 共1 to 2 ⬙ long兲 are
taped in the center of the couch top, one at the gantry side
and one at the foot side 共similar to the test above兲. The lateral
coordinates of two wires in their respective images should be
identical. To verify that the couch base is level in the axial
direction, the couch top can be scanned in several places and
scanner cursor tool can be used to evaluate if the couch base
is level. To verify that the longitudinal couch axis is orthogonal to the imaging plane, two small pieces of wire can be
taped to the couch top 共in the same longitudinal position but
laterally spaced as far as possible兲. Each wire should be oriented at 90° with respect to the other wire and at 45° with
respect to the imaging plane. The wires are first scanned with
the couch in the lowest vertical position and then in the
highest achievable position. The separation between the
wires in two images should be identical. Variation in wire
separation in two images indicates that the couch base is not
orthogonal with the imaging plane. This can be due to gantry
or couch base tilt. Any discrepancies should be addressed
during commissioning.
(2) Table vertical and longitudinal motion according to
digital indicators should be accurate and reproducible—
Table vertical and longitudinal digital indicators are used for
patient
treatment
isocenter
marking
during
CT-simulation.1,2,4,12 Therefore, the digital indicators and
table motion accuracy directly affect the ability to accurately
correlate internal patient anatomy with skin marks. A longitudinal motion accuracy test is inherent to the previously
described laser QA wherein the separation between gantry
and wall lasers was verified.
Longitudinal digitally indicated motion accuracy and reproducibility is tested by placing a longitudinally oriented,
long ruler flat on the tabletop, and moving the table in and
out of the gantry. Laser projection on the ruler is used to
directly measure the distance traveled, and relative table position.
Vertical digitally indicated motion accuracy and reproducibility is tested by placing a long ruler vertically on the tabletop and observing a laser position on the ruler as the table is
raised and lowered. Of course, care should be taken to ensure
that the ruler is perpendicular to the table top for all measurements. Both, longitudinal and vertical digital table position indicators should be accurate within to 2 mm.
Some patient immobilization devices register directly to
the scanner tabletop. These devices can register to the treatment machine tabletop as well. In such situation, it is possible to use scanner and treatment machine absolute table
coordinates to position patients. Furthermore, treatment machine table coordinates can be entered in the record and
verify system to verify correct patient positioning.
Accuracy of absolute scanner couch coordinates can be
verified by observing couch coordinates reported by the
scanner when verifying coincidence of scanner lasers and the
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2789

imaging plane 共III C 1兲. Absolute table coordinates should be
consistent with reference values to within ⫾2 mm. Reference values should be obtained during commissioning or after adjustment of couch operation.
(3) Table indexing and position under scanner control
should be accurate—This test has been described in detail by
several authors.36,40 This test is similar to the preceding section except that the table is moved under scanner control
rather than manually. A ready-pack film is taped on the tabletop and the film is irradiated at some predetermined fixed
spacing with a series of narrow scans. This test can be performed in axial or spiral scan mode. The spacing between
stripes on the film should correspond to the spacing used for
the scan. Reproducibility of the table indexing can be
checked by irradiating the above film twice. The table should
be moved under scanner control for both scans. After processing the film, the lines from two scans should be superimposed.
Table indexing can alternatively be checked without exposing the film as described in the AAPM Report No. 39.14
Table indexing accuracy and reproducibility under scanner
control should be accurate within ⫾1 mm.
(4) Flat tabletop should not contain any objectionable
artifact producing objects—During initial acceptance testing,
the flat tabletop insert should be scanned to evaluate whether
there are any objects in the tabletop which can produce clinically significant image artifacts 共screws, etc.兲.

APPENDIX F: X-RAY GENERATOR TESTS
Typical tests of the x-ray generator include evaluation of
the peak potential 共kVp兲, half-value layer 共HVL兲, current accuracy 共mA兲, time accuracy 共seconds兲, mAs linearity and
reproducibility and, potentially, other tests like focal spot
size.20 Inaccurate performance of these parameters can affect
the accuracy of CT numbers measured with the scanner and,
potentially, the accuracy of heterogeneity-corrected dose calculations.
QA goals: CT-scanner x-ray generator measurements
should be performed at installation or following replacement
of major components in the x-ray generator system, such as
the x-ray tube. Tests should include evaluation of
共1兲 peak potential 共kVp兲,
共2兲 half-value layer 共HVL兲,
共3兲 mAs linearity,
共4兲 mAs reproducibility,
共5兲 time accuracy.
Tools needed: Evaluation of a CT-scanner x-ray generator
can be somewhat difficult due to the rotating x-ray tube and
the closed nature of most modern systems which impede
invasive measurements. Invasive measurements are cumbersome, require manufacturer assistance, and are potentially
dangerous for both equipment and personnel. Noninvasive
measurements of x-ray generator performance parameters are
appropriate and, in fact, preferred in a radiation oncology
setting. Several noninvasive, commercially available devices

2790

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

are capable of assessing kVp, time, and exposure. Each of
the five performance parameters listed above can be assessed
with noninvasive devices. HVL measurements can be performed with pencil ionization chamber and electrometer.81
Test method: For use of noninvasive measurements, the
CT-scanner must be capable of ‘‘parking’’ the x-ray tube at
the 12 o’clock position. The manufacturer should be able to
provide assistance with this procedure as the utility which is
used to park the x-ray tube is usually not a part of the main
user interface and can sometimes be a hidden service utility.
Report No. 39 discusses evaluation of the x-ray generator
system, and the reader is referred to that report for a detailed
description of tests. The AAPM Report No. 2582 also provides information and procedures for accessing some of the
generator performance parameters. For evaluation of all of
the above five performance parameters, the x-ray tube is rotated to the 12 o’clock position and the table is placed at the
lowest possible position within the gantry. The measurement
device is centered on the table using the overhead gantry
lasers. The scanner is programmed from the control console
to evaluate various settings. For all measurements, the widest
available collimator setting should be used.
(1) kVp—accuracy of all clinically used tube potential settings should be evaluated. Measured values should meet
manufacturer specifications. In absence of the manufacturer
specifications, Report No. 39 recommends that tube potential
should be within ⫾2 kV of indicated values for all power
levels.
(2) HVL—Half-value layer should be evaluated for all
clinically used tube potential settings. The HVL is specified
in mm of aluminum. A set of thin sheets of aluminum, of
varying thicknesses are required for HVL measurements.
First, at a particular, fixed mAs setting the exposure 共mR兲 of
the open 共unfiltered兲 beam is measured. Next, Al sheets are
placed incrementally between the noninvasive detector and
the x-ray tube. Exposure measurement is repeated with each
addition of Al sheet. Half-value filtration is calculated from
the Al thickness and the corresponding mR values. In the
absence of manufacturer specifications, values found in the
AAPM Report No. 2582 can be used.
As noted by Kruger,81 displacing the ionization chamber
laterally from the scanner isocenter can significantly change
measured HVL values, due to bow-tie filter.
(3) mAs linearity—This test is used to infer tube current
through indirect measurement. The foundation for this test is
that for a constant tube potential and slice width, the integral
exposure 共mR兲 should be a linear function of mAs. Therefore, for this test, relative exposure measurements are required. For all measurements, the exposure time should be
kept constant 共for example, 1 second兲 and the current should
be varied through the range of available settings. The measurements should be performed for all clinically used tube
potential settings. As specified in Report No. 39 共III A 7兲, for
each tube potential, mR/mAs should be calculated. The coefficient of linearity relative to the mean of all values is then
determined. The coefficient of linearity of mR/mAs between
the mean of all values and any single value 共absolute difference divided by sum兲 should be within 0.05.
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2790

(4) mAs reproducibility—For repeated exposure measurements at a fixed setting, the measured values should be reproducible within values specified by the manufacturer.
(5) Time accuracy—Scan time accuracy can be evaluated
with the noninvasive meter. Time accuracy should be measured for all available settings which are used clinically. The
measurements should meet manufacturer specifications.

APPENDIX G: SAMPLE OVERALL CT-SIMULATOR
PROCESS TEST
A simple phantom with an opaque marker either inside or
on the surface works well to test the overall process or phantoms previously described can be used. A scan should be
acquired of the phantom with a slice thickness and index
typical of a routine scan. The following is an outline of a
typical process:
共1兲 Scan phantom with a fiducial marker,
共2兲 Check scan indexing based on length of phantom,
共3兲 Transfer data to workstation,
共4兲 Check orientation,
共5兲 Outline external contour of phantom,
共6兲 Calculate area and volume to determine accuracy of
structure outlining,
共7兲 Align isocenter to fiducial marker,
共8兲 Move CT couch to isocenter coordinates,
共9兲 Mark phantom insuring that lasers match fiducial mark,
共10兲 Set field size,
共11兲 Send data to RTP system,
共12兲 Check orientation and beam parameters,
共13兲 Check CT numbers if the phantom is heterogeneous,
共14兲 Send data to a treatment machine,
共15兲 Print DRRs and setup documentation,
共16兲 Setup and verify phantom treatment.
a兲

Author to whom correspondence should be address: Department of Radiation Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, 4921 Parkview, St. Louis, MO 63110; Electronic mail: mutic@radonc.wustl.edu
b兲
Advisor.
1
E.K. Butker et al., ‘‘Practical implementation of CT-simulation: The
Emory experience,’’ in A Practical Guide to 3-D Planning and Conformal Radiation Therapy, edited by J.A. Purdy and G. Starkschall 共Advanced Medical Publishing, Middleton, WI, 1999兲, pp. 58 –59.
2
A Practical Guide to CT Simulation, edited by L.R. Coia, T.E. Schultheiss, and G. Hanks 共Advanced Medical Publishing, Madison, WI, 1995兲.
3
J. Conway and M.H. Robinson, ‘‘CT virtual simulation,’’ Br. J. Radiol.
70, S106 –S118 共1997兲.
4
CT Simulation for Radiotherapy, edited by S.K. Jani 共Medical Physics
Publishing, Madison, WI, 1993兲.
5
T. Kushima and M. Kono, ‘‘New development of integrated CT simulation system for radiation therapy planning,’’ Kobe J. Med. Sci. 39, 197–
213 共1993兲.
6
J.M. Michalski, J.A. Purdy, W. Harms, and J.W. Matthews, ‘‘The CTsimulation 3-D treatment planning process,’’ Front. Radiat. Ther. Oncol.
29, 43–56 共1996兲.
7
Y. Nagata et al., ‘‘CT simulator: a new 3-D planning and simulating
system for radiotherapy: Part 2. Clinical application,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 18, 505–513 共1990兲.
8
T. Nishidai et al., ‘‘CT simulator: a new 3-D planning and simulating
system for radiotherapy: Part 1. Description of system,’’ Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol., Biol., Phys. 18, 499–504 共1990兲.
9
G. Sherouse, K.L. Mosher, K. Novins, E.L. Rosenman, and E.L. Chaney,
‘‘Virtual simulation: concept and implementation,’’ in Ninth International

2791

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

Conference on the Use of Computers in Radiation Therapy, edited by
I.A.D. Bruinvis, P.H. van der Giessen, H.J. van Kleffens, and F.W. Wittkamper 共North-Holland, 1987兲, pp. 433– 436.
10
G.W. Sherouse, J.D. Bourland, and K. Reynolds, ‘‘Virtual simulation in
the clinical setting: some practical considerations,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 19, 1059–1065 共1990兲.
11
G.W. Sherouse, K. Novins, and E.L. Chaney, ‘‘Computation of digitally
reconstructed radiographs for use in radiotherapy treatment design,’’ Int.
J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 18, 651– 658 共1990兲.
12
J. Van Dyk and J.S. Taylor, ‘‘CT-simulators,’’ in The Modern Technology
for Radiation Oncology: A Compendium for Medical Physicists and Radiation Oncologists, edited by J. Van Dyk 共Medical Physics Publishing,
Madison, WI, 1999兲, pp. 131–168.
13
G.J. Kutcher et al., ‘‘Comprehensive QA for radiation oncology: report
of AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 40,’’ Med. Phys. 21,
581– 618 共1994兲.
14
AAPM, Report No. 39. Specification and Acceptance Testing of Computed Tomography Scanners 共American Institute of Physics, New York,
1993兲.
15
B. Fraass et al., ‘‘American Association of Physicists in Medicine Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 53: quality assurance for clinical
radiotherapy treatment planning,’’ Med. Phys. 25, 1773–1829 共1998兲.
16
R.L. Gerber and J.A. Purdy, ‘‘Quality assurance procedures and performance testing for CT-simulators,’’ in A Practical Guide to 3-D Planning
and Conformal Radiation Therapy, edited by J.A. Purdy and G. Starkschall 共Advanced Medical Publishing, Inc., Middleton, WI, 1999兲, pp.
123–132.
17
J. Van Dyk and K. Mah, ‘‘Simulation and imaging for radiation therapy
planning,’’ in Radiotherapy Physics in Practice, 2nd ed., edited by J.R.
Williams and T.I. Thwaites 共Oxford University Press, Oxford, England,
2000兲, pp. 118 –149.
18
K. Mah, C.E. Danjoux, S. Manship, N. Makhani, M. Cardoso, and K.E.
Sixel, ‘‘Computed tomographic simulation of craniospinal fields in pediatric patients: improved treatment accuracy and patient comfort,’’ Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 41, 997–1003 共1998兲.
19
E.K. Butker, D.J. Helton, J.W. Keller, I.L. Hughes, T. Crenshaw, and
L.W. Davis, ‘‘A totally integrated simulation technique for three-field
breast treatment using a CT simulator,’’ Med. Phys. 23, 1809–1814
共1996兲.
20
T.S. Curry, J.E. Dowdey, and R.C. Murry, Christensen’s Physics of Diagnostic Radiology, 4th ed. 共Lea & Febiger, PA, Malvern, 1990兲.
21
S.H. Fox, ‘‘CT tube technology,’’ in Medical CT and Ultrasound: Current
technology and applications: Proceedings of the 1995 AAPM Summer
School, edited by L.W. Goldman and J.B. Fowlkes 共Advanced Medical
Publishing, Madison, WI, 1995兲, pp. 350–357.
22
W.A. Kalender, W. Seissler, E. Klotz, and P. Vock, ‘‘Spiral volumetric CT
with single-breath-hold technique, continuous transport, and continuous
scanner rotation,’’ Radiology 176, 181–183 共1990兲.
23
W.A. Kalender, ‘‘Principles and performance of spiral CT,’’ in Medical
CT and Ultrasound: Current Technology and Applications, edited by
L.W. Goldman and J.B. Fowlkes 共Advanced Medical Publishing, Madison, WI, 1995兲, pp. 379– 410.
24
W.A. Kalender and A. Polacin, ‘‘Physical performance characteristics of
spiral CT scanning,’’ Med. Phys. 18, 910–915 共1991兲.
25
K. Klingenbeck-Regn, S. Schaller, T. Flohr, B. Ohnesorge, A.F. Kopp,
and U. Baum, ‘‘Subsecond multi-slice computed tomography: basics and
applications,’’ Eur. J. Radiol. 31, 110–124 共1999兲.
26
H. Hu, ‘‘Multi-slice helical CT: scan and reconstruction,’’ Med. Phys. 26,
5–18 共1999兲.
27
T. Fuchs, M. Kachelriess, and W.A. Kalender, ‘‘Technical advances in
multi-slice spiral CT,’’ Eur. J. Radiol. 36, 69–73 共2000兲.
28
H.D. Suit et al., ‘‘Potential for improvement in radiation therapy,’’ Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 14, 777–786 共1988兲.
29
C.R. Ramsey, D. Scaperoth, D. Arwood, and A.L. Oliver, ‘‘Clinical efficacy of respiratory gated conformal radiation therapy,’’ Med. Dosim 24,
115–119 共1999兲.
30
K. Ohara et al., ‘‘Irradiation synchronized with respiration gate,’’ Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 17, 853– 857 共1989兲.
31
C.H. McCollough and F.E. Zink, ‘‘Performance evaluation of a multislice CT system,’’ Med. Phys. 26, 2223–2230 共1999兲.
32
C.A. Perez et al., ‘‘Design of a fully integrated three-dimensional computed tomography simulator and preliminary clinical evaluation,’’ Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 30, 887– 897 共1994兲.
Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2791
33

J.L. Garcia-Ramirez, S. Mutic, J.F. Dempsey, D.A. Low, and J.A. Purdy,
‘‘Performance evaluation of an 85 cm bore x-ray computed tomography
scanner designed for radiation oncology and comparison with current
diagnostic CT scanners,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 52, 1123–
1131 共2002兲.
34
D. Loo, ‘‘CT acceptance testing,’’ in Specification, Acceptance Testing
and Quality Control of Diagnostic X-ray Imaging Equipment, edited by
J.A. Seibert, G.T. Barnes, and R.G. Gould, Proceedings of AAPM Summer School 共American Institute of Physics, New York, 1991兲.
35
C.H. McCollough, and F.E. Zink, ‘‘Quality control and acceptance testing
of CT systems,’’ in Medical CT and Ultrasound: Current Technology and
Applications, edited by L.W. Goldman and J.B. Fowlkes, Proceedings of
the 1995 AAPM Summer School 共Advanced Medical Publishing, Madison, WI, 1995兲, pp. 350–357.
36
C.H. McCollough and F.E. Zink, ‘‘Performance evaluation of CT systems,’’ Radiological Society of North America Categorical Course in
Diagnostic Radiology Physics 共CT and US Cross-sectional Imaging, Oak
Brook, IL, 2000兲.
37
AAPM, Report No. 1, Phantoms for performance Evaluation and quality
assurance of CT Scanners 共American Association of Physicists in Medicine, New York, 1977兲.
38
M. Stovall et al., ‘‘Fetal dose from radiotherapy with photon beams:
report of AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 36,’’
Med. Phys. 22, 63– 82 共1995兲.
39
National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements 共NCRP兲
Report Number 91. Recommendations on limits for exposure to ionizing
radiation, Bathesda, MD, 1987.
40
R. Cacak, ‘‘Quality control for computed tomography scanners,’’ in Computed Tomography, 2nd ed., edited by E. Seeram 共W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia, PA, 2001兲 pp. 385– 407.
41
R.L. Dixon and K.E. Ekstrand, ‘‘A film dosimetry system for use in
computed tomography,’’ Radiology 127, 255–258 共1978兲.
42
J.A. Sorenson, ‘‘Technique for evaluating radiation beam image slice
parameters of CT scanners,’’ Med. Phys. 6, 68 – 69 共1979兲.
43
R.A. Brooks and G.D. Chiro, ‘‘Slice geometry in computer assisted tomography,’’ J. Comput. Assist. Tomogr. 1, 191–199 共1977兲.
44
CFR 21.1020.33, 1984, pp. 598 – 603.
45
National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements 共NCRP兲,
Report Number 99, Quality assurance for diagnostic imaging equipment.
Bathesda, MD, 1988.
46
P.F. Judy, ‘‘The line spread function and modulation transfer function of
a computed tomographic scanner,’’ J. Comput. Assist. Tomogr. 3, 189–
195 共1976兲.
47
S.M. Bentzen, ‘‘Evaluation of the spatial resolution of a CT scanner by
direct analysis of the edge response function,’’ Med. Phys. 10, 579–581
共1983兲.
48
N.J. Schneiders and S.C. Bushong, ‘‘Single-step calculation of the MTF
from ERF,’’ Med. Phys. 5, 31–33 共1978兲.
49
E.L. Nickoloff and R. Riley, ‘‘A simplified approach for modulation
transfer function determinations in computed tomography,’’ Med. Phys.
12, 437– 442 共1985兲.
50
E.L. Nickoloff, ‘‘Measurement of the PSF for a CT scanner: appropriate
wire diameter and pixel size,’’ Phys. Med. Biol. 3, 149–155 共1988兲.
51
R.T. Droege and R.L. Morin, ‘‘A practical method to measure the MTF of
CT scanners,’’ Med. Phys. 9, 758 –760 共1982兲.
52
P.M. Joseph and C.D. Stockham, ‘‘The influence of modulation transfer
function shape on computed tomographic image quality,’’ Radiology 145,
179–185 共1982兲.
53
K.P. McGee, I.J. Das, and C. Sims, ‘‘Evaluation of digitally reconstructed
radiographs 共DRRs兲 used for clinical radiotherapy: a phantom study,’’
Med. Phys. 22, 1815–1827 共1995兲.
54
Y. Yu et al., ‘‘Permanent prostate seed implant brachytherapy: report of
the American Association of Physicists in Medicine Task Group No. 64,’’
Med. Phys. 26, 2054 –2076 共1999兲.
55
K.P. McGee and I.J. Das, ‘‘Commissioning, acceptance testing, and quality assurance of a CT simulator,’’ in A Practical Guide to CT Simulation,
edited by L.R. Coia, T.E. Schultheiss, and G.E. Hanks 共Advanced Medical Publishing, Madison, WI, 1995兲, pp. 39–50.
56
T.C. Craig, D. Brochu, and J. Van Dyk, ‘‘A quality assurance phantom for
three-dimensional radiation treatment planning,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 44, 955–966 共1999兲.
57
National Electrical Manufacturers Association 共NEMA兲, DICOM PS 3
共set兲, Digital Imaging Communications in Medicine 共DICOM兲, 1998.

2792

Mutic et al.: AAPM–TG66 Report

58

S. Mutic et al., ‘‘Multimodality image registration quality assurance for
conformal three-dimensional treatment planning,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.,
Biol., Phys. 51, 255–260 共2001兲.
59
A.L. Boyer, T.G. Ochran, C.E. Nyerick, T.J. Waldron, and C.J. Huntzinger, ‘‘Clinical dosimetry for implementation of a multileaf collimator,’’
Med. Phys. 19, 1255–1261 共1992兲.
60
A. Brahme, ‘‘Design principles and clinical possibilities with new generation of radiotherapy equipment,’’ Acta Oncol. 26, 403– 412 共1987兲.
61
I.J. Das, G.E. Desobry, S.W. McNeely, E.C. Cheng, and T.E. Schultheiss,
‘‘Beam characteristics of a retrofitted double-focused multileaf collimator,’’ Med. Phys. 25, 1676 –1684 共1998兲.
62
A. Frazier et al., ‘‘Dosimetric evaluation of the conformation of the multileaf collimator to irregularly shaped fields,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol.,
Phys. 33, 1229–1238 共1995兲.
63
J.M. Galvin, A.R. Smith, and B. Lally, ‘‘Characterization of a multileaf
collimator system,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 25, 181–192
共1993兲.
64
D. Georg, F. Julia, E. Briot, D. Huyskens, U. Wolff, and A. Duetrix,
‘‘Dosimetric comparison of an integrated multileaf-collimator versus a
conventional collimator,’’ Phys. Med. Biol. 42, 2285–2303 共1997兲.
65
M.S. Huq, Y. Yu, Z.P. Chen, and N. Suntharalingam, ‘‘Dosimetric characteristics of a commercial multileaf collimator,’’ Med. Phys. 22, 241–
247 共1995兲.
66
T.J. Jordan and P.C. Williams, ‘‘The design and performance characteristics of a multileaf collimator,’’ Phys. Med. Biol. 39, 231–251 共1994兲.
67
J.R. Palta, D.K. Yeung, and V. Frouhar, ‘‘Dosimetric considerations for a
multileaf collimator system,’’ Med. Phys. 23, 1219–1224 共1996兲.
68
I.J. Das et al., ‘‘Use of multiplanar reformatted radiographic and digitally
reconstructed radiographic images for planning conformal radiation
therapy,’’ Radiographics 15, 1483–1488 共1995兲.
69
M.L. Bahner, J. Debus, A. Zabel, S. Levegrun, and G. Van Kaick, ‘‘Digitally reconstructed radiographs from abdominal CT scans as a new tool
for radiotherapy planning,’’ Invest. Radiol. 34, 643– 647 共1999兲.
70
C. Yang et al., ‘‘Use of digitally reconstructed radiographs in radiotherapy treatment planning and verification,’’ Australas Radiol. 44, 439–
443 共2000兲.

Medical Physics, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2003

2792
71

W.A. Kalender, A. Polacin, and C. Suss, ‘‘A comparison of conventional
and spiral CT: an experimental study on the detection of spherical lesions
关published erratum appears in J. Comput. Assist. Tomogr. 1994 Jul-Aug,
18共4兲:671兴,’’ J. Comput. Assist. Tomogr. 18, 167–176 共1994兲.
72
M. Goitein and M. Abrams, ‘‘Multi-dimensional treatment planning: I.
Delineation of anatomy,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 9, 777–787
共1983兲.
73
M. Goitein, M. Abrams, D. Rowell, H. Pollari, and J. Wiles, ‘‘Multidimensional treatment planning: II. Beam’s eye-view, back projection,
and projection through CT sections,’’ Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys. 9,
789–797 共1983兲.
74
International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements 共ICRU兲,
Determination of absorbed dose in patients irradiated by beams of x- or
gamma-rays in radiotherapy process, Bethesda, MD, 1976.
75
Joint Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations: Radiation Services: Quality assurance standards, 1987.
76
Joint Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations: Radiation Services: Quality assurance standards, 1992.
77
H.D. Nagel, Radiation Exposure in Computed Tomography, 共COCIR,
Frankfurt, 2000兲.
78
T.B. Shope, R.M. Gagne, and G.C. Johnson, ‘‘A method for describing
the doses delivered by transmission x-ray computed tomography,’’ Med.
Phys. 8, 488 – 495 共1981兲.
79
AAPM, Report No. 31, Standardized Methods for Measuring Diagnostic
X-ray Exposures 共American Institute of Physics, New York, 1990兲.
80
NCRP, Structural Shielding Design and Evaluation for Medical use of X
rays and Gamma Rays of Energies up to 10 MeV, 共National Council on
Radiation Protection and Measurements, Washington, DC, 1976兲.
81
R.L. Kruger, C.H. McCollough, and F.E. Zink, ‘‘Measurement of halfvalue layer in x-ray CT: a comparison of two noninvasive techniques,’’
Med. Phys. 27, 1915–1919 共2000兲.
82
AAPM, Report No. 25, Protocols for the Radiation Safety Surveys of
Diagnostic Radiological Equipment 共American Institute of Physics, New
York, 1988兲.

