AAPM REPORT NO. 85

TISSUE INHOMOGENEITY CORRECTIONS
FOR MEGAVOLTAGE PHOTON BEAMS

Report of Task Group No. 65 of the Radiation Therapy Committee
of the American Association of Physicists in Medicine

Members
Nikos Papanikolaou (Chair)
University of Arkansas, Little Rock, Arkansas
Jerry J. Battista
London Regional Cancer Centre, London, Ontario, Canada
Arthur L. Boyer
Stanford University, Stanford, California
Constantin Kappas
University of Thessaly, Medical School, Larissa, Hellas
Eric Klein
Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, St. Louis, Missouri
T. Rock Mackie
University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin
Michael Sharpe
Princess Margaret Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Jake Van Dyk
London Regional Cancer Centre, London, Ontario, Canada

August 2004
Published for the
American Asociation of Physicists in Medicine
by Medical Physics Publishing

DISCLAIMER: This publication is based on sources and information believed
to be reliable, but the AAPM, the editors, and the publisher disclaim any warranty or liability based on or relating to the contents of this publication.
The AAPM does not endorse any products, manufacturers, or suppliers.
Nothing in this publication should be interpreted as implying such endorsement.
Further copies of this report ($15 prepaid) may be obtained from:
Medical Physics Publishing
4513 Vernon Blvd.
Madison, WI 53705-4964
Telephone: 1-800-442-5778 or
608-262-4021
Fax: 608-265-2121
Email: mpp@medicalphysics.org
Web site: www.medicalphysics.org
International Standard Book Number: 1-888340-47-9
International Standard Serial Number: 0271-7344
© 2004 by American Association of Physicists in Medicine
One Physics Ellipse
College Park, MD 20740-3846
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise) without the prior written
permission of the publisher.
Published by Medical Physics Publishing
4513 Vernon Boulevard, Madison, WI 53705-4964
Printed in the United States of America

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract ..........................................................................................................v
I.

INTRODUCTION...............................................................................1

II.

NEED FOR INHOMOGENEITY CORRECTIONS..........................3
A. Required Dose Accuracy ................................................................3
1. Slopes of dose-effect curves........................................................4
2. The level of dose differences that can be detected clinically .......4
3. The level of accuracy needed for clinical studies ........................5
4. The level of dose accuracy that will be practically
achievable ...................................................................................8
B. Recommended Accuracy in Tissue Inhomogeneity Corrections .......9

III.

RADIATION PHYSICS RELEVANT TO PHOTON
INHOMOGENEITY CALCULATIONS ..........................................10
A. Photon Interactions: The TERMA Step .........................................10
B. Charged Particle Interactions: The DOSE Step .............................11
C. Charged Particle Equilibrium........................................................14
1. Longitudinal TCPE...................................................................15
2. Lateral TCPE ...........................................................................16
D. Influence of Tissue Density and Atomic Number ..........................16
1. Density scaling .........................................................................16
2. Effects of atomic number..........................................................22
E. Concept of Primary and Scattered Dose Components ...................24
F. Introduction to the Superposition and Convolution Principles ........27

IV.

INHOMOGENEITY CORRECTION METHODS ..........................29
Category 1: Local Energy Deposition (No Electron Transport);
1D Density Sampling ..........................................................................32
Method 1.1: Linear attenuation .....................................................33
Method 1.2: Effective attenuation coefficient.................................34
Method 1.3: Ratio of tissue-air ratios (RTAR) ...............................34
Method 1.4: Power law (Batho).....................................................35
Category 2: Local Energy Deposition (No Electron Transport);
3D Density Sampling ..........................................................................38
Method 2.1: Equivalent tissue-air ratio (ETAR) ............................38
Method 2.2: Differential scatter-air ratio (dSAR) ..........................44
Method 2.3: Delta volume (DVOL) ...............................................44
Method 2.4: Differential tissue-air ratio method (dTAR)...............45
Method 2.5: 3-D beam subtraction method ...................................46
Category 3: Non-Local Energy Deposition (Electron Transport);
1D Density Sampling ..........................................................................47
Method 3.1: Convolution techniques .............................................47
Method 3.2: Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) convolution .................49

iii

Category 4: Non-Local Energy Deposition (Electron Transport);
3D Density Sampling ..........................................................................49
Method 4.1: Superposition-convolution methods ...........................50
Method 4.2a: Monte Carlo method: overview ...............................55
Method 4.2b: Monte Carlo: dosimetry in heterogeneous media .....58
V.

DATA COMPARISON OF DOSE IN INHOMOGENEOUS
MEDIA..............................................................................................65
A. Air Cavities...................................................................................67
B. Lung .............................................................................................69
C. Bone and High-Density Media ......................................................75
D. Influence of CT Number Variations ..............................................77
E. Radiosurgical Beams.....................................................................78
F. Multiple Beam Arrangements........................................................79
G. Measured Benchmark Data ...........................................................80
H. Data Trends...................................................................................94

VI.

THE EFFECT OF INHOMOGENEITY IN IMRT ..........................95

VII. SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ...................................100
VIII. REFERENCES................................................................................107

iv

ABSTRACT
The human body consists of a variety of tissues and cavities with different
physical and radiological properties. Most important among these, from a radiation dosimetry perspective, are tissues and cavities that are radiologically different from water, including lungs, oral cavities, teeth, nasal passages, sinuses,
and bones. The dose distribution is affected by these tissue inhomogeneities and
since treatments are becoming increasingly conformal, the opportunity for geographic misses of the target due to incorrect isodose coverage increases. In view
of the inconsistent use of inhomogeneity corrections, the recent advances in the
dose calculation algorithms, the improved 3D image acquisition and display
capabilities, and the trend towards dose escalation in smaller target volumes,
the Radiation Therapy Committee (RTC) of the American Association of
Physicists in Medicine (AAPM) commissioned Task Group 65 (TG 65) to
review this subject specifically for megavoltage photon beams. The specific
objectives of this Task Group are: (a) to review the clinical need for inhomogeneity corrections and the currently available methodologies for tissue inhomogeneity corrections in photon beams; (b) to assess the known advantages
and disadvantages of each of the currently available algorithms; (c) to make
recommendations regarding the types of procedures that should be used to
assess the accuracy of inhomogeneity correction procedures and the clinical
application of specific inhomogeneity corrections for different anatomical
regions. This report summarizes the findings of the Task Group and aims to
provide the practicing clinical medical physicist with sufficient physical and
mathematical insight into the inhomogeneity problem to be able to discern the
capabilities and limitations of the particular method(s) available, to advise radiation oncologists as to the accuracy of the predicted doses and prescriptions,
and to advise both so they are able to make informed decisions during the purchase of treatment planning systems.

v

I. INTRODUCTION
The human body consists of a variety of tissues and cavities with different
physical and radiological properties. Most important among these, from a radiation dosimetry perspective, are tissues and cavities that are radiologically different from water, including lungs, oral cavities, teeth, nasal passages, sinuses
and bones. In some instances, foreign materials, such as metallic prostheses,
are also present. To maximize the therapeutic benefit of radiation therapy, it is
essential that the absorbed dose delivered to all irradiated tissues in the presence of such inhomogeneities be predicted accurately.
Optimization of therapeutic benefit is dependent on maximizing the dose to
the planning target volume while minimizing the dose to normal tissues. This
optimization requires the accurate, three-dimensional localization of both the
diseased target tissues and the sensitive normal tissues. In the last two decades,
major progress in imaging technology has improved our ability to identify and
to localize these critical volumes and to determine their densities in vivo on a
voxel-by-voxel basis. Furthermore, radiation therapy treatment delivery systems
have advanced to the point where volumes can be irradiated to millimeter precision. The combination of enhanced imaging procedures and beam modulation
(aperture and intensity) techniques allow the radiation dose to be precisely conformed around the targeted tissues. One result of improved conformality is dose
escalation studies in which the requirements/restrictions on the accuracy of the
computed dose distributions are of even greater importance due to the potential
for increased complication rates if the dose is inaccurately predicted.
The photon dose calculation problem is summarized in Figure 1. The accurate
delivery of a prescribed dose to a well-defined target volume is dependent firstly
on the accuracy with which the radiation beam can be calibrated under well-controlled reference conditions in a uniform water-like phantom (Figure 1a).
Secondly, the dose at any point of interest within the patient must be calculated
and correlated to the calibration dose. Figure 1b demonstrates some of the variables that must be considered in the photon beam dose calculation procedure,
which is discussed below.
Until the 1970s, dose distributions were generally calculated by assuming
that the patient was composed entirely of water. This was mainly due to the lack
of patient-specific anatomical information. With the advent of computed tomography (CT), it became possible, for the first time, to actually derive electron
density information in vivo, which could be incorporated into the dose calculation process. This, combined with tremendous advances in computer technology, resulted in much research with the aim of improving dose calculation
procedures, which account for the complex physical processes associated with
the irradiation of the heterogeneous human body.
Today, we are able to derive very precise three-dimensional information
from a variety of imaging modalities including CT, magnetic resonance (MR),
positron emission tomography (PET), single photon emission computed tomog1

Figure 1. The photon dose calculation problem: (a) beam calibration in water
and (b) calculation of the dose distribution in patient.
raphy (SPECT), digital angiography, and ultrasound. All this information can
be processed for the improved delineation of diseased and normal tissues within
the body. Computer workstations allow for the virtual simulation of the patient
treatment by superimposing beam geometries at any orientation on the patient
image set. This provides an environment for integrating 3D calculation and display tools into the treatment planning process.
Yet, in spite of this sophisticated technology, many radiation therapy departments have only achieved limited use of imaging data in the dose calculation
process. In fact, many cancer centers still do not use patient-specific tissue density corrections. This may be due in part to the cost and effort of implementing
new imaging technologies, limited access to these technologies in individual
radiation therapy institutions, and the variability in the implementation and
capabilities of tissue inhomogeneity corrections. These limitations complicate
the standardization of dose delivery and contribute to uncertainties when comparing clinical outcomes, especially in the context of multi-center clinical trials.
However, the judicious selection of proper calculation methods will improve
dose standardization. Furthermore, dose coverage is also affected by tissue
inhomogeneity, leading to additional variability. Because treatments are becoming increasingly conformal, the opportunity for geographic misses of the target
due to incorrect isodose coverage prediction increases. This report will provide
guidance to clinical physicists, dosimetrists, and radiation oncologists who aim
2

to improve the accuracy of absolu e dose prescriptions and dose distributions
for the patient. The report assumes that the inhomogeneity corrections will be
applied to patient-specific CT data and not to external, contour-based description of the patient.
In view of:
• the inconsistent use of inhomogeneity corrections,
• the recent advances in the dose calculation algorithms,
• improved 3D image acquisition and display capabilities, and
• the trend towards dose escalation in smaller target volumes,
the Radiation Therapy Committee (RTC) of the American Association of
Physicists in Medicine (AAPM) commissioned Task Group 65 (TG 65) to
review this subject specifically for megavoltage photon beams. The specific
objectives of this Task Group were:
1. To review the clinical need for inhomogeneity corrections.
2. To review currently available methodologies for tissue inhomogeneity
corrections in photon beams.
3. To assess the known advantages and disadvantages of each of the currently available algorithms.
4. To make broad recommendations on the use of inhomogeneity corrections
in the clinical environment.
This report summarizes the findings of the Task Group and will provide the
practicing medical physicist with sufficient physical and mathematical insight into
the inhomogeneity problem to be able to discern the capabilities and limitations of
the particular method(s) available, to advise radiation oncologists as to the accuracy of the predicted doses and correct prescriptions, and to advise both as to
make informed decisions on the purchase of new treatment planning systems.

II. NEED FOR INHOMOGENEITY CORRECTIONS
A. Required Dose Accuracy
Radiation therapy is a complex process involving many steps with the accuracy of each step having a potential impact on tumor control or normal tissue
complications. The sources of geometric and dosimetric uncertainties are
known, but because of variations in tumor and normal tissue response, it is difficult to quantify the impact of these uncertainties in the clinical setting. A
statement of the accuracy in dose required in clinical radiation therapy is generally predicated by four considerations:
1. The slope of dose-effect curves.
2. The level of dose differences that can be detected clinically.
3. Statistical estimates of the level of accuracy needed for clinical studies.
4. The level of dose accuracy that will be practically achievable.
3

1. Slopes of dose-effect curves
It is well established that both tumor control probabilities (TCP) and normal
tissue complication probabilities (NTCP) have a sigmoidal dependence on radiation dose.1,2,3,4,5 TCP and NTCP model calculations may be used in a relative
manner to evaluate and optimize three-dimensional (3D) treatment plans. 6,7
Important parameters to describe the response are D 50 (the dose yielding a
response (TCP or NTCP) in 50% of a patient population), and the normalized
dose gradient g. 8 The parameters D 50 and g (or as it applies to the Linear
Quadratic model the a/b ratio) are organ and injury (endpoint) specific and can
be calculated only from clinical data. In general the D50 value for tumor control
increases with tumor size while for normal tissue injury, it decreases with larger
irradiated volumes.9,10,11 There is a large variation in the reported slopes of doseeffect curves for the different tumors and normal tissues depending on their
separate radiobiological characteristics. However, it has been extensively
reported that the slopes of the dose-response curves appear to be steeper for
normal tissues than for tumors, which mainly stems from their differences in
their intrinsic radiobiology and internal structural organizations. 5,8,12,13 The
delayed introduction of radiobiological treatment planning in the clinical routine stems from the fact that there are significant problems in the determination
of the actual parameters to be used in the models14,15 but also the foundations of
the biological models that at present are subject to some controversy. 16 To
improve the state of the art, high accuracy and quality must also be enforced in
dose reporting.17,18 In an attempt to quantify the actual accuracy needed, Boyer
and Schultheiss19 studied the influence of dose uncertainty on complication-free
tumor control and concluded that a 1% accuracy improvement results in 2%
increase in cure rate for early stage tumors. While the importance of dosimetric accuracy depends on the absolute dose delivered (i.e., the region of the
dose-effect curve), the mid-range represents the steepest portion of this curve
and will require the greatest dosimetric accuracy. At this point, a 5% change in
dose may result in a 10% to 20% change in tumor control probability at a TCP
of 50%. Similarly, a 5% change in dose may result in a 20% to 30% impact on
complication rates in normal tissues. The results mentioned above refer to
changes caused by homogeneous dose distributions covering the whole tumor
or organ at risk considered, which is characterized by certain D50 and g values.
Nevertheless, they demonstrate the potential impact that a certain change in
dose to the clinical outcome may have.

2. The level of dose differences that can be detected clinically
At least two examples20 have been reported where a 7% difference in dose
delivered to different groups of patients was discovered independently by a
radiation oncologist through clinical observations. Two experiences from the
Institut Gustave Roussy are reported: one was related to tumor regression, the
other related to normal tissue reactions.
4

The first study (carried out in the early sixties) was intended to demonstrate
that high-energy photons or electrons give the same effects on tumors for the
same dose. Patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsil were randomized and three observers recorded the tumor regression during the treatment.
They reported a significant difference between electron and photon treatments
nominally identical in dose (18 fractions of 2.5 Gy in 40 days). The small number of patients (20) that was studied in each arm of the trial was enough to
show a definitely smaller efficiency of the electron treatment. This led to the
discontinuation of the trial. A new calibration of the dosimetry for both photons and electrons was achieved with ferrous sulphate during the following
months and showed for the high-energy calibration, a departure from the
cobalt-60 calibration that had been used during the trial. The new calibration
led to a 7% difference between the doses of electrons and photons. This could
explain the difference observed in tumor regression between the two kinds of
treatment.
The second experience was described in an internal report as follows: The
radiotherapist (i.e., radiation oncologist) in charge of gynecological patients
treated with high-energy photons (25 MV) on the Sagittaire (CGR MeV linac)
mentioned to the physics department that he suspected an error in dosimetry
because he observed reactions on patients which were more severe than usual.
These were skin reactions on the skin folds and also diarrhea in patients irradiated to a prescribed tumor dose equal to 50 Gy to the whole pelvis 5 times a
week for 5 weeks. After a careful rechecking of the linac, the physics department found an underestimation of the calibration factors of the monitor chamber leading to a systematic overdosage of the patients; the reason was the
misuse by a junior physicist of the correction factors applied to the ionization
chamber. The overdosage was estimated to be 10% between September and
November 1970 and 7% between November 1970 and March 1971. The number of patients who had been overdosed for a part or for the full course of their
treatment was 21 between September and November 1970 and 67 between
November 1970 and March 1971. Fifty patients out of the eighty-eight overdosed had finished their treatment course over 2 months before the radiotherapist (i.e., radiation oncologist) suspected the error. No striking reaction was
observed on the other (non-gynecological) patients.
Thus it could be concluded that at least a 7% difference in dose delivered is
manifested in the patient’s response to radiation treatment and is detectable
clinically by a radiation oncologist.

3. The level of accuracy needed for clinical studies
The level of dose accuracy required for clinical trials depends on the ability
to demonstrate a statistically significant improvement in clinical outcome as the
dose is altered. Some authors5,8,13,21,22 have looked at the steepness of dose-effect
curves to estimate the required accuracy (as discussed above) while others have

5

analyzed dose distributions and treatment plans done with and without inhomogeneity corrections in lung.23,24,25,26,27
A side benefit but important consequence of including inhomogeneity corrections is the impact on the number of patients required in clinical trials.
Orton and co-workers28 have evaluated the difference in the number of patients
required to demonstrate a statistically significant difference in the probability of
tumor control (TCP) between two arms of a dose-escalation study and its
dependence on the level of uncertainty in delivered dose. They have demonstrated the importance of making lung corrections even if the correction algorithms are not absolutely accurate. They presented the case of a dose-escalation
study where inhomogeneities are present and no correction is applied (example
1) and when approximate correction is applied (example 2). For both examples
it is assumed that a 10% change in TCP results from a 5% change in dose.
Further, it is assumed that the standard error in TCP is 10%.
In the first example (no correction) an extra standard error in TCP due to
lung attenuation is added which is also 10% (equivalent to a 5% standard error
in dose). Then the overall standard error is 10 2 % , since standard errors
propagate in quadrature, i.e. the standard error in observed TCP is increased
by a factor of 2 due to lung attenuation variations. Hence, for the same confidence level, the new number of patients required n¢ is given by n¢ = a 2n, where
a is the overall standard error and n the initial number of patients required. In
this example n¢ = 2n, i.e., twice as many patients are needed in order to discriminate between the control probabilities in each arm of the clinical study.
In the second example (approximate correction) it is assumed that the
approximate lung correction reduces the additional standard error in TCP due
to lung attenuation from 10% to 5%, the overall standard deviation reduces
from 10 2 % to 10 1.25 % . Hence n¢ = 1.25n, i.e., only 25% more patients
are needed.
Furthermore, inhomogeneity corrections reduce the uncertainty in absolute
dose, yielding a more controlled study with less variability in absolute dose
delivery. Thus far, two clinical trials for the treatment of lung cancer have been
performed through the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG):

(

(

)

(

)

)

• The RTOG-880829 trial, which closed in 1993, required treatment plans to
be performed with a retrospective heterogeneity correction. These patients
were treated, however, according to prescriptions and dose distributions
based on dose in water. The isodose calculations were then repeated with
heterogeneity corrections and absolute dose distributions were computed
using the homogeneous dose prescriptions in water. In addition, an independent calculation of delivered dose to the isocenter using the Batho correction method was performed. Of the 490 patients enrolled, a total of 322
patients have been documented in this manner. This study found that for
all fields the mean inhomogeneity correction factor at the isocenter was
1.05±0.05 (SD) with an overall range of 0.95 to 1.28, i.e., a 33% spread
in the dose delivered (an inhomogeneity correction factor is applied to
6

make adjustments to the uncorrected distribution to account for variations
in tissue density).
• In the RTOG 88-08 study, the treatment plans were however limited to a
single central plane. The RTOG30 initiated a three-dimensional (3D) treatment planning study for lung cancer. RTOG 93-11 is a dose escalation
study that is similar to RTOG 8808, requiring institutions to submit uncorrected and corrected dose distributions. Again, the patients were treated
according to uncorrected treatment plans. Doses are taken to the maximum level of 90.3 Gy based on calculations for water. RTOG 93-11 will
then provide additional information in the 3D context. Clearly, the correct
implementation of inhomogeneity corrections methods can reduce the
dose uncertainty, remove ambiguity in the interpretation of outcomes, and
subject fewer patients to clinical trials.
Earlier reports that are not based on clinical trials data also cite specific
numerical examples of the effects of inhomogeneity corrections on dose. Mah
and Van Dyk23 previously reviewed, quantitatively, dose distributions for 100
patients who had thoracic irradiation for a variety of malignancies. The general
conclusions were:
(1) within lung, correction factors are significant in the majority of patients,
(2) within the target volume, correction factors can also be quantitatively
significant for many situations,
(3) dose uniformity in lung is worse when the distributions are corrected for
inhomogeneities, and
(4) in approximately 80% of the patients studied, the probability of radiation-induced lung damage would be underestimated by at least 5% if
lung corrections were not applied. These conclusions are consistent with
the later review of the RTOG trials data.
In the literature many authors cite reasons for and against the use of lung
corrections.23,24,25,26,28,31 It has been argued by some that tissue inhomogeneity
corrections should not be used at all since current clinical practice and dose
prescriptions are largely based on historical experience with tissue response to
dose in water. However, the clinical data above indicate that even for simple
anterior-posterior parallel-opposed fields encompassing the mediastinum and
lung regions, the corrections at the reference target point could range between
0.95 and 1.16, and are even larger for oblique or lateral fields. Because the
entire dose distribution can be distorted by tissue inhomogeneity, not only is the
dose to the target volume affected, but also so are the doses to nearby organs at
risk. For example, the dose to the spinal cord will increase due to lung transmission, and simultaneously decrease due to absorption of surrounding
upstream vertebral bodies, and further decrease because of the decreased scatter due to the adjacent low-density lung.
Today, many dose escalation clinical trials limit the target dose levels
according to the dose to organs at risk. Therefore accurate assessment of dose
7

distributions, in addition to absolute point dose, is vital. The proper choice and
implementation of inhomogeneity corrections methods reduces the uncertainty,
and allows dose prescriptions to be optimized for each patient accordingly.
Furthermore, correction of the relative dose distributions is important for the
optimization of the field size in achieving tumor coverage in conformal radiotherapy. For example in lung cancer, where there is an enlargement of the irradiated volume32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39 caused by the excessive lateral diffusion of electrons
[see section III.C.(b)], the field dimensions should be adjusted according to the
dose distribution with inhomogeneity correction.

4. The level of dose accuracy that will be practically achievable
A statement of dose accuracy goals should be based on what is realistically
achievable, in light of the magnitude and relative importance of all other uncertainties known at the present time. Various authors 5,8,20,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47 have
reviewed uncertainties associated with the dose delivered to the patient by
examining the individual steps within the dose determination process. Their
estimates are summarized in Table 1. It is important to appreciate the impact
that different sources of error have on the overall uncertainty, excluding the
dose calculation step. When 2% to 3% errors in the dose computation are factored into the total uncertainty, the overall error is @5% or larger. The above
estimates are valid when a complete and comprehensive quality assurance (QA)
program is followed. Larger errors should be expected when more complex
treatment techniques are applied. However, with the anticipated reductions in
overall uncertainties in the near future due to improved imaging and radiation
Table 1. Estimates of Uncertainty (in terms of one standard deviation)
in absolute dose in the patient for the complete treatment procedure
using megavoltage photons, today and in the future.
Source of Uncertainties

Uncertainty at
Present (%)

Uncertainty in
Future (%)

Dose at the calibration point in water

2.5

1.0

Additional uncertainty for other points

0.6

0.3

Beam Monitor stability

1.0

0.5

Beam flatness

1.5

0.5

Patient data

1.5

1.0

Patient set up and organ motion

2.5

2.0

Overall (excluding dose calculation)

4.3

2.5

Dose calculation algorithm (multiple levels)

1.0 / 2.0 / 3.0 / 5.0

1.0 / 2.0 / 3.0

TOTAL

4.4 / 4.7 / 5.2 / 6.6

2.7 / 3.2 / 3.9

8

technology, it becomes evident that even more accurate dose calculation algorithms will become desirable.

B. Recommended Accuracy in Tissue Inhomogeneity Corrections
As indicated in Table 1, there are many considerations in the uncertainty
estimation of the dose delivered to the patient. Accepting that (in terms of one
standard deviation) the present overall desired accuracy is 5% in the dose delivered to a volume (or point) and that it may be realistic to expect 3% to be
achievable in the near future, then the accuracy of computed dose distributions
should be between 1% to 2%. Since relative dose calculations have conventionally comprised two steps: (i) a calculation in a homogeneous medium, and (ii)
a tissue inhomogeneity correction, each of these independent components, if
divided evenly, would have to be determined with an uncertainty of less than
1.4%. For computational methods, which do not require an a priori calculation
of dose in water, the overall uncertainty in the directly computed dose distribution should be less than 2%.
As will be shown later (in section V), this level of accuracy is very difficult
to achieve with many existing algorithms. Some traditional methods produce
systematic errors of much greater magnitude, (well in excess of 10% in the thorax for example), especially when charged particle equilibrium is not assured.
However, this limitation should be balanced against the inadequacy of performing no corrections at all.
For situations other than lung, the clinical impact and need for accuracy has
not been assessed as extensively. This is true for bone and various smaller cavities throughout the body. The effects of metallic prostheses are of particular
interest due to their high attenuation characteristics and large dose interface
effects. The AAPM report of Task Group 6348 reviews and makes recommendations on the effects of metallic hip prostheses. While the overall clinical impact
may not be well understood, the general principle of 3% accuracy in dose
delivery with the corresponding need for better than 2% accuracy in correcting
for inhomogeneities is a reasonable, albeit challenging, goal.
Clearly, the standardization of absolute dose delivery cannot be achieved if
the uncontrolled variability caused by the anatomy, geometry, and density associated with individual patients is not accounted for. Accurate dose determination including inhomogeneity corrections is an essential component of dose
optimization and the objective analysis of clinical results, especially with the
advent of 3D precision conformal radiotherapy and with the extension of intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) treatments to structures that have not
been irradiated before.
We now review the underlying radiation physics of tissue inhomogeneity corrections. This knowledge is especially important in understanding the strengths
and limitations of the existing dose algorithms.

9

III. RADIATION PHYSICS RELEVANT TO PHOTON
INHOMOGENEITY CALCULATIONS
This section provides a summary of the major physical processes that underlay the absorption of photon energy in different tissues. More details of the
physics involved can be found in several excellent textbooks.49,50 Our goal in this
section is therefore only to summarize the key concepts to assess the basis,
strengths, and limitations of tissue inhomogeneity calculations presented later.
Our starting point is a spatial, spectral, and directional distribution of photon
fluence entering the patient’s surface as one would get from a Monte Carlo simulation of a treatment machine.51,52,53
The deposition of energy in tissue from a photon beam is fundamentally a
two-step process:
(1) the photons interact in the medium to impart kinetic energy to charged
particles (i.e., the TERMA step, see paragraph III.A.)
(2) charged particles then deposit their given energy through ionization and
excitation events along a finite track (i.e., the DOSE step, see paragraph
III.B.).
If charged particle equilibrium (CPE) is established, then there is a linear
relationship between TERMA (total energy released per unit mass) and
dose 49 and the two steps are effectively blended into a single calculation.
However, if this condition does not hold (e.g., at tissue interfaces and beam
edges), this simplification is invalid and the two steps must be more clearly
distinguished.

A. Photon Interactions: The TERMA Step
The initial photon interactions within tissue are characterized by a linear
attenuation coefficient (m) which is the probability of a photon interacting per
unit distance. This probability depends on: (i) the incident photon energy; E
(MeV), (ii) the tissue density, r (g/cm2); and (iii) the effective atomic number
(Z) of the tissue.
In a therapeutic photon beam, a large number of photons are incident on the
patient,54 each with energy E (MeV). The ensemble of photons reaching a point
in the patient is characterized by an energy fluence (MeV cm–2).
For a given energy fluence, the total energy released per unit mass,
TERMA 55 is given as the product of the total mass attenuation coefficient
Ê mˆ
56
Á ˜ and the energy fluence (y) at a point.
Ë r¯
The kinetic energy released to charged particles only per unit mass is the
KERMA (<TERMA), and the kinetic energy released and subsequently locally
absorbed along the charged particle tracks per unit mass is the collision

10

KERMA c (<KERMA). Bremsstrahlung events are excluded since the photons
produced do not deposit their energy locally.
These quantities are all related to the photon energy fluence by the mass
attenuation, mass energy transfer, and mass energy absorption coefficients,
respectively (Table 2).
The removal of photons from the radiation therapy beam is dominated by
three competing interactions with the atoms of tissue: the photoelectric effect,
the Compton effect and pair production. Figure 2 summarizes the dominance
of the Compton effect for different photon energies and for absorbers with different atomic number (Z).
• In water-like tissues (Z = 7.5), the probability of Compton events dominates (>80%) for energies between 0.05 MeV and 10 MeV. Thus, accurate
modeling of Compton scattering events is an essential ingredient of any
method of inhomogeneity correction for megavoltage photon beams.
• For higher atomic number materials, such as bone (Z = 13), the energy
range of Compton dominance is reduced (0.08 to 7 MeV). At orthovoltage
and superficial therapy energies, the photoelectric effect is strongly
dependent on atomic number (~Z3), and thus the dose to bone relative to
the dose to water will be increased, for a given photon fluence. Similarly,
for x-ray energies between 10 and 25 MV the dose to bone is accentuated
compared with water due to a higher incidence of pair production events.
• Similar considerations apply to ultra-high atomic number materials such
as metallic prostheses implanted in the patient, except that, because of
additional electrons set in motion with the metal,48 the interest is focused
at the tissue in the vicinity and shadow of the metal rather than the metal
itself.

B. Charged Particle Interactions: The DOSE Step
All the photon interactions release some energy to recoil charged particles
including photoelectrons, Compton electrons, and electron-positron pairs,
which are ultimately responsible for energy deposition in tissue. The charged
particles are launched with a spectrum of initial energies and directions. These
particles then slow down through multiple Coulomb collisions, which deposit
Table 2. Interrelationships between radiation quantities.
Common units

cm–1

cm2/g

MeV/g

–1

SI units

m

m2/kg

Gy

Attenuation

m

m/r

TERMA

Transfer

m tr

m tr /r

KERMA

Absorption

m en

m en /r

KERMAc

11

Figure 2. The fraction of interacting photons that undergo Compton scattering
as a fraction of photon energy and the atomic number of the absorbing
medium.
energy locally along the particle track and occasional radiative bremsstrahlung
events that carry energy remotely away from the charged particle track. To
include only local energy deposition, the mass collisional stopping power49 is
thus more relevant to the energy deposited locally along the path of a charged
particle:
Ê MeV ◊ cm 2 ˆ
Á
˜
g
Ë
¯

Scol dE
=
r
rdl

12

(1)

where an average energy, dE , is lost locally to the medium per unit density
and per path length traversed, dl. The mass collisional stopping power depends
on the energy and charge of the decelerating particle, and the atomic number of
the stopping medium and is nearly density independent (see section III.D.1). In
reality, charged particles lose a variable burst of energy for each interaction, but
this statistical energy straggling56,57 is often ignored and “continuous slowing
down approximation (CSDA)” is assumed. This allows for the determination of
a unique “CSDA range” of the charged particle:
Ê dE ˆ
RCSDA = Á
˜
Ë rdl ¯
0
E

Ú

-1

◊ dE

Ê g ˆ
Ë cm 2 ¯

(2)

In addition to slowing down, the charged particles are also deflected
through multiple scatter ing events, which redirects their energy and
changes their dose deposition patterns. This scattering is enhanced in
higher atomic number materials. The detailed calculations of multiple scattering of electrons require complex analytical or Monte Carlo methods and
these have been developed elsewhere for electron beams. 53,58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65,66,67
However, because secondary charged particles produced by photon beams
are of lower energy than the photons and have relatively shorter ranges, a
simpler treatment of electrons is often acceptable for photon beams. In the
simplest models, recoil electrons are often assumed to be “absorbed on the
spot” for low energy photon beams. For higher photon energies, the particle ranges are significantly longer (i.e., centimeters) and the spreading of
the energy of charged particles launched by photons needs to be modeled
(Table 3).
Table 3. Particle ranges and corresponding energies for different tissues and
initial photon energies. s tr is the energy transfer cross section for the Compton
effect and s is the total energy cross section for the Compton effect.

13

C. Charged Particle Equilibrium
Charged particle equilibrium (CPE) occurs when there is a “steady state”
between the charged particles entering and leaving a small region of dosimetric
interest (in reference to the electron RCSDA range). Equivalently, within a small
volume of interest partial electron tracks can be paired to form complete ranges.
The track segments are said to be complementary and the situation is as if the
entire track energy were deposited on the spot.68 Thus, if pure CPE holds, the
primary dose (see equation 8) becomes exactly equal to the collision KERMA
(Table 4). CPE is an energy balance in three-dimensional space. Pure equilibrium can develop if the photon fluence is sufficiently uniform in the vicinity of
the sampling volume that charged particles are also released uniformly with a
constant energy and angular spectrum. The surrounding shell of material must
be uniform over a minimum thickness equal to the maximum range of charged
particles launched therein by the photons from the point under consideration.
Satisfying the condition of uniform charged particle fluence is strictly
impossible for photon beams because of beam divergence and photon attenuation.69 For example, the extent of disequilibrium can be quantified by considering the photon attenuation along the beam direction over the maximum range of
secondary electrons, as shown in Table 4.49
Fortunately, transient charged particle equilibrium (TCPE) is much easier to
achieve than pure equilibrium.49 In brief, TCPE is achievable along the central
ray in a uniform absorber at depths which exceed the maximum forward range
of the particles launched, provided the half-width of the radiation field also
exceeds their maximum lateral motion (i.e., lateral equilibrium). In this case,
the beam attenuation can cause a systematic shift between collision KERMA and
dose: the absorbed dose becomes proportional to (but not equal to) the collision
KERMA (as in Table 4). For CPE and TCPE, a calculation of dose is greatly
simplified since it requires no detailed tracking of electron trajectories. Many of
the simpler methods of inhomogeneity correction assume implicitly CPE or
TCPE and thus avoid dealing with the complexity of charged particle transport.
Table 4. Parameters related to achieving charged particle equilibrium (CPE).
Incident photon
energy [MeV]

Photon attenuation
[%] in thickness of
medium equal to
maximum electron
range

Mean depth
of energy
deposition, x
[cm]

Ratio of Primary
Dose to collision
KERMA

0.1

0

0.000853

1.000146

1

1

0.0768

1.00545

10

7

1.60

1.0365

30

15

4.53

1.082

14

As noted earlier, CPE is a three-dimensional phenomenon. For simplicity
here, we have separated its components into the longitudinal direction along the
beam axis and in the lateral directions perpendicular to the beam axis.

1. Longitudinal TCPE
First consider the familiar build-up dose along the central ray of a broad beam of
megavoltage photons for a beam sufficiently large to achieve lateral equilibrium. The
fluence of charged particles builds up to a maximum at a depth equal to the most
probable range of the charged particles, Rp. Beyond the maximum range of charged
particles, Rmax, only TCPE exists and the dose exceeds the collision KERMA
because the energy launched by photons is actually deposited downstream by an offset distance, x . The proportionality constant (ratio of dose to kerma) is a scalar
larger than unity for points along the central axis (beyond dmax) of a beam incident on
a uniform water absorber and is given in column 4 of Table 4. A simple way to relate
primary dose to collision KERMA (beyond dmax) in a uniform absorber is to use70,71:
DP ( x ) = e

mx

Kc ( x ) ª (1 + mx ) ◊ Kc ( x )

(3)

where Dp(x) is the primary dose and Kc (x) is the collision KERMA at depth x,
and the exponential term corrects for the downstream attenuation along the
mean distance between energy launch and energy deposition points. Table 4
lists some representative values for and for the resultant proportionality constant for monoenergetic primary photons interacting in water.72
For shallow depths less than dmax, where disequilibrium is obvious, the transport of charged particles must be explicitly taken into account. Considering
only the primary dose for the moment, ignoring beam contamination, and
assuming a field size large enough to achieve lateral CPE (see section 2. below),
the depth-dose curve can be obtained through a convolution of the collision
KERMA with the spread of electron energy.73
x
- mx' - b ( x - x' )
DP ( x ) = N Ú Kc e
dx'
be
0

(4)

where:
DP is the primary dose as a function of depth, x.
N is a dose normalization factor
Kc is the incident collision KERMAc, which is attenuated exponentially with
depth, x, according to m, the linear attenuation coefficient [cm–1] for the photons

b ( = 1 / x ) is a linear coefficient [cm–1] describing the longitudinal energy
deposited downstream by “response” electrons launched from every
upstream point x¢. The drop-off in dose is assumed to be a steep exponential
due to the divergence of electrons away from a site of photon interaction.
15

The primary dose reaches its peak value for the usual condition:
dDP
=0
dx

(5)

from which we can obtain the value of dmax.
dmax =

1
ln( b / m )
b
m )
(

(6)

For deeper locations (i.e., x >> dmax), transient TCPE is established49 and assuming b >> m, equation (4) reduces to the following form:
DP ( x ) =

NK 0 b - mx
e - e - bx
(b - m )

(

)

(7)

These equations provide a good introduction to convolution techniques and to
the basic concept of equilibrium. In real radiotherapy beams, the shape of the
actual depth-dose curve, however, will differ from that predicted by these simple equations. In addition to the inverse square law effect, the contributions of
contaminant radiation incident on the patient, the photon scattering within the
patient, and lateral disequilibrium must also be taken into account.

2. Lateral TCPE
As stated above, TCPE can be achieved at depths beyond the maximum projected range, Rmax of the charged particles provided the field area is sufficiently
large to achieve electron equilibrium in all the lateral directions.74,75 Figure 3a
shows how the dose and the collision KERMA change with depth and with field
size for an 18 MV x-ray beam. These computations demonstrate clearly how
longitudinal and lateral equilibrium conditions (Figure 3b) must both be satisfied for TCPE to become established in 3D. At shallow depths and for narrow
field sizes, more energy leaves a region of interest than enters it, creating a
reduction in dose, compared with the dose in full build-up regions. Table 5
summarizes the minimum equilibrium depths (d max) and radii required to
achieve TCPE in a uniform water absorber for a variety of photon beams. If
both conditions are satisfied (i.e., depths > dmax, and field size > Rmin), TCPE is
achieved in the water absorber. The data show that as an approximate rule-ofthumb, the lateral electron range is about one-third of the forward range.

D. Influence of Tissue Density and Atomic Number
1. Density scaling
The mass attenuation and absorption coefficients, which describe photon
interactions, are, by definition, independent of mass density. Similarly, the
16

Figure 3a. Primary depth-dose per unit fluence for 18 MV x-rays for a family
of field sizes ranging from 0.5 to 15 cm in diameter. The primary collision
kerma is also shown to illustrate how CPE or TCPE must be satisfied in three
dimensions to achieve a proportional relationship between collision kerma and
absorbed dose.

Figure 3b. Primary dose profile at dmax per unit fluence for 18 MV x-rays for a
family of field sizes ranging from 0.5 to 15 cm in diameter.
17

Table 5. Minimum equilibrium depth (dmax ) and radius (r) required to achieve
TCPE in a uniform water absorber for a variety of photon beams.
Photon
Energy

Water
Minimum Equilibrium
Depth (dmax)

Minimum Equilibrium
Radius (r)

100 keV

0.15 mm

0

1 MeV

4.5 mm

1.5 mm

10 MeV

5 cm

2 cm

(Reprinted from: M.Tubiana, J Dutreix, A. Dutreix, and P. Jockey, “Bases Physiques de
la radiotherapie et de la radiobiologie”, Editions Masson (1963) with permission from
Editions Masson.)

mass stopping powers that describe the transport of charged particles set-inmotion are quasi-independent of density in solid materials, except for the
polarization effect. In dealing with geometric dimensions of beams and
patients, corresponding linear coefficients are often needed and they are
obtained by density multiplication (e.g., m = m/r • r). In a heterogeneous
medium, the attenuation of photons in a layer of tissue (of length t) can be calculated using the “radiological-pathlength” thickness, rt, (g/cm2) of each tissue
inhomogeneity. Such adjustments in inhomogeneity correction methods are
often referred to as density scaling. Since most interactions are Compton events,
such scaling should be done in accordance with the electron density relative to
water, rather than mass density.
The electron density (e– per cm3) is given by the product NA(Z/A) r, where
NA is Avogadro’s number and r is the mass density. The relative electron density is normalized to the electron density of water, which is 3.34 ¥ 1023 e/cm3.
This density can be measured easily for water-like tissues in vivo using x-ray
computed tomography, 76,77,78 but it can only be estimated for materials of
unknown atomic number such as bone in vivo.79

Fano and O’Connor’s Theorems
The dosimetric data used in treatment planning are mainly derived from
water. The existence of two important theorems of radiation transport (for photons and for charged particles) by O’Connor and Fano enables density scaling
of data for water to “water-like media” with arbitrary densities.
Fano’s theorem80 states that when an infinite medium of varying density but
constant atomic composition is exposed to a uniform photon fluence (i.e., CPE
conditions), differential in energy and direction, then the fluence of charged
particles launched by the photons is also constant and not affected by density
variations. This constant fluence of secondary electrons equals the fluence generated under conditions of charged particle equilibrium (CPE) for a given fluence of photons. Consequently, the absorbed dose across any area of density
18

variations would be constant. This is intuitively plausible since density not only
modulates the number of electrons launched per unit volume, but also rescales
their linear range.
The main assumption in Fano’s theorem81 is that the interaction cross sections per unit mass are independent of the density of a medium of identical
atomic composition.
Strictly, in order to apply Fano’s theorem to external photon beams, one
must assume that the:
• primary photon attenuation,
• the stopping power density effect, and
• the release of secondary photons
can be neglected in an equilibrium layer surrounding a dose point of interest.
Ignoring photon attenuation essentially means that the mean free paths of
primary photons must be much larger than the maximum ranges of the released
secondary electrons. This first condition can be fulfilled in clinical beams, with
photon energies less than 1 to 3 MeV and applies to points in an externally irradiated medium that are sufficiently far from boundaries.82
Density or polarization effects (within the density range of human tissues)
are generally small for clinical beams and the production of secondary photons
is not problematic as long as their mean free paths are larger than the ranges of
secondary electrons. For the above reasons Fano’s theorem provides an important test of dose calculation algorithms.83
While Fano’s theorem applies to situations of charged particle equilibrium,
the density-scaling theorem by O’Connor84 relates the dose in two media of
different density but equal atomic composition, both irradiated by the same
external beam. According to this theorem, the ratio of the secondary scattered
photon fluence to that of primary photon fluence is constant in the two media
provided all geometric distances, including field sizes, are scaled inversely with
density. This means that the dose at corresponding points in two media is the
same if all dimensions in the irradiation geometries are scaled inversely with
density.
While these two theorems provide good insights into the problem of changing density, they should not be applied without recognizing their basic inherent
assumptions. They have limited applications to heterogeneous tissues since both
density and atomic composition are likely to change simultaneously (e.g.,
bones, prostheses).85 Fano’s theorem is also implicitly built on the same assumptions that underpin charged particle equilibrium; this requirement has sometimes been understated and overlooked.82
Both Fano’s and O’Connor’s theorems rely on a common assumption that
the interaction probability (per electron) is independent of density variations
between media. The common foundations and relations between these two theorems were analyzed and unified mathematically within a general framework
by Bjarngard.86
19

Figure 4. Fluence and DOSE distributions for a beam of 5.0 MeV photons
(5 ¥ 5 cm2 field) incident on a water phantom (a and c) and a slab phantom with
a cork insert (b and d). Fluence distribution in a water-cork-water phantom
(b). DOSE distribution in a water phantom (c). DOSE distribution in a watercork-water phantom (d). Note the dose reduction in the central region of the
cork and the penumbral flaring of the beam. (Reprinted from J. J. Battista and
M. B. Sharpe110, “True three-dimensional dose computations for megavoltage
x-ray therapy: a role for the superposition principle,” Australas. Phys. Eng. Sci.
Med. 15:159–78 (1992) with permission from the Australasian College of
Physical Scientists in Medicine.)
The influence of electron density on photon fluence and dose is illustrated
independently in the low-density slab phantom exposed to monoenergetic 5
MeV photons (Figure 4). The changes in photon transport can be easily calculated using density scaling of the layers (Figure 4a and 4b). However, the range

20

of recoil electrons is significant, such that they can be released in one medium
and absorbed in a different downstream material. The initial “build-up” of dose
in water is followed by a “build-down” within the low-density region and a
“rebuild-up” occurs in the distal water section (Figures 4c and 4d). Figures 5
and 6 isolate the contributions from electrons launched in different density
regions and explain the complex shape of the depth-dose curve. In such a case
(high energy, small field, low density), inhomogeneity corrections based solely
on photon fluence or attenuation would be inadequate (see Figure 6). On the
other hand, simpler calculations based solely on photon fluence can be quite
accurate for lower photon energies where primary photon fluence, KERMA,
and TERMA are linearly related (see section F. below). Unfortunately, it is not
always easy to predict a priori which tissue regions are prone to disequilibrium
for a 3D irradiation of a heterogeneous absorber.
While this section has emphasized the effect of density on central axis values of photon fluence and of dose, density can also affect the beam penumbra
in tissue,87 due to a lateral loss of TCPE at the field edge. Thus the beam edge
is blurred in low-density absorbers due to the increased lateral motion of
charged particles, as seen in Figure 4. Monte Carlo calculations have shown
that the primary penumbra width is inversely proportional to tissue density
whereas the density has the opposite effect on the scatter penumbra, since the

Figure 5. Isolation of electron contributions launched in different density
regions. In such a case (high energy, small field, low density), lung inhomogeneity corrections based solely on photon fluence or attenuation would be
inadequate.

21

Figure 6. Significant electronic non-equilibrium effects occur at the interfaces
between media of different densities for fields whose sizes are of the same order
of magnitude as the range of electrons. (Reprinted from R. Mohan, C.-S. Chui,
and L. Lidofsky,108 “Differential pencil beam dose computation model for photons,” Med. Phys. 13:64–73 (1986) with permission from the American
Association of Physicists in Medicine.)
scatter dose decreases with the decrease of density. Therefore, the inverse proportionality of penumbra width with density does not hold for the total dose.34
For an 18 MV x-ray beam, the penumbra width (80%–20%) was measured to
be 2.4 times bigger in lung-density phantom than in water phantom, whereas
for a 4 MV beam, the penumbra width has been measured slightly smaller in
the low-density medium.33
This penumbral degradation effect should be carefully considered when 3D
conformal radiotherapy is intended to assure coverage of the planning target
volume.88 The effects need to be considered in the context of multiple overlapping fields.

2. Effects of atomic number
The pattern of dose distributions in the presence of high atomic number
inhomogeneities is perturbed due to a number of complex effects:
(a) The opportunity for competing photon interactions (e.g., pair production, which increases with atomic number) may reduce the proportion of
Compton-scattered photons (Figure 2). Secondly, pair production affects
the spectral distribution of the secondary charged particles as well as

22

Table 6. Mass attenuation coefficient dependence on atomic number
Atomic
number,
Z

1 to 10

11 to 60

61 to 92

Mass attenuation
coefficient at
low photon energy,
(cm2/g)

Mass attenuation
coefficient at
high photon energy,
(cm2/g)

(cm2/g)

Ê mˆ
Á ˜
Ë r ¯ le

Ê mˆ
Á ˜
Ë r ¯ he

Ê mˆ
Ê mˆ
Á ˜ -Á ˜
Ë r ¯ le Ë r ¯ he

3.5 (for Z=1) to
1.9 (for Z=10)

2.7 (for Z=1) to
1.4 (for Z=10)

0.8 (for Z=1)

decreases with
increasing Z

decreases with
increasing Z

0.5 (for Z=10)

0.9 (for Z=11) to
7.0 (for Z=60)

0.4 (for Z=11) to
1.0 (for Z=60)

0.5 (for Z=11)

increases with
increasing Z

increases with
increasing Z

6.0 (for Z=60)

7.1 (for Z=61) to
4.4 (for Z=92)

0.1 (for Z=61) to
2.8 (for Z=92)

7.0 (for Z=61)

decreases with
increasing Z

increases with
increasing Z

1.6 (for Z=92)

(From the National Institute of Standards and Technology—NIST,
http://www.physics.nist.gov/Divisions/Div846/Gp2/gp2.html.)

their range. The stopping of positrons may also generate tertiary annihilation photons.
(b) The mass attenuation coefficient depends on atomic number (Table 6),
thus exponential attenuation of photon fluence and TERMA is greatly
accentuated. Severe attenuation can spoil the uniformity of photon fluence in “shadowed” regions, violating a necessary condition for charged
particle equilibrium.
(c) The mass energy absorption coefficient depends on atomic number, and
thus the collision KERMA is changed locally within the absorbing material. This is well known in kilovoltage x-ray dosimetry, where a factor is
used to calculate the enhancement of dose to bone for a given photon
fluence, assuming CPE. For megavoltage photons, the collision KERMA
can similarly be used to estimate the local dose, but only if a sufficient
mass of material allows CPE or at least TCPE to become established.
This is generally not the case for small bone regions and such dose
enhancement calculations based on Kc ratios are not very accurate in
bone.
(d) With increasing atomic number, a more detailed inclusion of electron
transport is needed for megavoltage x-ray beams. Multiple scattering of
23

charged particles by the nucleus89 is accentuated producing a local variation in their angular distributions, which can also spoil the equilibrium
conditions, yielding “hot/cold spots”.90,91 For example, back scattering
from higher atomic number materials yields a significant contribution to
the electron fluence and dose at the interface between soft tissue and a
material of higher atomic number. For metallic interfaces encountered
in prosthetic implants, dose increases of up to 50% are measured in the
backscatter direction within the range of electrons set in motion by 18
MV x-rays. At such higher energies, the transition zone extends over
several centimeters and can affect a significant volume of adjoining tissue, with a potential for adverse clinically observed reactions.85,92,93
In summary, the most general solution to inhomogeneity corrections should
account for changes in electron density as well as atomic number of the tissues
traversed by primary photons and all secondary photons and charged particles.
Because of the dominance of water-like soft tissues and of Compton and
Coulomb interactions within them, the electron density of tissues is the most
important parameter and has merited the greatest attention. However, we
remind the reader that special considerations for elevated atomic number are
sometimes needed for bone or for metallic prostheses, especially in the upper
range (greater than 10 MV) of megavoltage energies.48

E. Concept of Primary and Scattered Dose Components
The primary and secondary particle contributions to dose (photons and electrons) exert their influence over a different range and they are individually
affected to different extents by tissue inhomogeneities and beam boundaries. It
is common to decompose the total dose into two components referred to as the
“primary” and “scattered” dose components. Generally, this separation has
been done empirically using conventional dosimetry instrumentation, but more
recently Monte Carlo simulations have aided in the more rigorous definition of
“primary” and “scatter” separation.94 Simplified point source models have been
extended to include extra focal radiation.95,96,97
Those photons that are incident upon the surface of the patient (or phantom)
are termed primary. Some of those have traveled directly from the radiation
source: others have been produced as a result of interactions within the structures comprising the treatment head. Most of these interactions are Comptonscattering events, which generate secondary electrons in addition to scattered
photons. In addition, pair production can occur if the incident photon has sufficient energy (i.e., above 1.02 MeV), resulting in the generation of electronpositron pairs and subsequent generation of photons of 0.51 MeV from positron
annihilation. Since these occur mostly in structures in the head of the machine
(some occur in the intervening air) we refer to the photon component as headscattered photons, but they still belong to the “incident” or “primary” group.
The dose from primary photons to the central axis of an open beam at depth in
24

a phantom will depend upon: (i) distance from the source; (ii) head-scatter,
which will depend upon collimator setting and other beam defining parts
(block, wedges); (iii) attenuation, i.e., absorption and scattering in the phantom, determined by depth and beam energy. At any depth, the dose contribution from primary photons is determined by the collimator setting, and not by
the size of the radiation field at that depth.98
The first time such photons interact with the medium, they contribute to primary dose through recoil electrons. Scattered component is that part of the
dose which is deposited by photons which have previously interacted at least
once in the medium. The proportion of dose due to scattered photons depends
upon photon energy and the volume of patient irradiated (field size, depth, and
patient thickness).
The total dose along the central axis can then be decomposed into:
D (x, r) = Dp (x) + Ds (x, r)

(8)

where r refers to the radial distance to the field edge. Extrapolating the dose
versus field size curve to a small pencil beam field size isolates the primary
dose. The limiting field size chosen will determine if the primary component
includes or excludes the primary electrons and this leads to some ambiguity
about the definition of a “pencil beam”.94,99 This is because two effects simultaneously reduce the central dose: (i) a reduction in the photon fluence; and
(ii) a reduction in the electron fluence generated by the primary dose component. As the pencil size progressively shrinks, the dose rapidly changes in a
non-linear way due to the combination of these effects, and the extrapolation
value needs to be decided. It is possible to clarify and standardize the definition of the primary component more precisely by using auxiliary Monte Carlo
calculations.99,100 If the small “0 ¥ 0” field is limited to an equilibrium pencil
beam, then the scattered component can be considered as due to scattered
photons only (see Woo et al.94, Figure 7). In this case, the pencil dimension
should be small enough to avoid incorporation of scattered photons, but yet
large enough to preserve charged particle equilibrium (CPE) in the lateral
dimension.101,102,103
The primary dose is essentially the primary collision KERMA, which is the
dose deposited from charged particles set in motion by primary photons only. The
scatter dose is then attributed to all secondary radiations, including Comptonscattered photons, annihilation photons, and bremsstrahlung. Figure 8 shows the
spread of energy by secondary radiations away from the photon interaction point.
From such “dose spread functions,” also known as “scatter kernels,” “point kernels,”104,105,106 “dose spread arrays,”72,107 “differential pencil beams”108 or “influence
functions,”70,74,109 it is possible to quantify their relative contributions to dose at a
point under full scattering conditions (i.e., within an infinite medium irradiated
by an infinitely broad beam). Using the reciprocity theorem,49 the contribution
from each component is simply the summation of all pixel values in each dosespread image. Figure 9 shows the results of such a calculation,87,110,111 and indicates
25

Figure 7. Tissue-air-ratios for an 18 MV photon beam at a depth of 10 cm in
water, as a function of field radius r. The asterisks represent the measured data.
The solid curves are generated using Monte Carlo, normalized to the measured
tissue-air ratio at 3 cm (Reprinted from M. K. Woo, J. R. Cunningham, and J.
J. Jeziorenski,94 “Extending the concept of primary and scatter separation to the
condition of electronic disequilibrium,” Med. Phys. 17:588–595 (1990) with
permission from the American Association of Physicists in Medicine.)

Figure 8. Intensity map of the distribution of the primary and varying orders of
scatter in water from a 6 MeV photon pencil beam.
26

Figure 9. Quantification of the relative importance of all interaction processes
(for a 1.25 MeV and a 6.00 MeV beam) to dose at a point under full scattering
conditions. The contribution from each component is simply the summation of
all pixel values in each dose spread image.
the relative importance of all interaction processes for a 1.25 MeV and a 6.00
MeV beam. Similar data have also been previously obtained by both measurements in a water absorber,109,112,113 and by analytical calculations of the first and
second Compton scattering components.114,115,116

F. Introduction to the Superposition and Convolution Principles
The superposition principle is very general and widely used in many
branches of physics and engineering. It can serve as a universal basis and aid in
the understanding and categorization of tissue inhomogeneity correction methods within a common framework.55,117,118,119,120,121
In this context, the initial sites of photon interactions can be viewed as
“sources” of energy and the “point kernels” are the energy spreading functions
or blurring functions as just described (Figure 10). For an external beam of
radiation, a downstream shower of secondary radiation is triggered from every
primary interaction point in the patient. The magnitude of the primary photon
impulse is the energy released at each interaction site, or total energy released
per unit mass (TERMA), and is dependent upon the primary photon fluence.
The pattern of energy spread away from an energy release point, per unit
27

Figure 10. A schematic illustration of the superposition method of dose calculation. The dose distribution is a superposition of dose spread kernels that are
modulated by the amount of energy released at each irradiated point; i.e., the
TERMA distribution.
TERMA, is the total dose spread function or kernel. Inhomogeneity corrections
are essentially aimed at modifying the primary TERMA values, based on attenuation of the photon fluence, and at also modifying the dose spread functions at
each point in the patient. More accurate methods use a variety of kernels for
each possible interaction mechanisms (e.g., single Compton scattering), and
each kernel is corrected individually for the effect of inhomogeneity.
This superposition approach to dose calculations was first suggested for
external beams of radiation by Roesch,70 who described an “influence function”. The concept was also explored semi-empirically71 in order to explain the
build-up portion of depth-dose curves for higher energy x-ray beams from an
early betatron. The notion of such response functions, however, remained dormant until Cunningham and Beaudoin developed the concept of voxel scatter
strengths based on differential scatter-air ratios,112 Sontag and Ray122 used scatter weights. O’Connor and Malone also derived primary dose spread arrays
from measurements for a cobalt-60 beam,113 and Wong et al.123 attempted to
determine iso-influence data experimentally using an air void in water. More
detailed response functions, which segregate the different interaction
processes, have since been calculated using analytical114,124,125 or Monte Carlo
methods.72,108,119,126,127,128,129,130,131,132
Mathematically, the dose is obtained from the most general superposition
integral:
r
r
r r
r
D(r ) = T (r ¢) ◊ K (r ; r ¢)d 3 r ¢

Ú

(9)

r
where T (r ¢) describes the total energy released by primary photon interactions
r
r r
per unit mass, or TERMA, at r ¢ and K (r ; r ¢) is the dose spread kernel which
r
describes the fraction of energy deposited at r by secondary particles originatr
ing at r ¢ and is allowed to be spatially variant. This is a computationally intensive operation since every point in the irradiated volume (r¢) contributes to each
r
r r
dose point ( r ) one pair ( r ; r ¢ ) at a time. In the special case of a spatially
r r
r r
invariant kernel (i.e., K (r ; r ¢) = K (r - r ¢) such as in a homogeneous absorber,
28

the superposition collapses to a convolution integral because the dose contribution depends only on the relative position of the dose and scattering point
pairs. It may be evaluated in real space as an integral or in Fourier space as a
simpler multiplication:
D(r ) = F -1[ F{D} = F{T } ◊ F{K } ]

(10)

where F and F-1 denote the Fourier Transform and inverse operation. This convolution approach relies on several assumptions111,133 but it greatly reduces the
computation time when the dimensionality of the integral is high (e.g., 3D) and
if the Fast Fourier transform (FFT) is applied.111,134,135

IV. INHOMOGENEITY CORRECTION METHODS
Dose calculation methods that account for tissue density variations can take
two general forms.136 In the most conventional form, a relative dose distribution
is first calculated assuming a patient consisting of homogeneous water-like density. The link between those relative distributions and absolute dose is the
machine-calibrated output that is defined at some reference point in water. Then
an inhomogeneity correction factor (ICF) is applied which makes adjustments
to the uncorrected distribution to account for variations in tissue density. The
ICF is thus defined as:
Ê
ˆ
dose in heterogeneous medium
ICF(r ) = Á
˜
Ë dose at same point in homogeneous medium ¯

(11)

Alternatively, the dose can be calculated to a point in a heterogeneous
medium directly using a model of radiation transport that would yield absolute
dose a priori. Relative dose distributions can then be constructed by normalizing to a reference point.
In treatment planning where the ICF method is used, there are three steps
necessary for correcting a dose distribution for tissue density variations:
• The dose is calculated in a water-like medium which adequately reproduces beam data measured in water and which is capable of modeling
other effects such as irregularly shaped fields, patient surface contour, and
primary beam intensity modulators
• Tissue density and atomic number information must be available for the
anatomy of the patient in question
• An inhomogeneity correction method is required to account for variations
in tissue density and atomic number.
These components are intricately connected and, at times, difficult to separate. For example, the correction for external patient contour shape can be part

29

of the homogeneous dose calculation but it is sometimes considered instead as
part of the inhomogeneity correction, using air voxels near the patient’s surface.
In this report we focus on inhomogeneity corrections internal to the patient and
will therefore mostly involve the latter two steps above.
Most radiation therapy clinics should have access to three-dimensional (3D)
CT patient density information,137,138,139,140,141 although many patients might still
be planned using only 2D single-slice input information.
With either 2D or 3D density information, all inhomogeneity methods begin
with a primary beam ray-tracing procedure. This incorporates an explicit calculation of the changes in TERMA or photon fluence due to changes in density
along the primary beam rays from the radiation source to every point of calculation within the patient.
From there, the methods differ mainly in the way they address the scattered
photon contribution and scattered primary electrons, and in the sampling of
anatomical 3D density information. A classification scheme based on these
considerations is shown schematically in Figure 11 and forms the order in
which different correction methods that will be reviewed in this report. Table 7
summarizes the various methods presently available and categorizes them
according to the physical considerations of Figure 11.

Figure 11. Classification of inhomogeneity correction algorithms according to
their ability for scatter integration and to calculation time.

30

Table 7. Categorization of different inhomogeneity correction
algorithms according to the level of anatomy sampled (1D or 3D)
and the inclusion or exclusion of electron transport.

1D

TERMA

DOSE

Local energy deposition
(No electron transport)

Non-local energy deposition
(Electron transport)

Category 1

Category 3

1.1 Linear attenuation
1.2 Ratio of TAR (RTAR)
(Equivalent path length,
effective SSD, isodose shift)
1.3 Power law (Batho)
3D

3.1 Convolution (pencil beam)
3.2 FFT techniques

Category 2

Category 4

2.1 Equivalent TAR (ETAR)
2.2 Differential SAR (DSAR)
2.3 Delta volume (DVOL)
2.5 3D Beam Subtraction Method

4.1 Superposition/Convolution
4.2 Monte Carlo
2.4 Differential TAR (dTAR)

There are numerous reviews on inhomogeneity correction methods in the literature categorizing them according to various criteria:
• Some classification schemes focus attention on the detail of the scatter calculation. For example, methods can be distinguished coarsely according to
whether they “sense” the proximity and lateral dimension of an inhomogeneity and whether the scattered electrons are considered explicitly.142
Others, categorized methods according to their ability to consider anatomical information (e.g., 2D or 3D geometry) in predicting scattering
effects,143 and CT density information they use.144,145,146,147,148 It is important
to consider whether the full 3D voxel data set is actually sampled per calculation point or whether only a subset (e.g., 1D ray-tracing) enters the
scatter calculation.117,120
• A mathematical classification criterion is based on the integral used to
sum the scatter from elements such as slab, pencil, or voxel scatter kernels.55,81,117,118 The physics described by these kernels and how they are each
adjusted for tissue inhomogeneity are distinguishing features in terms of
accuracy and speed of an algorithm. The most accurate methods independently adjust the energy released from a voxel by scattered electrons
and photons.
In this report, we chose to categorize the available methods in accordance
with their ability to treat primary TERMA and electron transport separately
(i.e., TERMA and DOSE) and whether the anatomy is being sampled along
one-dimensional primary rays (1D) or the full three dimensions (3D). Table 7
31

includes methods in increasing order of complexity and accuracy (from category 1 to category 4), at the expense of more input anatomy data sampling and
slower performance (CPU time per point per beam). The different methods of
inhomogeneity correction will now be reviewed individually.

Category 1: Local Energy Deposition (No Electron Transport);
1D Density Sampling
This elementary class of inhomogeneity correction methods was originally
developed in the late 1960s and later modified to incorporate pixel density data
when CT became available.78,79,144,149,150,151,152,153,154,155,156,157,158,159,160,161,162,163,164,165,166 These
methods deserve some attention because (i) they are the most predominant
methods that have been used in 2D or 3D commercial treatment planning systems for decades, (ii) for practical considerations, they will remain in clinical
use for some more years, and (iii) despite the use of full simulation models in
modern treatment planning systems, simple approaches are still needed and will
most likely be further refined for independent checks of the treatment planning
results. These models assume that:
• the patient consists of a semi-infinite slab geometry per calculation point,
and
• all energy from the photon interactions is deposited at the site of interaction.
Only primary ray-tracing is used to calculate the dose to a point. This also
results in an implicit adjustment of the scattered photon contribution. An illustration167 of the semi-infinite slab approximation along with examples of primary and first order scatter ray tracing is shown in Figure 12. For the primary
fluence calculation, a primary ray trace is exact and identical for 1D, 2D and
3D geometries provided that the density sampling follows the proper trajectory
of the divergent ray. 2D planning in a single CT slice with 1D ray tracing does
not take into account the geometry and density information from the whole
irradiated volume, resulting in erroneous scatter estimation. Typically, cylindrical symmetry is assumed and the single patient slice is extended in the longitudinal direction to build a “3D” patient volume. Attention should be paid when
using these kinds of algorithms in selection of the beam dimensions and beam
weights, which may implicitly include or exclude the inhomogeneity correction
factor. In the case of non-coplanar beams using one or few CT slices, primary
ray-tracing is not always possible due to the lack of density information along
oblique raylines which cut through missing adjacent CT slices. When calculating dose far away from an inhomogeneity, this elementary class of inhomogeneity correction methods gives results with less than 5% error, but for a complex
heterogeneous medium and for dose calculations within or in the near vicinity
of an inhomogeneity, errors larger than 5% can occur.167

32

Figure 12. The dose to point P in a homogeneous tissue-equivalent medium (a)
is a result of both primary and scattered radiation. Introduction of an inhomogeneity (b) and (c) alters the attenuation of the primary as well as the magnitude of scatter; the former a function of thickness of the inhomogeneity, while
the latter is also a function of the position and lateral dimensions of the inhomogeneity. Traditional methods (d) consider only effects on the primary by calculating an effective thickness.

Method 1.1: Linear attenuation
The simplest form of inhomogeneity correction is to adjust the dose at a
point on the basis of the overlying thickness of the inhomogeneity and using a
“percent per cm” correction (Table 8). This method is very crude and is useful
only for a quick estimation of the dose adjustment:
ICF = (% per cm) ¥ inhomogeneity thickness

(cm)

(12)

Clearly, this does not include patient-specific densities nor any consideration of
the geometric treatment beam parameters (e.g., field size).

33

Table 8. Simple correction (percent per cm) of the dose according
to photon energy and tissue density.
Energy

%/cm Correction
Lung

Bone

Cobalt-60

+4.0%

–2.5%

4–6 MV

+3.0%

–2.0%

10 MV

+2.5%

–1.5%

18–25 MV

+1.5%

–1.0%

Method 1.2: Effective attenuation coefficient
A slightly more sophisticated version of a similar concept uses the effective
attenuation coefficient and the point correction is given by
ICF = e (

m ¢ d -d ¢ )

(13)

where:
m¢ is the effective attenuation coefficient of water for a particular beam quality,
d is the physical depth from the surface to the point of calculation, and
d¢ is the “radiological depth,” “equivalent depth,” or “equivalent path length”
and is given by
d¢ =

Â (Ddi ) ◊ ri
i

(14)

where Dd i are the thicknesses of tissues with different relative electron densities
ri lying above the point of calculation. In this method, patient specific densities
can be used in the evaluation of d¢, but treatment beam parameters are still
ignored.

Method 1.3: Ratio of tissue-air ratios (RTAR)
This method was one of the most commonly used methods in older commercial treatment planning systems and is still used by many physicists for
manual “spot checks” of dose. Other names have been given to this method
such as “effective SSD” or “isodose shift” but these essentially have the same
foundation. This correction method is given by
ICF =

TAR( d ¢, W )
TAR( d , W )

34

(15)

where d¢ is the equivalent path length given by equation (14), d is the physical
depth, and W represents the field size at the level of the point of interest. Here
the primary ray trace produces a radiological depth, which is used for looking
up a revised tissue-air ratio (TAR) value. In this manner, this method provides
an exact correction for the primary fluence, or dose if the condition of electron
equilibrium (CPE) is met. Correction to the scattered photon contribution is
implicit although approximate in that only a modified depth is chosen for the
TAR [and thus implicitly scatter-air ratio (SAR)] value. The ratio of tissuemaximum ratio (TMR) values could be used instead of TAR values as this is
formally identical [since the backscatter factor (BSF) values are canceled out].
The popularity of this method is primarily due to its simplicity and its ability to
approximately account for some scatter changes due to field size and effective
depth.
The major weakness of the RTAR method is its compromised modeling of
the lateral component of the scattered photon contribution that results in an
over-correction when the density is less than that of water and an under-correction when the density is greater than water. This can be shown with the simple
consideration of a homogeneous medium of density, r < 1. Here the RTAR corrected result of TAR(rd, r) would be higher than TAR(rd, rr) which is the
exact solution as given by the O’Connor scaling theorem.84

Method 1.4: Power law (Batho)
Batho in 1964,168 and Young and Gaylord in 1970169 proposed an empirical
correction factor method for points lying within water and distal to an inhomogeneity by raising tissue-air ratios to a power that depends on density. This was
generalized by Sontag and Cunningham167 in order: (i) to include points within
an inhomogeneity and (ii) to handle arbitrary densities and non-water-like
materials. The correction factor is given by:
TAR( d1 , Wd ) 1

r - r2

ICF =

TAR( d2 , Wd )

1- r2

(16)

where:
r1:

relative electron density of the medium in which the point of
calculation lies,

r2:

relative electron density of the overlying material,

d 1:

depth within this medium, and

d 2:

distance to the upper surface of overlying material

A further modification of this method by Webb and Fox,170,171 and Cassel et
al.172 allowed it to be adopted for CT tissue densities and is given by:

35

ICF =

m= N

’ TAR( Xm )

( rm - rm -1 )/ ro

m =1

( men / r ) N / ( men / r )W

(17)

where:
N:

number of layers of different densities above the point of calculation,

m:

layer number,

x m:

distance from point of interest to the surface of the mth layer,

rm, r0:

electron density of the mth layer, and that of water,

(men /r)N:

mass energy absorption coefficient of the material in layer N.

Equations (16) and (17) show that in the semi-infinite geometry, the effect
of an inhomogeneity with density r is modeled as a compounding of TAR values. With the power law, the multiplicative relationship in the depth direction,
shown in equation (17), is easy to understand for slab geometry. The model is
sensitive to the proximity of the inhomogeneity and provides a first order
approximation to changes in both primary and scattered photon fluencies in the
slab geometry.
Some improvement has been demonstrated when tissue-maximum ratios
(TMR) or tissue-phantom ratios (TPR) are used instead of TAR. El-Khatib and
Battista, 173 Kappas and Rosenwald, 174 and Thomas 175 have found marked
improvement by nearly 5% in the accuracy of dose calculated within lung when
they substituted TMR values instead of TAR values for Co-60 radiation. ElKhatib and Battista173 provided measurements of the ICF for Co-60 and 6 MV
energies. A cork thickness of 10 cm was used to simulate lung. The ICF was
plotted as a function of the distance of the measurement point and the “top” of
the cork slab. Results were obtained for small (5 cm ¥ 5 cm), medium (10 cm
¥ 10 cm) and large (50 cm ¥ 50 cm) fields. Inside cork and for both energies
they found that the maximum deviation of the TMR-Batho method from measured values was 3%. The deviation from measured values was consistently
worse for the TAR-Batho method and can be as high as 9% for large fields. The
authors give also a partial physical explanation why TMR-Batho method should
give better agreement with measurements: (i) the TMR values include no inherent backscatter; (ii) the TAR value includes inherent backscatter, (iii) in lung of
density 0.3 g/cm3, backscatter is reduced and (i) is more appropriate.
For higher energies than Co-60 and when the point of calculation lies in the
rebuild-up region (either inside the heterogeneity or in the water-like medium
beyond it) the power law correction factor is undefined. For this case the above
mentioned authors suggest a simple modification of the formula by adding systematically the build-up distance zm to all depths before calculating the TMR.
In this way one ensures that only TMR values from the equilibrium portion of
the curve beyond zm are used.
36

Many authors,25,146,173,175,176,177,178,179,180,181,182,183,184,185,186,187,188,189,190 have demonstrated
experimentally or by theoretical analysis the advantages and the limitations of
the initial and the multiplicative generalized Batho method and/or compared it
with other correction methods. According to them, the generalized power-law
method:
(a) Provides an acceptable approximation below a single inhomogeneous
layer with an extent larger than that of the field size and electron density
less than that of tissue.
(b) Within an inhomogeneous layer, generalized corrections perform well
when the relative electron density of the inhomogeneity is less than
unity, but results become progressively worse for denser layers and
larger field sizes.
(c) If the electron density (relative to water) of the inhomogeneous layer is
greater than unity, the method overestimates the dose. In the extreme
situation of a large inhomogeneity and large field sizes, the method has
been proved to be inadequate with errors up to 10%.
(d) For very large radiation fields such as those used to cover the entire thorax or for half or total body irradiation, the method underpredicts the
correction factor by as much as 12% in the middle of the lung.178,179
(e) It is a better model than that of the RTAR method and does provide better agreement with measurements in the slab geometry for small to
medium field sizes.173
(f) The method is limited by the requirement of lateral charged particle
equilibrium. Recent results177 confirmed that dose errors in the calculated depth dose arise also from the neglect of electron transport. This
effect increases as the field size decreases, as the density of the inhomogeneity decreases, and with the energy of incident photons, i.e. small
fields of high-energy beams in lung may cause very large errors.173,175
(g) In clinical geometries which are rarely slab-like,180 the Batho calculations do not appear to be much superior to those of the RTAR method.
Artifacts arise in the calculations when applying the power law method
to downstream positions near a lung-chest wall boundary. The contribution from the first layer of water-like tissue is canceled by the multiplicative model and the correction is erroneous because TAR values in
the build-up region are used, despite an already established electron
equilibrium condition in the lung. This er roneous result can be
improved by using TARs that are exponentially extrapolated to shallow
depths from larger depths to approximate the KERMA-depth curve
instead of the depth-dose curve [see discussion of equation (4)].
(h) In contrast to the RTAR results, the Batho power law calculations in slab
geometry have been shown analytically to undercorrect when the density is less than that for water and overcorrect when the density is
greater than that for water.182

37

The above models were all developed in an era of radiation therapy when
photon energies tended to be lower in the cobalt-60, 4 MV, and 6 MV x-ray
energy range. The approximation of electron equilibrium was acceptable and
thus TAR data could be used and adjusted directly. However, all these methods
have been difficult to extend to situations where electron equilibrium does not
exist.36,191 Furthermore the handling of scattered photon radiation was approximate and indirect, accounting only for field size differences and effective depths
in water. These were major weaknesses and necessitated the development of
alternative methods.

Category 2: Local Energy Deposition (No Electron Transport);
3D Density Sampling
The assumption of slab-like geometry is inadequate for many clinical situations where the inhomogeneity intercepts only a portion of the radiation beam.
Inhomogeneity correction methods described in this category provide a solution
by including 3D density information in an explicit calculation of the scattered
photon dose, but they still assume electron equilibrium or that electrons are
absorbed at the point where they are created (“on the spot” absorption).

Method 2.1: Equivalent tissue-air ratio (ETAR)
The equivalent tissue air ratio method (ETAR152,192) was widely implemented
in commercial treatment planning systems during the 1980s and is still in use
on a number of modern systems. It can be considered as the first practical dose
calculation method using the full CT data set for computerized treatment planning.
Principle of the method: According to the density scaling theorem,84 the tissue-air ratio (TAR) in a field of radius r at depth d in a uniform medium of density r relative to water, is equal to TAR(rd, rr), i.e., the tissue-air ratio in a unit
density medium for field size rr and depth rd. The ETAR correction factor for
homogeneous, non-unit-density water-like medium is defined as
ICF = TAR( r d , r r ) / TAR( d , r )

(18)

The application of ETAR method to heterogeneous geometries is given by:
ICF = TAR( d ¢, r˜ ) / TAR( d , r )

(19)

where d¢ and r̃ are the “scaled” or “effective” values of d and r respectively for
the energy of the radiation being used.
d¢ is derived by averaging CT values along primary photon ray paths [similar to the effective pathlength methods, see equation (14)]. In the original
ETAR method, the derived electron density matrix, which comprises 256 ¥ 256
elements, is reduced to 128 ¥ 128 elements by averaging adjacent pixels. The
38

summation is carried out in this 128 ¥ 128 matrix, which coincides with the
plane of calculation.
The scaled beam radius is given by
r˜ = r ◊ r˜

(20)

with

r̃ =

Â Â Â rijk Wijk
i

j

k

Â Â Â Wijk
i

j

(21)

k

where the summation is over the whole of the irradiated volume. The rijk is
the relative electron density of an element (pixel) in each of the 32 ¥ 32
(reduced) matrices (CT images). The coordinate system has been set up such
that the Y-axis is parallel to the central ray of the radiation beam and the origin of the coordinate system is at the center of the region of interest. Indices
i, j, k refer to X, Y, and Z coordinate, respectively.

Determination of Weighting Factors
The Wijk is a weighting factor, proportional to an element’s contribution to the
scattered radiation arriving at the point of calculation. Wijk will, in general, be
largest for voxels (volume elements) that are close to and in front of the point of
calculation and smallest for pixels that are far away or behind. The weighting
factors depend on the conditions of irradiation, the irradiated medium, and the
location of the point of calculation. Thus, a different set of weighting factors is
needed for every point of calculation. No general set exists (i.e., the weights are
not spatially invariant in the language of the superposition principle).
Several approaches might be used to determine values for weighting factors.
In Sontag and Cunningham work 109,192 use is made of differential scatter-air
ratios (dSAR). The procedure is facilitated by separately determining the first
and multiple scatter components. The weighting factor is a set equal to a sum of
the two components:
Wijk = DS1(d, r) + DSM(d, r)

(22)

where DS1 and DSM denote the first and multiple scatter components respectively. The first scatter estimate is derived from the Klein-Nishina Compton
scattering probabilities and the multiple scatter component is based on measured SAR values.109
Determination of the average density r̃ requires a summation such as in
equation (20) over the entire irradiated volume each time a point is calculated
would necessitate use of all of the (32 ¥ 32) matrices. In the development of a
dose calculation system to be used routinely in the clinic, such a summation is
39

possible but was deemed impractical because of excessive computer memory
requirements and calculation times (in 1970s).
As a result, an approximate procedure needed to be developed in which the
volume is divided into parallel and contiguous slices, perpendicular to the Zaxis (along the patient’s superior-inferior axis). Every volume element in a
given slice has the same k coordinate. It is assumed that the weighting factor
Wi,j,k, which is a function of the X, Y, and Z positions of the volume element,
can be approximated by a product of two independent weighting factors, both
determined for a water medium. This has allowed the reduction of the volume
summation to a planar summation and is also compatible with the use of data
obtained from CT slides:
Wi,j,k = Wk . Wi,j

(23)

Wk is a function of the Z position (i.e., assumed constant with respect to X and
Y) and is intended to express the relative importance of the kth slice’s contribution to the scatter dose at the point of calculation. Wi,j expresses the relative
importance as a function of the X and Y positions (i.e., assumed constant with
respect to Z). Thus, Wijk values are evaluated by decomposition into Wk for
each CT slice and Wij within the effective scattering slice.
Since Wk is taken as constant (with respect to i and j) r̃ could be written as

r˜ =

Â Â r˜ ijWij
i

j

Â Â Wij
i

(24)

j

with,

Â r˜ ijkWk
r˜ ij = k
Â Wk

(25)

k

Determination of r̃ij results in a “coalescing” procedure, in which the volume (all the density data of adjacent CT slices) has been reduced to a single
effective slice from a photon scatter perspective (unshaded slice on the right
portion of the Figure 13). The final ICF was therefore determined from integration of scattered contribution of an area rather than the actual volume.
Wk is determined by taking the difference between two scatter-air ratios for
water, so that:
Wk = S(dref , r2) - S(dref , r1)

(26)

where r2 and r1 are the radii of “equivalent” circular beams, related to Z and
X, the width of the beam in the plane of calculation. dref has been arbitrarily

40

Figure 13. Schematic diagram to illustrate the steps taken in evaluating the
“average density” for scattered radiation. In practice, slices are chosen to cover
the entire irradiated volume. Here, six slices are shown and are irradiated from
above. The densities in all six slices first are coalesced to form an effective
slice as shown by the non-shaded slice on the right. This slice is made up of
density elements rij and is considered to be at distance Zeff away from the plan
of calculation. For the final step, a weighted average is formed for each point
of calculation from all of these elements. (Reprinted from M. R. Sontag and
J. R. Cunningham,152 “Clinical application of a CT based treatment planning
system,” Comput. Tomogr. 2:117–30 (1978a) with permission from Pergamon
Press.)
chosen as an average depth, to be 10 cm (however even for extreme cases, the
correction factor calculated will vary by less than 1%, regardless of the dref
chosen).
This coalesced slice of varying mean density is assumed to be positioned at
a distance Zeff away from the plane of calculation. Zeff is the position within the
irradiated volume at which the scatter dose to the point of calculation from all
the volume elements with a Z coordinate less than Zeff is equal to the scatter
dose from all the volume elements with a Z coordinate greater than Zeff. Thus,
Zeff can be interpreted as the mean position from which scatter originates: by
assigning a weighting factor, wk, to each slice with the result that the coalesced
slice consisted of pixel values with the weighted average of all pixel values
along lateral axes lines that have the same i and j indices. It is further assumed
that the inter-space between the effective scatter slice and the calculation plane
is composed of water.
Zeff is thus calculated as follows:

Â Zk Wk
Zeff = k
Â Wk
k

41

(27)

where the summation is over k, those slices actually irradiated by the beam,
and Zk is the distance from the plane of calculation to the kth slice.
The “coalescing” procedure needs to be performed only one time for each
beam of radiation. In contrast, the calculation of the weighted average and the
corresponding equivalent beam radius and, therefore, the equivalent tissue-air
ratio must be repeated for each point of calculation within the plane of calculation: a summation is performed for all the elements of density r̃ij in the
effective scattering plane over X and Y, yielding the weighted average density,
r̃ . As such, for a given energy, a set of weighting factors unique for each depth
and field size must be calculated.
In most software implementations, the coalescing of adjacent CT slices renders a 3D problem into a 2.5D form. More recently, the Wijk factors have not
been decomposed and the full 3D CT data set is retained, without coalescence
(Theraplan-Plus, MDS-Nordion). This is expected to improve the performance
of the method if the Wijk weights are determined by more detailed ray tracing
through the inhomogeneous CT voxels.
Scatter Kernels: the “scatter kernel” or spatial pattern of energy which is
spread (mainly) downstream from an interaction voxel resembles a water
droplet in its shape (see Figure 14). This can be interpreted from two points of
view: (1) as iso-contributions from upstream scattering points to a destination
dose point (i.e., a receiver’s viewpoint) as used by Sontag and Cunningham192
or (2) as the energy spread from a scattering point to downstream voxels (i.e., a
sender’s viewpoint).
Using reciprocity, 49 it can be shown that for a particular mechanism of
energy spread, such as single Compton scattering in water, the scatter kernels
are indeed equivalent to the scatter weights (Wi,j,k). The scatter kernels for an
all-water absorber can be derived from either theoretical considerations,114
Monte Carlo simulations72,108 or empirical data.112 The real challenge therefore is
to correct these kernels, or equivalently the Wi,j,k weights for the effects of the
varying density and atomic number of neighborhood tissues. Many of the methods discussed below have approached this problem starting from a different
database and using one of the two equivalent perspectives of “receiver” or
“sender” of scattered radiation.
The ETAR method has been reduced from a complex and time-consuming
calculation into a practical and useful method by making a number of assumptions. These assumptions have been assessed in some detail by Yu and Wong193
and Martel et al.194 The methodology always predicts a decrease in scatter when
the density is less than unity and an increase in scatter when the density is
greater than unity.195 This is not always true, especially with small low-density
cavities upstream that can increase the primary fluence in shadowed voxels causing an indirect increase in scatter. Nevertheless, the ETAR model is powerful
because it guarantees that the calculation will be correct for any homogeneous
medium of non-unit density (i.e., satisfies O’Connnor’s theorem as a constraint),
provided that the effects due to atomic number variations are negligible.
42

Figure 14. The “scatter kernel” or spatial pattern of energy which is spread
(mainly) downstream from an interaction voxel resembles a water drop in its
shape. This can be interpreted from two points of view: (1) as iso-contributions
from upstream scattering points to a destination dose point (i.e., a receiver’s
viewpoint) or (2) as the energy spread from a scattering point to downstream
voxels (i.e., a sender’s viewpoint).
While the ETAR method is superior, in some instances, to the RTAR and
power law methods, it is much slower in speed performance. Speed enhancement of the ETAR method has been proposed by Yu and Wong. 193 By assuming the invariance of the weighting factors, Wijk, these investigators have been
able to make fast 3D ETAR calculations using the fast Fourier transform
(FFT) technique which improves the practical application of the method for
3D treatment planning. In this approach, the Wijk are essentially the scatter
kernels for an all-water absorber used in a convolution integral. The CT
voxel densities are, however, used fully in correcting for the changes in
TERMA.
Recently, Engelsman et al.196 have tried to assess the limitations of treatment
planning of lung tumors, calculated by some simple tissue inhomogeneity correction algorithms including the ETAR method. Single multileaf collimatorshaped photon beams of 6, 8, 15, and 18 MV nominal energy were used to
irradiate a 50 mm diameter spherical solid tumor, simulated by polystyrene,
which was located centrally inside lung tissue, simulated by cork. One of the
main findings of their study is the quantification of the difference between the
actual penumbra broadening and that calculated by ETAR, Power Law, and
EPL correction algorithms. Those algorithms predict almost no penumbra
broadening independent of the photon beam energy. Wong et al.197 studied the

43

effects of air cavities on x-ray dose distribution at 6 and 25 MV. Measured dose
was then compared to calculated dose using Clarkson sector integration and
ETAR algorithms. Both algorithms show errors in dose calculation at the distal
surface of air cavities mainly because they fail to account for the effect of electron disequilibrium. Du Plessis et al.185 have compared the Batho and ETAR
dose calculation methods in CT based head/sinus, lung, and prostate patient
models for 2 ¥ 2, 5 ¥ 5, and 10 ¥ 10 cm2 open x-ray beams. The EGS4-based
BEAM code was used to construct a generic 8 MV accelerator to obtain a
series of x-ray field sources. Their results indicated that the Batho and ETAR
methods contained inaccuracies of 20% to 70% in the maxillary sinus region in
the head model. Large lung inhomogeneities irradiated with small fields gave
rise to absorbed dose deviations of 10% to 20%. It is also shown for a 10 ¥ 10
cm2 field that the program DOSXYZ models lateral scattering in lung, which is
not modeled by the Batho and ETAR methods. All the calculations were evaluated against the Monte Carlo simulations.

Method 2.2: Differential scatter-air ratio (dSAR)
As early as 1968, Beaudoin198 showed that it was possible to use scatter-air
ratios, cast in a differential form, to calculate the dose to a point in an inhomogeneous medium. In this method the scatter contribution that arises from voxels within the irradiation volume is determined by a scatter-air ratio table,
which has been differentiated numerically in the depth and lateral r directions.
The scatter from such an elemental volume DV is dependent on five parameters199: (i) the attenuation of the primary en route to the scattering volume
DV; (ii) the number of photons per electron of DV emitted; (iii) the attenuation
and geometrical dispersion of the scattered photons; (iv) the absorbed dose per
unit fluence; (v) the electron density of the volume DV.
The integration that is performed is very analogous to a first scatter integration over volume except that differential scatter-air ratios are used in place of
scattering cross sections. 109 When developed in 1968, this method was well
ahead of its time, years prior to CT scan availability. However, due to the slowness of computers, the time required to do a three-dimensional integration and
the lack of availability of patient-specific CT density data, the method was
never implemented clinically.

Method 2.3: Delta volume (DVOL)
Wong and Henkelman,116 and Wong et al.200 proposed a further improvement
on the semi-empirical approach of the dSAR method in 1983. They first considered a primary and an analytical first scatter calculation and, then, a term
containing SARs and a residual scatter component determined experimentally.
They proposed two limiting conditions that should be met by all photon dose
calculation algorithms: accurate prediction of dose for: (i) the effect of a small

44

air void within a unit density medium (i.e., their experimental setup); and (ii)
the homogeneous, non-unit density medium (i.e., O’Connor’s theorem).
The first order scatter ray tracing is, in principle, more complete than the
ETAR density scaling scatter model. DVOL calculations have been shown to
agree with measurements to better than 3% for complex mediastinum geometries in which the dose point is in between two laterally placed lung volumes, if
the condition of electron equilibrium holds. Unfortunately, the improved accuracy comes with very long calculation times due to the nature of 3D volume
integration and the relatively low computational power of the 80s.201 To the best
of our knowledge, this method is not used clinically.

Method 2.4: Differential tissue-air ratio method (dTAR)
Kappas and Rosenwald,199,202 have found that a simplification of the differential scatter-air ratio method (dSAR) proposed by Beaudoin198 applied to a slab
geometry gives more accurate results than the original method. Thus, a
method, which takes advantage of this simplification has been developed, called
the “differential tissue-air ratio method (dTAR)”. The simplification of the
dSAR method essentially consists in suppressing the multiplicative factor K(q,
m) = exp[(m0cosq - m1(q)](b - b) which accounts for the lateral distance between
the primary interaction and the calculation point. The quantities m0 and m1(s)
are the linear attenuation coefficients in water of the primary and of the firstorder scattered photons arriving at point after a scattering of angle q; b is the
path length en route to point M (in the waterlike medium) and b is the corresponding effective path length (in the heterogeneous medium). Consequently,
for a density less than unity, if one uses K(q, m) = 1 for all volume elements, the
total first scatter contribution (first and multiple arising from each voxel DV in
the medium) will be reduced compared to the original dSAR method.
The dTAR method:
• does not require any specific measurements or predetermination of voxel
scatter data, the only data actually needed being geometrical distances
and standard TAR values.
• it is an additive approach accounting for all the layers located in front of
the calculation point, one layer at a time.
• leads to calculation times not significantly longer that the conventional
methods.
• provides similar results to the power law (Batho) method, although it
seems to be slightly better for large fields within lung inhomogeneities.
The method generally shows an agreement better than 1.5% for on-axis
points and for the majority of situations as long as the electron equilibrium is
achieved. The dSAR method makes the assumption that the introduction of an
inhomogeneity causes the first and multiple scatter components of radiation to
change by the same ratio. Thus, for very large fields and depths and when the

45

overlying tissue is thick (over 5 cm), the discrepancy between measurements
and calculations is greater than 2% but less than 6%.202

Method 2.5: 3D beam subtraction method
The 3D beam subtraction method (3D-BSM) proposed by Kappas and
Rosenwald,183,202 tries to ameliorate the methods of category 1 by taking into
account that (i) the point of calculation is not necessary located on the beamaxis, (ii) the primary is not always affected by the presence of the inhomogeneity, (iii) the lateral dimensions of the inhomogeneity could be smaller than
the field dimensions. The method consists of using a mathematical combination
of on-axis conventional (category 1) correction factors. Each factor is calculated according to the actual size and position of the inhomogeneity relative to
the calculation point and the beam geometry. The method is originally based
on Day’s formula,203 where in a rectangular 2X*2Y field the dose at any offaxis point P can be computed as the average between the dose contributions
from four independent rectangular sections located around P.
The 3D-BSM is characterized by the fact that: (i) it assumes that the
patient’s internal structure can be represented in terms of macroscopic volumes
of tissues of different but uniform “effective” densities (i.e., contoured or segmented regions); (ii) the shapes of inhomogeneities are approximated by parallelepipeds; (iii) the algorithm defines several “inhomogeneous” parallelepipeds
(alternatively crossed or not crossed by the primary ray) for each inhomogeneity; (iv) their limits are adjusted as a function of the relative position of the calculation point and the inhomogeneity according to the beam direction.
The global correction factor is therefore

ICF = 1 +

[

]

Â (-1)i Â (-1) j e ij¢ (cij - 1)D0w (Ui , Wj )
2

2

i =1

j =1

2

2

ÂÂ
i =1 j =1

e ij D0w

(x , y )
i

(28)

j

where e ij¢ is the sign of the product Ui,Wj , Ui and Wj represent the algebraic
distances from point P to the inhomogeneity limits, D0w Ui , Wj is the dose at the
center of the corresponding rectangular field in the absence of the inhomogeneity. Cij is the on-axis conventional correction factor (category 1) for the field Ui
and Wj .
Using the described method, observed errors between experimental data and
calculated correction factors are attributed, on one hand, to the accuracy of the
on-axis correction factor (Cij) and on the other hand, to the simplifications specific to this method.
It is assumed that the scatter arising laterally from the homogeneous regions
is not modified by the presence of the inhomogeneity. This assumption is less
and less valid as the inhomogeneity is larger and its electron density more dif-

(

46

)

ferent from unity. In the case of rhet < 1, the importance of the lateral scatter is
thus theoretically underestimated and so is the corresponding correction factor.
On the other hand, if one considers a parallelepiped located laterally at proximity from an inhomogeneity (rhet < 1), the interaction between this parallelepiped and the inhomogeneity results in a lack of scatter (second order
scatter and above). This is not taken in account in this method, which assumes
that, each parallelepiped behaves independently from the others. It should
therefore result in an overestimation of the calculated correction factor.
The method is very fast and comparable in performance with the Batho
method with no additional data requirements. The 3-D BSM method is implemented in the “3D-ISIS” treatment planning system (“Technologie Diffusion”,
Institute Curie, Paris, France).

Category 3: Non-Local Energy Deposition (Electron Transport);
1D Density Sampling
The methods of category 1 and 2 are more applicable to photon beams with
energies less than 6 MV where electron equilibrium is assumed to hold and
where the photon scatter contribution is greater. However, they are not well
suited for higher energy photon beams where the scatter contribution is less
important and the effects of electrons set in motion by the photons can lead to
very high dose changes locally.

Method 3.1: Convolution techniques
Several models, 107,119,125,129,204,205,206,207,208,209,210,211,212,213 have been developed in
recent years that focus on the transport of secondary electrons arising from primary photon interactions. Analytic approximations or Monte Carlo simulations
are used to model the energy deposition distribution from the site of photon
interaction in water, forming a dose spread kernel that is then adjusted for the
inhomogeneous patient medium. Scattered photon dose kernels are also generated with or without the assumption of local energy deposition.
Convolution techniques get their name from the mathematical expression
(section IIIF) that governs the dose calculation algorithm. In essence, the
energy fluence distribution is convolved with the scatter spread kernel to obtain
dose. Energy deposition kernels represent the response of the medium; commonly water, to an incident elementary radiation. Pencil beam kernels have long
found widespread applications in electron dose calculation algorithms. For a
monoenergetic photon beam the energy deposition by secondary particles from
the primary interaction site is independent of the geographic location of the site
(in homogeneous media) and thus convenient to be described by a kernel.
Although three-dimensional in nature, the kernels can be integrated (prior to
the convolution) in one or two dimensions, giving rise respectively to a pencil
beam kernel and a planar spread function (Figure 15). This is analogous to the

47

Figure 15a. Scatter kernels of different dimensions.

Figure 15b. Scatter kernels of different dimensions.
collapsed ETAR implementation that was discussed earlier, and aims to simplify the calculation and reduce the computation time at the expense of reduced
accuracy in the presence of inhomogeneities. An example of such a photon pencil beam algorithm is now used commercially (Bruinvis, Nucletron, MDS
Nordion) for external beam dose calculations.

48

Method 3.2: Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) convolution
The FFT convolution method introduced by Boyer et al.134 is given for a polyenergetic beam spectrum as
r
D(r ) =

r

r

r

Â Ú F n (r ¢) ◊ Kn (r - r ¢)dV'
n

(29)

v

where:

r r
K n (r - r ¢) is the dose spread kernel for the nth energy interval, and
r
F n (r ¢) is the spectrally weighted primary fluence given by equation (25).
r

r r
- m r dr

Ú n( )
r
r
F n (r ¢) = F on (r ¢) ◊ e 0

(30)

where:

r
F 0n (r ¢) is the primary energy fluence.

In the inhomogeneous medium, a relatively simple 1D anatomy-sampling
model is used which corrects for the primary fluence or TERMA. The first scatter-spread kernel is adjusted for the primary fluence at the point of interaction and
for the density of the interaction site. The same 1D information is used for making a first order adjustment of the first and higher order scattered photon dose
contributions. In the Boyer FFT method, the separation of the primary and scattered corrections provides noticeably improved results over the earlier 1D models.
In the semi-infinite slab inhomogeneous geometries irradiated with cobalt-60, the
calculations rival those using ETAR or DVOL methods. Poor results were
observed with aluminum inhomogeneity because the effects of atomic number
changes are not addressed by the model. Recent refinements to this model scheme
have been introduced independently by various workers.193,214,215,216,217,218,219,220
With simplifying approximations, the convolution (assuming invariant kernels) can be implemented using techniques such as the FFT algorithm to greatly
reduce computation time. These methods can compute the dose very accurately
in areas of electronic disequillibrium due to build-up and build-down effects
(e.g., entrance and exit dose, dose at the edge of the radiation field, and dose
under the beam blocks). While these are not internal inhomogeneity effects,
they are significant, especially as the radiation fields become more collimated
both in conformal and in IMRT planning and delivery.

Category 4: Non-Local Energy Deposition (Electron Transport);
3D Density Sampling
This category of inhomogeneity correction methods employs complex models to incorporate 3D density CT information for the transport of both scattered
49

photons and electrons. These methods include the dose spread array (DSA)
method by Mackie et al. 107, the differential pencil beam (DPB) method by
Mohan et al. 108, the convolution method using total energy released in the
medium (TERMA) concept of Ahnesjo et al.55 and the forward and backward
scatter transport model of Iwasaki221,222,223 (in 1D). More recently Woo et al.94
extended the ETAR method to include electron transport in what has been now
implemented in Theraplan-Plus (MDS-Nordion).

Method 4.1: Superposition-convolution methods
A number of authors have studied the application of the superposition and
convolution principles to dose calculations in radiotherapy. The underlying
challenge is to account for tissue inhomogeneities that deform both the TERMA
distribution and the dose spread kernels. Tissues that lie along the primary ray
lines from the radiation source(s) directly influence the TERMA at each point
in the patient. Most methods of dose calculation account correctly for this variation in primary energy fluence. The primary beam penetration is calculated by
ray-tracing151,160,224 through the voxel densities in the 3D volume along divergent
beam ray paths.
Figure 4 showed how photon energy fluence (and hence the TERMA) and
the dose could be quite different and how these differences can be explained by
the superposition principle.56,110,225,226 This example showed distributions for a
small field (5 ¥ 5 cm) of 5.0 MeV x-rays incident on an all-water phantom and
a slab phantom consisting water, low-density cork (=0.3g/cm3), and water. An
increased penetration through the low-density material is observed (Figure 4b
vs. Figure 4a). The fluence distributions exhibit very sharp field edges because
the blurring due to scattering in the phantom is not yet included in this first
stage (TERMA) of the calculation. In the second stage (DOSE), the spread of
energy by secondary particles is considered. The fluence patterns (Figure 4c
and Figure 4d) become blurred by the energy spreading within the phantom,
exhibiting an initial build-up region starting at the beam entrance surface, and
a penumbra developing near to the beam edge. In this heterogeneous medium,
the spatial extent and shape of the dose spread kernels K(r¢;r) is deformed by
the local density environment for each superposition point, and the dose distribution is considerably broadened in the low-density zone (Figure 4d vs. Figure
4c). Furthermore, an unexpected effect in which the central dose is actually
reduced within the lung, in opposition to the elevated fluence (Figure 4d vs.
Figure 4b) is also observed. This build-down effect is due to a disruption of
charged particle equilibrium. Because the lateral range of charged particles
increases in the low-density medium, more electron energy is “out-scattered”
laterally than is “in-scattered” because of the small field size (5 cm ¥ 5 cm).
This effect is strongly influenced by the beam energy and the density of the tissues irradiated and to a smaller extent by the finite size of the x-ray source.96
The overall effect upon a single beam dose distribution is illustrated in 3D for
an 18 MV x-ray beam (5 cm ¥ 5 cm) in Figure 16. This figure shows a simu50

Figure 16. 3D single beam dose distribution for an 18 MV x-ray beam (5 cm
¥ 5 cm). Because the lateral range of charged particles increases in the lowdensity medium, more electron energy is “out-scattered” laterally than is “inscattered” because of the small field size.
lated water/lung/water phantom where the beam is incident perpendicularly
from the top. The colors correspond to relative units of dose in a thermal scale,
red being the highest level. Reliance on a simple consideration of the primary
radiation alone (i.e., TERMA only in Category 1 and 2 algorithms) can yield
misleading dose predictions under some clinical situations, such as lung
exposed to small fields of high-energy (> 10 MV) x-rays.35,227
As was described earlier, the convolution/superposition calculation has two
elements to it. The TERMA part that describes the distribution of the energy
that is released at a primary interaction site and is available for consumption in
the medium and the kernel part that describes the distribution of the scatter
from a primary interaction; in essence the kernel dictates how the TERMA is
going to be distributed in the medium. Starting with Monte Carlo or analytically generated dose spread kernels as input, both the primary and first order
scatter ray tracings are used to process the 3D density information. The equation for the TERMA element (T) of the convolution method is given by
r
r
m r
T ( r ¢ ) = ( r ¢ ) ◊ Y( r ¢ )
r
51

(31)

The convolution/superposition is then simply the integration of the TERMA
distribution multiplied by the kernel over the entire patient volume. Since the
indexing is performed in radiological space (density*distance) the mathematical expression of the integral is:
r
r
r
r
r
D(r ) = T (r ¢ ◊ r ¢) ◊ K (r ◊ r; r ¢ ◊ r ¢)d 3 r ¢

Ú

(32)

In general, the effective density calculated along the scattered ray path is
used to change secondary particle contributions or to look up the appropriate
value in the scatter kernel using density scaling. The latter holds for all orders
of photon scatter and is a good approximation of electron transport. These
methods are by far the most complete of all inhomogeneity correction methods
discussed thus far. Excellent results have been demonstrated for a variety of difficult low-density inhomogeneous media. The 3D implementation of convolution superposition algorithm can operate in three modes that include electron
transport where: (i) both the TERMA and the kernel are scaled by density
(equation 32); (ii) only the TERMA includes the density distribution, while the
kernel does not; and (iii) both TERMA and the kernel assume that the patient
is homogeneously made of water. Some clinically relevant results are shown in
Figure 17.
Several computation time reduction schemes have been implemented from
the use of variable calculation resolutions to the “collapsed cones”106 for reducing the scatter ray trace burden. TERMA distributions are generated and calculated and then convolved with either analytical or Monte Carlo generated
kernels that account for scattered photons and transport of charged particles.72,209 The TERMA array is weighted to account for the polyenergetic nature
of the beam,228 as is correction for kernel tilting with beam divergence.209

Figure 17. 3D implementation of convolution superposition algorithm: (i) both
the TERMA and the kernel are scaled by density [Equation (32)]; (ii) only the
TERMA includes the density distribution, while the kernel does not; and (iii)
both TERMA and the kernel assume that the patient is homogeneously made of
water.
52

The collapsed cone convolution method uses an analytical kernel represented by a set of cones, the energy deposited in which is collapsed onto a line
(hence the name). In practice, the method utilizes a lattice of rays, such that
each voxel is crossed by one ray corresponding to each cone axis. TERMA is
calculated at regular points along each ray and the resulting energy directed
into the associated cone is used to increment the dose deposited at points along
the ray (via the kernel parameters for that ray angle). Dose at a point is the sum
of contributions from each such ray (one for each cone angle), where dose due
to each ray is an accumulation of the effect of TERMA at all points on the ray.
The polyenergetic spectrum is accounted for in the TERMA calculation via an
effective attenuation coefficient, and there is an empirical correction to account
for the fact that the kernel parameters do not vary as the primary beam hardens
with depth.209 Adaptive and full collapsed cone options exist. The adaptive variant uses a dose gradient difference method to reduce the time of calculation.
The collapsed cone method proposed by Ahnesjo106 applies an angular discretization of the kernel that enables an efficient approach for energy transport
and deposition. The geometry is shown schematically in Figures 18a and 18b.
In order to simplify the use of kernels, analytical fitting has been proposed
for point kernels106,229 and for pencil kernels by Ahnesjo et al.128 The approach
used by Ahnesjo for polyenergetic point kernels was to model the kernel as
mediated by rectilinearly transported particles with exponential attenuation and
inverse square divergence according to
h( r ) =

Aq e -aq + Bq e - bq
r2

(33)

where Aq, aq, Bq, and bq are fitting parameters depending on the scattering angle
q. The first term mainly describes the primary and the second term the scatter
dose fraction.
Angular discretization of a parameterized point kernel yields, for each discrete angular sector (cone) W i, the energy deposition per radial distance as
hr0

ÚÚ r (r, W)r d W = AW e
2

2

i

Wi

- a Wi r

+ BW i e

- bWi r

(34)

Notice that the inverse square of the radius cancels due to the increasing
cross section of the cone W i with increasing radius. When the angular discretized kernel is convolved with the terma distribution, all energy released into
the cone direction W i from volume elements on the cone axis is approximated
to be rectilinearly transported, attenuated, and deposited in volume elements on
that axis; i.e., the cones are collapsed onto their axes (see Figure 18a). A lattice of transport lines, representing cone axes, is constructed to cover the irradiated volume such that each direction intersects every calculation voxel. This
requires a parallel subset of lines for each discrete direction of the “collapsed”
kernel, which can be arranged in several ways.104,106,230,231
53

Figure 18a. A consequence of the collapsed cone approximation to transport
the energy along a discrete axis is that the energy that should have been
deposited in voxel B¢, from interactions at the vertex of the lower cone, is
deposited in voxel B and vice versa. This displacement grows with distance;
however, the first scatter fraction decreases with increasing distance, making the
approach acceptable as the total energy deposited is conserved. Most energy is
deposited close to where it is released, making displacement errors less important since it takes place mainly within voxels, as shown by the voxels A and A¢
(Reprinted from A. Ahnesjo,106 “Collapsed cone convolution of radiant energy
for photon dose calculation in heterogeneous media,” Med. Phys. 16:577–92
(1989) with permission from the American Association of Physicists in
Medicine.)

Because of the exponential description of the kernel, the energy transport
along a line can be expressed analytically resulting in recursive formulae that
only need to be evaluated once for each voxel on that line. Kernel scaling for
the heterogeneities is performed during the recursion, both for the primary and
scatter dose kernels [i.e., both terms in equations (33) and (34)]. The recursions pass each voxel at least once per direction. When each point is calculated
individually, the number of operations will be proportional to MN4, where M is
the number of conical sectors (angular bins). If instead the dose is calculated in
one sequence for a bulk of N3 points, the total number of operations needed in
heterogeneous media is proportional to MN3. In a similar method Reckwerdt
and Mackie231 bypassed the exponential parameterization by using the result of
an initial ray-trace along each transport line to look up the radiological distance
between each pair of release/deposition points. This results in an MN4 algorithm, because for each point the other points on the same line have to be visited separately. The collapsed cone method has been implemented in
commercial systems (e.g., MDS-Nordion, Helax).

54

Figure 18b. Example of a simple lattice of cone axes made to cover the 3 ¥ 3 ¥
3 calculation voxels with the 26 discrete cone directions used in this case. In
this example all transport lines intersect at each voxel center but this is not
required as long as each voxel is intersected by each direction (Reprinted from
A. Ahnesjo,106 “Collapsed cone convolution of radiant energy for photon dose
calculation in heterogeneous media,” Med. Phys. 16:577–92 (1989) with permission from the American Association of Physicists in Medicine.)

Method 4.2a: Monte Carlo method: overview
The Monte Carlo method provides a bridge between measurements and analytically based numerical calculations (see reviews of Monte Carlo applications
in medical physics by Andreo, 232 Rogers and Bielajew, 233 and Mackie 234,235).
These three techniques provide complementary descriptions and each would be
less useful or credible without the cont r ibution of the other two.
Experimentation and simulation result in the distillation of insight by a careful
choice of parameters to be measured in one case and “scored” or tabulated in
the other. Monte Carlo calculations provide a benchmark for analytic calculations and a verification of results obtained in difficult measurement situations.
In turn, Monte Carlo calculations are built on the foundations of measured and

55

calculated probability distributions, for example, those describing fundamental
scattering processes and energy loss.
Monte Carlo modeling is often done in situations in which physical measurements are difficult or impossible. It is possible to “synthetically measure” significant but almost un-measurable quantities such as the contribution of dose
from different orders of photon scattering. While, in principle, the spectra of
high-energy clinical linear accelerators can be measured, such measurements
are often difficult to realize. The main difficulties in such reconstructive techniques based on measured depth dose distributions or attenuation measurements are:
(a) depth dose distributions from monoenergetic photons calculated by
Monte Carlo must be available.
(b) the use of different constraints on the spectral shape is necessary to
handle numerical conditioning problems.
(c) the dose from charged particle contamination in the build-up region
complicates the use of data from that region including the depth of dose
maximum.
Some authors suggest ways to unfold the accelerator spectrum from measurements; either from monoenergetic depth dose distributions 126,129,236,237,239 or
based on attenuation measurements.240,241,242,243,244,245,246
On the other hand, Monte Carlo spectra can now be obtained relatively
easily. Several workers performed Monte Carlo simulations of the treatment
head for modeling radiation treatment machine heads, and generating the
energy spectra and angular distributions of photon beams produced by linear
accelerators and Co-60 teletherapy machines, and for studying other characteristics of photon beams.52,53,247,248,249 This approach assumes a detailed knowledge of the materials and geometry of the contents of the accelerator head
being used clinically.
The Monte Carlo technique of radiation transport consists of using knowledge of probability distributions governing the individual interactions of electrons and photons to simulate their transport through matter. The resultant
distributions of physical quantities of interest from a large number of simulated
particles (called “histories”) provide a description on the average transport
properties and the associated distributions such as the dose deposition. This is
done, in general, in the following way (referring to photon interactions): from
the exponential attenuation distribution, the appropriate cumulative distribution
can be evaluated and the distance s between interactions in a medium (step
length) is determined by:
s = - lln(1 - x)

(35)

l being the mean free path at the photon energy at the beginning of the step and
x a random number, 0 £ x £ 1. For the production of “true” random numbers,
the so-called Random Number Generators (RNGs) have been developed. All
56

RNGs are based upon specific mathematical algorithms, which are sequential
and repeatable with a very long period. As such, the numbers are pseudorandom. Nevertheless, when the generator is “well-behaved,” even if the sequence
of numbers is used more than once, the probability of having more than one
particle history starting in the same event position is practically negligible. This
means that when the end of a sequence is reached, it will be started again during some of the sampling procedures used along the simulation.
The type of interaction event occurring after the step s is sampled from the
appropriate relative probabilities p i (ratios of single cross-sections to the total
cross-section), using their cumulative distribution function Pi. Another random
number x selects the interaction event i(x) such that:
j -i

Â
i =1

pi = Pj -1 £ x <

j

Â pi = Pj

(36)

i =1

where i(x) is the Rayleigh, photoelectric, Compton or pair production effect at
the corresponding photon energy.
Different techniques exist to sample from the probability distributions
describing photon interactions after the distance s. The small number of interactions that take place when photons traverse through matter has motivated the
development of variance reduction techniques53 to decrease uncertainties that
can be evaluated by statistical methods. In such techniques the “natural
physics” is manipulated in a number of different ways so as to increase the relative occurrence of certain events. Forced interactions, importance sampling
Russian roulette, and particle splitting are commonly used techniques.
Monte Carlo techniques have become widely used in medical physics
because of the massive increase in computing power in the last decades and
because of the availability of powerful codes such as BEAM, EGSnrc, PENELOPE, and ETRAN/ITS/MCNP. Both trends can be expected to continue so
that Monte Carlo techniques for radiation transport will only continue to
increase in importance in the next decade. In the short term, the commercial
application of codes such as DPM,250 MCDOSE,251,252 or VMC++,63 should start
to make Monte Carlo a useful technique in clinical treatment planning. The
VMC++ code developed by Kawrakow making use of some highly innovative
variance reduction techniques including photon splitting, electron history repetition, Russian Roulette, and a technique called STOPS 253 (Simultaneous
Transport of Particle Sets), can do an electron beam calculation in about 35 s
on a 500 MHz machine (4 times faster machines are available today for a very
affordable cost) and photon beam calculations take about 360 s.235 DPM is capable of computing 3D dose distributions (in 1 mm3 voxels) which agree to within
1% in dose maximum with widely used and exhaustively benchmarked generalpurpose public-domain MC codes in only a fraction of the CPU time. A representative problem, the simulation of 1 million 10 MeV electrons impinging

57

upon a water phantom of 128(3) voxels of 1 mm on a side, can be performed
by DPM in roughly 3 min on a modern desktop workstation.
Furthermore, improvements in Monte Carlo calculation speed demonstrated
by the project “PEREGRINE” of Lawrence Livermore Laboratory254 showed
that real-time Monte Carlo dose calculation could be possible for all modalities,
including photons. Based on the EGS4 code, Wang et al.255 proposed to improve
efficiency through the use of variance reduction techniques and density thresholding, the latter to speed up the ray-tracing calculations.

Method 4.2b: Monte Carlo: dosimetry in heterogeneous media
There are two types of tissue interface most significant in radiotherapy;
namely between any low-density inhomogeneity and soft tissue and between
bone and soft tissue. Interface dosimetry for prosthetic implants is the subject of
a different task group report48 although the physical processes of the interactions
and the observed dosimetric changes are of the same nature. Dose perturbations
at an interface are due to a number of complex effects.75,90,91,217,256,257,258 The attenuation coefficients, the mass energy absorption coefficients, and the mass collision
stopping powers are different on either side of the interface. For Monte Carlo
simulation accurate charged-particle transport is important because charged
particles set in motion on one side of the interface can migrate to the other side
and deposit energy. Inadequate treatment of charged-particle transport will
result in inaccurate prediction of the resultant “hot/cold spots” spurious effects.
Several Monte Carlo codes have been used with success in supporting,
testing, or guiding the development of dose calculations for radiotherapy
appl ica t ion s , esp e cia l ly for complex t issue inte r face prob lems. 64,177,181,217,257,259,260,261,262,263,264,265,266,267,268,269,270,271,272,273,274
Mackie et al.275 utilized the EGS code to model the dose distribution both
within and distal to simulated regions of lung in order to test the ratio of tissueair ratios (TAR), Batho, and equivalent TAR methods. Figures 19 and 20 show
the central-axis dose correction factor when a 15 MV x-ray beam irradiates a
heterogeneous slab phantom. When the field size is decreased, electron disequilibrium causes the central axis dose to be reduced considerably. This is
observed experimentally (solid lines) and in the Monte Carlo simulation
(Figure 19), but not with simpler dose algorithms (Figure 20). The curve trends
are similar for the measured and Monte Carlo results (Figure 19), but there is
an offset approximately 2% between measured and computed data. This discrepancy is attributed to a combination of small effects, including the use of the
ion chamber under conditions of charged particle disequilibrium, mismatch of
x-ray spectra, or differences in the assumed (0.25 g/cm3) and actual density of
cork. The agreement among the Monte Carlo calculation, analytical calculations, and measurements181,259 is within about 2%. Allen Li et al., systematically
studied the dose perturbation near planar and cylindrical air cavities in a water
medium irradiated by megavoltage x-ray beams. The combined set of Monte
Carlo calculations showed that the dose reduction near an air cavity is greater
58

Figure 19. Comparison of inhomogeneity correction factors produced by a
Monte Carlo calculation with measured data for 15 MV x-ray fields of different
sizes. The solid lines are measured data while the isolated points are those
obtained by a Monte Carlo calculation. Charged particle equilibrium is not
established for field sizes of less than 10 ¥ 10 cm2, and there is considerable
underdosage within cork. (Reprinted from T. R. Mackie, E. El-Khatib, J. J.
Battista, J. Scrimger, J. Van Dyk, and J. R. Cunningham,275 “Lung dose corrections for 6 MV and 15 MV x-rays,” Med. Phys. 12:327–332 (1985) with permission from the American Association of Physicists in Medicine.)
for: (i) smaller x-ray field size; (ii) higher x-ray energy; (iii) larger air-cavity
size; and (iv) smaller depth in water where the air cavity is situated. Notice that
there is no sharp rise in dose at the first tissue-lung interface as reported by
Webb and Parker.276 Indeed, there is a small reduction in dose attributable to
decreased backscatter from the low-density region. The field size was 10 cm in
diameter, which is large enough to establish lateral electron equilibrium at the
central axis. Therefore, the reduction of dose could not have been due to lack
of lateral equilibrium.
Lateral disequilibrium of electrons can produce perturbations in dose in
low-density regions in heterogeneous phantoms. Mackie et al.275 used the EGS
code to model a 0.25 g/cm3 slab of water-like material simulating lung embedded in a water phantom. They showed that there is a reduction in dose in the
59

Figure 20. Results for irradiation with 15 MV x-rays and 5 ¥ 5 cm2 field. Dose
measured and calculated at points along the central axis in both a homogeneous
and a heterogeneous phantom composed of slabs of waterlike and lunglike
materials. (Reprinted from T. R. Mackie, E. El-Khatib, J. J. Battista, J.
Scrimger, J. Van Dyk, and J. R. Cunningham,275 “Lung dose corrections for 6
MV and 15 MV x-rays,” Med. Phys. 12:327–332 (1985) with permission from
the American Association of Physicists in Medicine.)
low-density medium if the distance from the field boundary is smaller than the
lateral range of electrons (see Figures 19 and 20). There is a corresponding
increase in the dose outside the field.
Figure 21a shows isodose curves produced by a monoenergetic pencil beam of
5-MeV photon beam incident on homogeneous and heterogeneous phantoms. In
the lung region, the lower-valued isodose lines “bulge” laterally. This could have
occurred because the electrons or the scattered photons have an increased range
in the lower-density medium. To prove that the effect is due to an increased electron range, the Monte Carlo calculation was repeated without and with electron
transport (Figure 21b): the KERMA and the dose were calculated at a position
midway into the low-density region as a function of distance from the central
axis. KERMA was obtained by “turning off” electron transport; i.e., by making
the cut-off energy higher than any possible electron energy. This forced the
charged-particle kinetic energy to be deposited on the spot where the particle
originated. The lateral spreading is attributable mainly to electrons, since the
KERMA curves for heterogeneous and homogeneous phantoms are very similar.
60

Figure 21a. Isodose curves generated by a Monte Carlo calculation for a pencil
monoenergetic beam of 5 MeV photons that approximates a 15 MV x-ray spectrum. The right hand side was obtained for a homogeneous water phantom
while the left-hand side is for a heterogeneous phantom with a cork slab
(shaded). (Reprinted from T. R. Mackie, E. El-Khatib, J. J. Battista, J.
Scrimger, J. Van Dyk, and J. R. Cunningham,275 “Lung dose corrections for 6
MV and 15 MV x-rays,” Med. Phys. 12:327–332 (1985) with permission from
the American Association of Physicists in Medicine.)
De Marco et al.247 have used a high-density heterogeneity phantom (from
Masterson et al.277) consisting of a 3 cm ¥ 3 cm ¥ 10 cm cortical bone insert
(mass density: 1.87 g/cm3) inserted into a 25 ¥ 25 ¥ 25 cm3 polystyrene support
base with 28 TLD-100 rod inserts. The measurement setup for the high-density
heterogeneity is based upon a field size of 10 ¥ 10 cm2 and a SSD of 95 cm. All
data sets are normalized to a depth of 5.0 cm. Figure 22 provides a benchmark
comparison between the TLD measurements, film dosimetry and MCNP4A
(Monte Carlo N-Particle, version 4A) 278,279 calculations, and a conventional
treatment planner for the 10-MV photon beam (the Wong-Henkelman116 correction factor is used to account for bulk heterogeneities and the equivalent tissue-air ratio (ETAR) method of Sontag and Cunningham167 is used for CT-based
correction factors). There is good agreement between the MCNP4A calculations and measurements for the three beam energies. The agreement of the conventional algorithm with film measurement and the MCNP4A calculation
61

Figure 21b. Dose profile across the pencil beam at a depth (d) of 10.5 cm. The
KERMA curve only considers the transport of photons while the dose curve
also considers the transport of electrons away from sites of photon interaction.
(Reprinted from T. R. Mackie, E. El-Khatib, J. J. Battista, J. Scrimger, J. Van
Dyk, and J. R. Cunningham,275 “Lung dose corrections for 6 MV and 15 MV xrays,” Med. Phys. 12:327–332 (1985) with permission from the American
Association of Physicists in Medicine.)
reveals a similar trend for all three energies. Within the bone heterogeneity
there is good agreement due to the normalization point, but for depths beyond
the heterogeneity the conventional algorithm consistently overestimates the
depth dose. At a depth of 10 cm from the surface of the phantom, the conventional system calculates a depth dose that is 5.6%, 8.9%, and 17.6% greater
than MCNP4A calculated values for the 6, 10, and 25 MV photon beams,
respectively. The magnitude of discrepancy may change if a different point of
normalization is used for the comparison.
The bone-soft tissue interface is often modeled by an aluminum-water interface. Webb and Fox170 calculated the dose from a 60Co g-ray beam near a wateraluminum interface using a Monte Carlo code, modified from previous work276
to take into account the changing stopping power as the electrons slow down.
Figure 23269 shows that the dose distribution is qualitatively no what is expected.
For example, there is not prediction of increased dose from backscatter. This
was likely due to excluding electron scattering.
Rogers and Bielajew280 have found quite different results with a similar geometric setup. They calculated the dose, using EGS, near a water-aluminum
slab interface from a 60Co g-ray beam and compared the results with those
62

Figure 22. High-density (1.87 g/cm3) benchmark comparison between TLD
measurements, film measurements, and the MCNP4A simulation and conventional treatment planning calculations for a 10 MV photon beam. The field size
is 10 ¥ 10 cm2 with an SSD of 95.0 cm to the top of the phantom. All data sets
are normalized to a depth of 5.0 cm. (Reprinted from J. J. DeMarco, T. D.
Solberg, and J. B. Smathers,247 “A CT-based Monte Carlo simulation tool for
dosimetry planning and analysis,” Med. Phys. 25:1–11 (1998) with permission
from the American Association of Physicists in Medicine.)
using the CYLTRAN code.281 The dose in water very near the interface is elevated by a few percent, indicating increased backscattering from aluminum.
The dose in aluminum just downstream from the interface is reduced by
approximately 15%.
The simulation by Webb269 of the dose near a water-aluminum interface was
repeated by Mackie282 for the same phantom configuration using the EGS code.
The 10 ¥ 10 cm2 beam was approximated by a 10.6-cm-diameter beam, the
equivalent circular field.283 The EGS calculation exhibits a sizable dose from
backscattering from the aluminum slab. More significantly, the EGS simulation
does not predict a buildup region in the aluminum layer. Instead, the dose falls
away rapidly at depths away from the interface. The simulations of both Webb
and Mackie agree on an approximately 13% reduction in dose at a sufficient
distance away from the interface to establish electron equilibrium. This reduction corresponds to the reduced mass absorption coefficient for aluminum compared with water. The results agree qualitatively with those of Rogers and
Bielajew280.
63

Figure 23. The distribution of absorbed dose for a 10 cm ¥ 10 cm Co-60 beam
incident on a water-aluminum interface (Reprinted from S. Webb, 269 “The
absorbed dose in the vicinity of an interface between two media irradiated by a
60
Co source,” Br. J. Radiol. 52:962–967 (1979) with permission from British
Journal of Radiology.)
Recently, Wang et al. 272 used Monte Carlo dose calculation to assess the
degree to which tissue inhomogeneities in the head and neck affect static field
conformal, computed tomography (CT)-based 6-MV photon treatment plans.
The dose distribution was recalculated with the Monte Carlo method, utilizing
the same beam geometry and CT images as the clinical treatment planning system. The Monte Carlo method accurately accounted for the perturbation effects
of local tissue heterogeneities. Monte–Carlo-calculated treatment plans showed
a slightly lower dose received by the 95% of target volume (D95) than the plans
calculated with the pencil beam algorithm. The average difference in the target
volume encompassed by the prescription isodose line was less than 2.2%. The
difference between the dose-volume histograms (DVHs) of the gross target volume (GTV) was generally small. For the brainstem and chiasm, the DVHs of
the two plans were similar (see Figures 24 and 25).
Several vendors are currently working toward incorporating a Monte Carlo
calculation option in their treatment planning systems with target release dates
of mid 2004. NOMOS Corporation already offers a clinical Monte Carlo version based on the PEREGRINE project.237,254 It is still argued, however, that
Monte Carlo may be of more benefit for electron beam planning than for photons. This stance is based on having an alternative photon beam superposition
algorithm that can be sufficiently accurate in most clinical situations. For the
electron beams the current algorithms continue to rely on weak assumptions in
regard to electron scattering and energy and range straggling, and their accuracy can be far inferior as compared to Monte Carlo. For inhomogeneities with
64

Figure 24. Comparison of the isodose distributions of the three-composite
fields from the transverse, coronal, and sagittal views, for a patient with tumor
in the para-nasal sinus region. The standard plan based on the equivalent path
length method is shown on the upper panel. The Monte Carlo plan is shown on
the lower panel. A common feature observed for individual fields is that the
Monte Carlo calculated doses to tissue directly behind and within an air cavity
are lower. However, after combining the fields employed in each treatment plan,
the overall dose distribution shows only small differences between the two
methods. (Reprinted from L. Wang, E. Yorke, and C.-S. Chui,272 “Monte Carlo
evaluation of tissue inhomogeneity effects in the treatment of the head and
neck,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 50:1339–1349 (2001) with permission
from Elsevier Science.)
atomic composition much different from water, as well as for interface dosimetry, Monte Carlo remains the most powerful tool and will play an emerging role
in clinical treatment planning.

V. DATA COMPARISON OF DOSE IN INHOMOGENEOUS
MEDIA
Various workers have reported measurements made in heterogeneous phantoms. These measurements were made specifically to obtain data to test dose
algorithms for cobalt-60 and high-energy x-ray beams. Some workers have
65

Figure 25. A comparison of the DVH of the spinal cord for three patients.
Differences in the details of the DHV and the dose to 1 cc of the structure were
observed, with Monte Carlo calculation generally predicting increased dose
indices to the spinal cord. However, these changes are not expected to be clinically significant. (Reprinted from L. Wang, E. Yorke, and C.-S. Chui,272 “Monte
Carlo evaluation of tissue inhomogeneity effects in the treatment of the head
and neck,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 50:1339–1349 (2001) with permission from Elsevier Science.)
66

constructed phantoms with different electron densities to simulate simultaneously air cavities, lung and bone; 277,284,285,286,287,288,289 others have focused their
interest to a single density:

A. Air Cavities
The most extreme case to quantify effects from heterogeneous media is
related to air cavities. The air-tissue interface that gives rise to the skin-sparing
effect for high-energy photon radiation is of clinical concern and must be taken
into account if the tumor extends to the surface (even though this is depending
on contaminant electrons, beam modifiers, etc.). Although dose corrections at
large distances beyond a cavity are accountable by attenuation differences, perturbations at air-tissue interfaces are complex to measure or calculate due to
lack of electron equilibrium. Underdosing effects occur at both the distal and
proximal air cavity interfaces. The magnitude of underdosing depends on cavity size, location, and energy. As the cavity thickness increases, the central axis
dose at the distal interface decreases. Increasing field size remedied the underdosing, as did the introduction of lateral walls. Experimental data are therefore
required to quantify the magnitude of the dose reduction in the vicinity of airtissue interfaces.
Measurements around air cavities have been made with a variety of measurement devices for energies ranging from Co-60 to 18 MV. TLDs have been used
for the majority of measurements.291,292,292,293 Thin-windowed parallel-plate chambers have also been utilized.294,295 Radiochromic film has been recently used for
measurements in a clinical phantom.296,297 Many of these studies provide data sets
limited to measurements distal to a rectangular cavity. Others were based on a
larynx geometry with measurements reported up and down stream of the cavities.187,265,293,294,295,296,298,299,300 Many of these studies compared measured data with
calculated corrections that did not account for the lack of re-established equilibrium near the cavity. Conventional algorithms commercially available will predict a dose increase well beyond a cavity (beyond dmax) based on straight-line
calculations (RTAR, Power Law Method) but will not predict the build-down
and build-up of dose near interfaces. Even algorithms that explicitly account for
electron transport overestimate the dose close to a cavity.301
Klein et al.294 made extensive measurements of doses on surfaces around air
cavities. A thin-windowed parallel-plate chamber and a special diode were used
for measurements with various air cavity geometries (layer, channel, cubic cavity, triangle) in x-ray beams of 4 and 15 MV. Their results show that following
a 2.0 cm wide air channel for a 4 MV, 4 ¥ 4 cm2 field there was an 11% underdose at the distal interface, while a 2.0 cm cubic cavity yielded only a 3% loss.
Measurements at the proximal interface showed losses of 5% to 8%. For a 4
MV parallel-opposed beam irradiation the losses at the interfaces were 10% for
a channel cavity (in comparison with the homogeneous case) and 1% for a
cube. The losses were slightly larger for the 15 MV beam (Figure 26).
67

Figure 26. Effects of varying air gap thicknesses on distributions (normalized
TMRs) after air for a 4 cm ¥ 4 cm field, (a) 4 MV, (b) 15 MV. (Reprinted from
E. E. Klein, L. M. Chin, R. K. Rice, B. J. Mijnheer,294 “The influence of air cavities on interface doses for photon beams,” Int. J. Radiat. Biol. Phys.
27:419–427 (1993) with permission from Elsevier Science.)
Underdosage at the lateral interface was 4% and 8% for the 4 MV and 15 MV
beams, respectively.
Concerning the dose distribution dependence on energy some reports294,295,302
suggest better clinical results using lower photon energies with the presence of
air cavities and improved target volume coverage when 3D information was
used. Izuno et al.303 reported better local control and survival of early vocal
cord cancer treated with Co-60 vs. 8 to 10 MV photons. Coia et al.302 reported
that Co-60 provided better target coverage when compared to 6 MV at the
expense of a larger volume of larynx receiving a high dose. The lower energy 4
MV provided better target coverage than 10 MV with only slight increase in the
volume of larynx receiving 77 Gy or more. In maxillary sinus treatment with
postoperative irradiation Jiang et al.304 suggest using a water-filled balloon to
reduce the air cavity volume (to reduce the potential dose inhomogeneity). For
68

example, if a pre-cavity thickness for high-energy photons is smaller than the
range of secondary electrons, there will be severe underdosage at the distal
interface. Also the distance between the proximal and distal layers is proportional to the magnitude of the underdosage that occurs at the distal interface,
while underdosage at the proximal interface is fairly consistent. Increase in field
size and introduction of lateral interfaces alleviate some of the dose lost to displaced forward scatter by introducing lateral scatter.

B. Lung
Accurate dose calculations in lung are important to assess lung and tumor
dose in various radiotherapy cancer patients. Those patients of particular relevance are lung cancer and esophagus cancer patients because large volumes of
lung are irradiated to high doses. For treatment of lung cancer, dose heterogeneity corrections and subsequent prescription alteration remain controversial.
Energy choice also remains controversial.
Path-length based algorithms: There has been a recent flurry of publications that challenge the simpler dose algorithms in predicting accurate dose
within or near lung media. These algorithms are used routinely in manual and
computer-aided planning of radiation therapy, but have been validated primarily
for cobalt-60 radiation. One deficiency of all the common correction algorithms
is that they do not work in regions of electron disequilibrium, such as near
lung-tumor interfaces or close to the edges of a beam within lung. This can
become significant with high-energy beams (>10 MV) and it is especially
important with the increased use of 3D planning and non-coplanar beams,
which often involve more treatment fields that most likely traverse greater lung
paths.
Many workers clearly have demonstrated the failure of path-length based
algorithms (i.e., 1D) in the presence of lung.167,196,227,275,305,308,309,310,311
Tests performed with 6 and 15 MV x-rays275 reveal that incorrect doses can
be computed within or near to a low-density medium, particularly when the
field size is small. In these cases, electron equilibrium is not achieved in the lateral direction, thereby violating an implicit assumption of all the above calculation methods. Figure 20 from Mackie et al. 276 demonstrates the rebuild-up
region downstream from cork for 15 MV x-rays and a 5 ¥ 5 cm2 field. A disequilibrium effect, observed for 6 MV x-rays, is much more pronounced with 15
MV x-rays. Within the cork, there is a reduction in dose and all the calculation
methods that assume equilibrium overpredict the dose. Considering the average
longitudinal range of an electron set in motion 15 MV x-rays to be 3.0 cm in
water (i.e., dmax), then this range is elongated to approximately 9.0 cm in cork
with density of 0.33. Laterally the electrons will be scattered to a distance of
approximately of 1/3 to 1/2 of this range, that approximately 3 to 5 cm. Thus,
irradiation of cork with a minimum field width equal to twice this lateral range
(i.e., 6 to 10 cm) is needed to maximize dose along the central axis of the
69

beam. The 5 ¥ 5 cm2 field is inadequate for achieving such lateral equilibrium
in a low-density medium.
Figure 27 from Rice et al.312 showed the dependence on these new build-up
regions of the density of the upstream material. They showed lower interface
dose and extended build-up curves beyond the interface. However, in this paper,
calculated and measured doses were reported away from the lung, where equilibrium was re-established.
Generally, the dose at the ICRU reference point of any lung tumor is calculated with acceptable accuracy. The accuracy of the algorithms is limited by the
assumption of electron and photon equilibrium. The location of the ICRU reference point at the center of a unit density GTV provides almost complete electron and photon equilibrium, hence the relatively small error observed at this
position. These circumstances explain the high accuracy with which the dose
could be calculated even with simple algorithms (pencil beam algorithm with
1D corrections, the modified Batho algorithm, and the equivalent path length
algorithm, see Engelsman et al.196) at the ICRU reference point. Differences
between calculated and measured dose distributions are primarily due to
changes in electron transport in the lung, which are not adequately taken into
account by the simple tissue inhomogeneity correction algorithms. Particularly
for high photon beam energies, clinically unacceptable errors will be intro-

Figure 27. Correction factor for a 15 MV x-rays, 5 ¥ 5 cm2 field as a function
of depth below the surface of the phantom for densities of 0.015 (humid air)
and 0.18 and 0.31 (lung) gcm–3. (Reprinted from R. K. Rice, B. J. Mijnheer, L.
M. Chin, 306 “Benchmark measurements for lung dose corrections for x-ray
beams,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 15:399–409 (1988) with permission
from Elsevier Science.)
70

duced in the choice of field sizes employed for conformal treatments, leading to
underdosage of the planning target volume (PTV). In addition, the dose to the
lung will be wrongly predicted which may influence the choice of the prescribed dose level in dose-escalation studies: many papers have demonstrated
that simplistic algorithms can overestimate the dose at a tumor lung boundary
to such a degree that making 1D corrections may be misleading clinically and
contra-indicated.24,190,212,313
3D dose calculation: Papers that examined the spread of secondary electrons from high-energy beams32,33,35,94,314,315,316 showed that the concept of primary
and scatter could be extended to conditions of non-equilibrium, using small
field TAR values which reflect the loss of lateral electron equilibrium.
Choice of energy: Many lung patients who undergo radiation therapy are
treated with higher energy photons (15 to 18 MV) to obtain deeper penetration.
However, the longer range of the higher energy recoil electrons in the low-density medium may cause lateral electron disequilibrium and degrade the target
coverage. Several studies (e.g., refs. 33, 35, 37, 227, 315, 317, 318) quantified
the effects of lateral low-density regions and show that the use of low-energy
beams is preferred in irradiating lung tumors because higher energy beams
would need larger field margins in order to achieve target dose homogeneity.
The previous work by Mackie et al. 275 further showed the central axis dose
depression for 15 MV x-rays (Figure 20). Wong and Purdy146 provided similar
measurements for Co-60, demonstrating the dependence on the proximity of
low-density regions to points of interest (see Figure 28). Loss of electron equilibrium within and adjacent to low density materials can result in a dose reduction along the central axis and near the beam edge for megavoltage photon
beams. In this context, the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group319 protocol #9105 recommends the use of photon beams of energy 12 MV or less for nonsmall-cell lung cancer therapy.
Ekstrand and Barnes 33 have compared profiles of x-ray beams ranging in
energy from 4 to 18 MV. The profiles were measured at 10-cm depth in unitdensity and lung-density (0.26) phantoms. At the highest energy the 20% to
80% physical penumbra width was measured to be 7.5 mm in the unit-density
material, whereas in the lung phantom the width was 18 mm. At 4 MV the situation was reversed; that is, the penumbra was slightly smaller in the lung
phantom. As a result, unanticipated underdosing inside the field and greater
dose outside the field can occur when high-energy x-rays are used. The authors
suggested that the optimal beam energies for lung tissue were 6 MV or less.
The penumbra broadening of a photon beam in lung is of major concern for
conformal irradiation of lung tumors. This broadening necessitates larger field
sizes to achieve the same target coverage as in a homogeneous environment,
and the effect increases for higher energies. For treatment of lung tumors, it is
advantageous to keep the field sizes as small as possible, to limit the mean lung
dose. It is, therefore, concluded32,317 that beam energies above about 10 MV are
less appropriate for treatment of these tumors.
71

Figure 28. Measurements demonstrate the dependence on the proximity of lowdensity regions to points of interest for Co-60 (Reprinted from J. W. Wong and
J. A. Purdy,146 “On methods of inhomogeneity corrections for photon transport,”
[Review]. Med. Phys. 17:807–814 (1990) with permission of the American
Association of Physicists in Medicine.)
Klein et al.313 performed a study that compared dose distributions around a
tumor situated within the lung parenchyma for 6 and 18 MV beams using a
five-field irradiation technique in an anthropomorphic phantom. They concluded that, for tumors surrounded by lung tissue, lower energy beams should
be used and, for tumors with at least one boundary with the lung parenchyma,
boost fields should be treated with lower energy beams. Their conclusions are
supported also by Miller et al.317 and Kornelsen and Young.35
White et al.315 examined unopposed and parallel opposed beams in lung density phantoms, and concluded that the addition of an opposed beam reduced the
penumbra difference between 6 and 18 MV to such a sufficient extent that the
use of higher energy beams would be preferable in some clinical situations in
which patient thickness would lead to unacceptably high entry doses with lower
energies. However, the reduced entrance dose with higher energies has to be
balanced against the increased field margins, which result in a possible increase
in mean lung dose and therefore an increased complication probability. They
concluded also that for opposed fields, the difference in beam fringe values
(distance between the 50% and 90% isodose lines) degradation of the 6 and 18
MV photon beams at the lung/polystyrene interface is clinically insignificant
compared to daily setup errors and patient motion.
Brugmans et al.32 have used an inhomogeneous phantom, consisting of polystyrene, cork, and polystyrene layers, with a 6 ¥ 6 ¥ 6 cm3 polystyrene cube
72

inside the cork representing the tumor, to simulate a lung cancer treatment.
Film dosimetry experiments were performed for an AP-PA irradiation technique with 8 or 18 MV beams. They concluded that for lung cancer treatment,
a beam energy of 8 MV is more suitable than 18 MV. Field sizes in conformal
radiotherapy of tumors in lung can be decreased without compromising the biologically effective dose to the target. Reductions of the mean lung dose by at
least a factor of 1.6 are feasible for the same mean target dose. A simple intensity-modulation technique, in which small edge segments deliver some extra
dose at the target edge in addition to a small uniform segment, can be employed
to maintain the target dose homogeneity and limit the decrease in minimum target dose upon field shrinkage. Small movements of the target, where the tumor
in which the edge of the target volume does not approach the field edge to
within several millimeters, hardly affects the target dose and no extra margin
for target motion needs to be taken into account. For motion with larger excursions, however, application of an extra margin is essential. Their study has
demonstrated that conformal therapy of lung tumors can be significantly
improved; the mean lung dose can be decreased by decreasing the field size and
keeping the mean target dose constant. For clinical application of these findings
for the conformal treatment of lung tumors, however, it is recommended by the
authors that dose distributions in the presence of heterogeneities can be calculated with a higher accuracy than presently possible with most treatment planning systems. Since Brugmans’ work is quite complex and includes much
valuable information, this Task Group recommends its study.
Obviously, an accurate dose computation algorithm (such as a Category 4
type as decribed earlier) will guide the treatment planner in the selection of the
correct energy and field margins. Some instances may occur where selection of
a higher energy beam would result in superior dose distributions, provided the
correct margin is selected. When inaccurate dose calculation algorithms are
used, use of lower energy beams for lung is preferred since the dose calculation
inaccuracy is less for many algorithms.
Dosimetry studies based on slab geometry with single-beam geometry do
not represent the clinical situation. A circumscribed tumor within lung poses a
more complex problem. Before adjusting dose prescriptions based on heterogeneity corrections, realistic phantom studies have to be performed. The accuracy and effect of the corrections must then be assessed. Various authors320,321
have constructed and irradiated phantoms based on benchmark patients. The
data were used to analyze algorithms (2D or 3D) and provide information concerning energy choice for lung irradiation. The debate on the use of simple
(1D) and complex (3D with electron transport) inhomogeneity corrections or
using no correction at all continues, especially as dose escalation trials with
3D–Treatment Planning evolve.30
Breast Treatment: Due to the inclusion of lung tissue in the treatment volume, some parts of the breast will get a higher dose during tangential breast
irradiation because of the lower lung density. The influence of lung on breast
73

treatment planning, the effect of different inhomogeneity algorithms on the dose
distributions, and the need of 3D dose calculation and conformal techniques
have been comprehensively addressed by some authors.184,322,323,324,325,326,327,328 To
investigate this issue, Chin et al.184 have studied the three-dimensional dose distributions calculated for an “average” (lung density 0.31 g/cm3) breast phantom
for 60Co, 4 MV, 6 MV, and 8 MV photon beams. They have concluded that
when lung correction is included in the dose calculation, the doses to areas at
the left and right margin of the lung volume increase. The magnitude of the
increase depends on energy and the patient anatomy. For the “average” breast
phantom the correction factors are between 1.03 and 1.06 depending on the
energy used. Higher energy is associated with lower correction factors. Both the
ratio-of-TMR and the Batho lung correction methods, used in this study, can
predict these corrections within a few percent. The use of higher energy photons provides lower value of the “hot spots” compared to lower energy photons,
but this needs to be balanced against a possible disadvantage in decreased dose
delivered to the skin and superficial portion of the breast. Aref et al.323 in a
study of the radiation therapy plans of 85 patients with early breast cancer have
found a significant reduction of volume overdosage if a complex 3D plan utilizing multiple contours, lung inhomogeneity correction, and dose-based compensators is used compared to single-contour-based methods. Fogliata et al.324 have
analyzed different treatment techniques with conventional photon beams, intensity-modulated photon beams, and proton beams for intact breast irradiation for
patients in whom conventional irradiation could cause potentially dangerous
lung irradiation. They concluded that geometrically difficult breast cancer
patients could be irradiated with a three-field non-IMRT technique, thus reducing the dose to the lung that is proposed as standard for this category of
patients. Intensity-modulated techniques were only marginally more successful
than the corresponding non-IMRT treatments, while protons offer excellent
results.
Data on the accuracy of dose calculation algorithms, investigated by phantom measurements, determinations of the geometry and density of the actual
lung in the patient, and the results of in vivo dose measurements, have been
published by Mijnheer et al.328 From their work it can be concluded that a lung
correction varying between 3% and 7% is needed, but its magnitude is slightly
overpredicted in a number of commercial treatment planning systems. Because
this increase in dose is already in a high-dose region, the authors recommend
that inhomogeneity corrections should be applied during tangential breast irradiation.
Accuracy in patient positioning is a prerequisite to ensure agreement
between the calculated and the delivered dose distribution to the patient but
may well be one of the weakest parts of the radiotherapy process. 329,330,331,332
During the delivery of the prescribed dose in external beam radiotherapy, respiration alters the patient’s body outline and consequently the basis for dose
calculations. Variations in dose distribution and in dose delivery can contribute
74

to underdosage of the tumor or overdosage of normal tissue, which are potentially related to a reduction of local tumor control and an increase of side
effects. Breathing motion can produce deviation of the delivered dose distribution compared to the calculated CT-based treatment plan and the effect in the
dose-volume histograms can be significant.333,334,335,336 Breathing also affects the
density of the lung, thus affecting the calculated dose.337,338 An estimation of the
impact that setup uncertainties have on the clinical outcome of the treatment (in
terms of lung tumor control and lung complications) has recently been reported
based on radiobiological modeling.196,339,340

C. Bone and High-Density Media
There is a surprisingly small number of papers addressing influence of the
presence of bone.247,341,342,343,344,345,346 There are many studies however that address
the influence of high Z media.56,74,75,91,217,256,263,264,269,347,348,349,350,351,352,353,354 Figure 29
demonstrates the dose build-up region as a photon beam approaches a steel slab
inhomogeneity in water. Downstream from the interface a build-down followed
by a build-up is observed due to the lack, initially, and then the rebuild of the
electron fluence (Galbraith in Gullane).85 These papers are explicit demonstra-

Figure 29. Upstream build-up region and downstream build-down followed by
build-up regions in water near to stainless steel for parallel opposed beams.
Doses at interfaces are measured using a wall-less ionization chamber, thus
yielding doses at the interface surface. The interface doses increase by as much
as 50% at the proximal surface of the metallic inhomogeneity (Reprinted from
P. J. Gullane,85 “Primary mandibular reconstruction: analysis of 64 cases and
evaluation of interface radiation dosimetry on bridging plates,” Laryngoscope
101:1–24 (1991) with permission of Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)

75

tions of the competition of abundant downstream scatter and the “rebuild up”
of dose in the low Z medium downstream. A few studies exist that examine the
influence of implanted high-Z prosthetic materials.93,355,356,357,358 Wang et al.359 and
Mian et al.360) examine the dose enhancement at bone-implant interfaces from
scattered radiation during simulated head and neck radiotherapy.
Niroomand-Rad et al.357 have investigated the magnitude of dose perturbation effects at the tissue-titanium alloy implant with (100 m and 500 m thick)
and without hydroxylapatite (HA) coating interfaces in head and neck cancer
patients treated with 6 MV and 10 MV photon beams. They found at the upper
surface (toward the source) of the tissue-dental implant interface, for 15 ¥ 3.2
mm 2 uncoated, as well as 100 m coated discs, dose perturbation is about
+22.5% and +20.0% using 6 MV and 10 MV photon beams, respectively. At
the lower interface for 15 ¥ 3.2 mm2 and 48 ¥ 3.2 mm2 uncoated and 100 m
coated discs, dose reduction is similar and is about -13.5% and -9.5% for 6
MV and 10 MV beams, respectively. For 48 ¥ 3.2 mm2 discs, these values basically remain the same. These results were slightly lower for the 500 m coated
discs but are not clinically significant.
Some studies exist dealing with the biological or clinical consequences of
interface effects. Metal dental prostheses or overlays may lead to increased
mucosal reactions of adjacent tissue surfaces during intensive irradiation of the
oral cavity. The dosimetry of this phenomenon was investigated by Gibbs et
al.361 by irradiating dental phantoms with 4 and 6 MV photons. It was found
that gold and amalgam interfaces may produce local mucosal doses as high as
150% to 170% depending on the beam geometry, but doses of 111% to 126%
for gold crowns and about 109% to 118% for amalgam fillings were found for
opposed-beam configurations. Two to four mm of tissue-equivalent absorber is
sufficient to re-establish a homogeneous dose distribution and should be
employed throughout therapy whenever dental extraction is unwarranted.
Zellmer et al.362 examined cell cultures attached to 6 micron Mylar™ adjacent to
scattering materials consisting of polystyrene, glass, aluminum, copper, tin, and
lead and irradiated with 137Cs gamma rays and 200 kVp x-rays. According to
the authors, the major differences in biological effect observed when the cells
were irradiated adjacent to these materials could be largely explained by the
differences in the physical dose. Further analyses using the linear quadratic
(LQ) equation suggested additional biological effects with implications for the
mechanisms involved. Cells showed a small but consistent increase in the lowdose mechanism for radiation scattered from high-Z material. An increased
value of the alpha coefficient suggests an increase in relative biological effectiveness (RBE) which could be associated with a higher proportion of lowenergy and track-end electrons in these fields.
AAPM TG 6348 has performed an in-depth review of the issues associated
with implanted high-Z hip prostheses and has made recommendations on how
to deal with some of the practical issues in clinical practice.

76

D. Influence of CT Number Variations
Accurate dose calculation not only requires an accurate algorithm but also
relies on accurate calibration of Hounsfield Unit (HU) for CT-based inhomogeneity corrections (especially for lung cases), prior to dose calculation. In CT
scans, the parameter that mostly affects the accuracy of CT-HU is kV because
it determines the beam quality and, therefore, the attenuation coefficient or HU.
Other parameters such as mAs, slice thickness, pitch factor, etc., should, in
principle, take no effect. For each CT scanner, the HU for each kV should be
correctly calibrated.
The limitation of using CT numbers for in vivo tissue characterization is well
documented (e.g.,363,364,365,366,367,368,369,370) Newman et al.363 suggest that the CT number and thickness of bone cannot be measured accurately unless the thickness
exceeds 3 mm. Below this thickness there is a progressive underestimation of
the CT number and an overestimation of thickness. These CT number variations, however, did not result in significant dose-calculation errors during radiation therapy treatment planning. Geise and McCullough364 reported that a 4%
to 10% uncertainty in electron density would result in no more than a 2%
change in dose; therefore, they concluded that knowing the size and shape of a
significant heterogeneity is more important than the accuracy of knowing the
electron density.
Chu et al.366 demonstrated that the uncertainty of the CT numbers from a
simulator-based CT scanner is larger than that from a conventional CT unit.
This phenomenon is more obvious for higher electron density or high-Z materials; in their study, a 20 HU uncertainty in CT number for soft tissues results in
about 2% of uncertainty in electron densities, and a 250 HU-CT number uncertainty for cortical bone results in about 5% of uncertainty in electron densities.
Also, the dose uncertainty for the 6 MV beam is less than 2%, up to a 20 cm
depth. The presence of 1 cm bone increases the uncertainty by less than 0.5%.
The dose uncertainty for the 18 MV beam is less than 2%, up to at least 30 cm
in depth. Verellen et al.365 also compared the treatment monitor units (MU) calculations for 10 pelvic fields using images from simulator-based CT and diagnostic CT. The agreement between their equivalent path length (EPL)-based
MU calculations is within 1% to 2%. The effect of CT numbers on dose calculation may depend on the particular dose algorithm used. Chu et al., have performed additional dose calculations using the collapsed cone convolution
algorithm106 implemented in a commercial planning system (Pinnacle, ADAC
Labs, Milpitas, CA) to confirm the EPL results described above. MUs for the
treatment fields were calculated for three clinical cases: the brain, lung, and
pelvis. The calculations show that a change of 20 HU for soft tissue and 250
HU for bone result in a less than 1% change in MU for the brain case, and a
less than 2% change for the lung and pelvis cases.
Establishing a relationship between CT numbers and electron densities
provides a simple method in dose calculations in inhomogeneous tissues. The
77

possible errors in measured CT numbers need to be assessed in order to estimate the error of calculated dose when the CT information is directly used.
Chu et al.366 have measured the CT number and have also conducted a series
of experiments to obtain the possible errors in measured CT numbers as a
function of electron density. These errors, although larger than those from
diagnostic CT scanners, produced an error in dose of less than 2% with depths
up to 20 cm.
For high-energy beams such as the 18 MV, pair production accounts for
more than 20% of the total energy transfer in bone. The pair production component is proportional to Z per gram and not to electron density (ED). However,
if there are high-Z materials on the beam path (e.g., 60° external wedge or an
internal hip replacement material) which cause significant amounts of beam
hardening and pair production for high energy beams such as 18 MV, the algorithm’s accuracy may need to be reevaluated. These high-Z materials will also
introduce high dosimetric differences between CT scans using different kVs (or
different HU–ED curves) because the photoelectric effect is strongly energy
and Z dependent. The difference is caused not only by the materials themselves, but also by the possible streak artifacts generated by the materials.
Task Groups 40371 and 53384 also make specific recommendations on tests and
measurements to be made.

E. Radiosurgical Beams
For fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy (SRT) and/or stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) treatment planning, the volume enclosed by the external contour
is typically assumed to be of uniform density. The majority of the SRT/SRS
treatment planning systems ignore the presence of heterogeneities such as the
cranial bone and the air cavities at the skull base mainly due to two reasons: (a)
the assumption that heterogeneity correction is not necessary since the multiple
beam arrangement is compensating the perturbation effect of the cranial bone
and (b) computation time limitations since the irradiation technique includes
multiple arcs and multiple isocenters. However, it has been shown by Rustgi et
al.372 for 6 MV x-rays that air cavities and low-density inhomogeneities encountered in the nasopharyngeal and sinus regions cause a significant perturbation
in the dose distribution of small beam immediately beyond the inhomogeneity.
They used a diamond detector in a 6 MV photon beam. Measurements that
were made in a uniform density solid-water phantom and in the presence of
four air gaps indicate significant dose perturbation immediately beyond the airsolid water interface; e.g., the reduction in dose at the surface for a 12.5 mm
diameter field was 11%, 17%, 23%, and 33% for air gap thickness of 3, 4.6, 6,
and 9.2 mm, respectively. For the dose perturbation caused by high-density
inhomogeneities, i.e., cranial bone, Rustgi et al.373 have shown that neglecting
the presence of the cranial bone may result to an overestimation of the absolute
dose at the isocenter by approximately 2% to 5% (depending on the cranial
78

bone thickness which varies between 3 and 8 mm with average thickness of 5
mm). The same magnitude of perturbations have been obtained by Theodorou
et al.374 comparing the results of Monte Carlo simulation and stereotactic dose
calculation code (without heterogeneity correction) based on clinical cases. The
effect of air inhomogeneities on dose distributions in radiosurgery is expected
to increase with beam energy as demonstrated by the results of Solberg et al.375
who studied a 10 MV photon beam. Nevertheless, for targets situated in the
central part of the brain Ayyangar and Jiang,376 based on clinical cases, showed
that conventional algorithms without inhomogeneity correction are sufficiently
accurate for relative dose distributions; whereas the absolute dose is overestimated by 1.5% to 2.6% compared to Monte Carlo calculations.

F. Multiple Beam Arrangements
Choice of beam quality in the presence of inhomogeneities could be less critical when multiple beams are used as several investigators 39,196,272,302,377 have
shown based on clinical measurements and image based treatment plans.
Engelsman et al.196 have shown that even when using low-energy beams for
irradiating lung tumors, the underestimation of field margins may result in a
very large difference between planned and actual delivered dose distribution.
Single multileaf collimator-shaped photon beams of 6, 8, 15, and 18 MV nominal energy were used to irradiate a 50-mm diameter spherical solid tumor, simulated by polystyrene, which was located centrally inside lung tissue, simulated
by cork. The planned dose distribution was made conformal to the PTV, which
was a 15 mm 3D expansion of the tumor. Values of both the absolute dose at the
ICRU reference point and relative dose distributions inside the PTV and in the
lung were calculated using three inhomogeneity correction algorithms. The
algorithms investigated in their study were the pencil beam algorithm with 1D
corrections, the modified Batho algorithm, and the equivalent path length algorithm. Deviations of up to 3.5% between calculated and measured values of the
dose at the ICRU reference point were found. Discrepancies between measured
and calculated beam fringe values (distance between the 50% and 90% isodose
lines) of up to 14 mm have been observed. The differences in beam fringe and
penumbra width (20±80%) increase with increasing beam energy. Their results
have demonstrated that an underdosage of the PTV up to 20% may occur if
calculated dose values are used for treatment planning. The three algorithms
predict a considerably higher dose in the lung, both along the central beam axis
and in the lateral direction, compared with the actual delivered dose values.
They have also concluded that the difference between planned and actual position of the 95% isodose level will be smaller in a treatment plan if multiple
(non-opposing) beams are used, because the contribution of a specific beam
penumbra to the dose at a certain point is decreased.
Wang et al.272 retrospectively studied 3D conformally shaped 6 MV photon
treatment plans that had been used for the treatment of five patients with tumors
79

in the nasopharyngeal or paranasal sinus regions. The plans were designed with
a clinical treatment planning system that uses a measurement-based pencil
beam dose-calculation algorithm with an equivalent path-length inhomogeneity
correction.378,379 For each plan, the dose distribution was recalculated with the
Monte Carlo method, which accounts for the perturbation effects of local tissue
heterogeneities.255,268,380 However, after combining the fields employed in each
treatment plan, the overall dose distribution shows only small differences
between the two methods. Their results indicate that conformal 6 MV photon
treatment plans for head-and-neck tumors, designed with a pathlength corrected, measurement-based pencil beam algorithm, give adequate target coverage and sparing of normal organs at risk, even in the presence of large surgical
air cavities.

G. Measured Benchmark Data
The data from the work by Rice et al.306 and by Zhu218 are assimilated in
Tables 10 through 12 to give a set of measurements covering the energy range
from cobalt-60 to 18 MV x-rays for lung and bone.
The phantom geometries in the examples given here are simple. They consist
of slabs of heterogeneous regions whose boundaries are normal or parallel to
the axis of the radiation beam, and which comply nicely with the assumptions
underlying the simpler dose algorithms. Although data are available for other
geometries, data for only two geometries are tabulated here.
One geometry consists of a slab extending across the entire field and the
other geometry consists of two lateral blocks separated by a region of unit density material around the central axis to simulate the mediastinum.181 The slabs
were imbedded in water-equivalent plastic or suspended in water at a depth of
DB from the surface. The slab thickness was denoted by ST. For the split slab
geometry, the separation between the regions was denoted by S.
All the data given in Tables 10 through 12 are Inhomogeneity Correction
Factors (ICF) measured on the central axis of the beam for square fields. Since
measurements are not easily obtained within a living human, the measurements have been more practically made in a variety of phantom materials. For
the homogeneous medium, water is the usual material of choice. However,
water-equivalent plastic has also been used. Rice used balsa wood with a density of 0.18 g/cc to represent emphazeimic lung and Styrofoam™ with a density
of 0.015 g/cc to represent humid air. Rice et al.306 fabricated plastic lung phantoms using Constantinou’s formulation.381,382 Many others384 have used cork to
represent normal lung densities (0.25 to 0.4 g/cm3). Both lung and bone phantom material provided commercially by Gammex RMI (Middleton, WI) were
used by Zhu et al. Zhu et al.212 measured the density of the lung plastic to be
0.272 g/cc and the density of the bone plastic to be 1.83 g/cc. The composition by weight of the lung material was C (0.6887), O (0.1762), H (0.0862),

80

Ca (0.0252), N (0.0226), Cl (0.0011) and that of the bone material was O
(0.3757), C (0.3226), Ca (0.2703), H (0.031), N (0.0099), and Cl (0.0005).
According to the suggestions of AAPM TG 53384 the tests must be based on
the nature of the correction method used. For example, if the algorithm uses a
simple equivalent pathlength approach, the verification of the algorithm can be
performed with a very simple 1D phantom test, but it will fail for more complex
phantoms. More complicated algorithms will require more complicated “stress”
tests.
The measurements made by Rice et al.306 employed special parallel plate
chambers constructed from water-equivalent plastic and lung-equivalent plastic.
The plate separation of the parallel plate chambers was 2 mm. In addition, Rice
used a cylindrical 0.1 cc ionization chamber with an inner diameter of 3.5 mm.
These data are generally limited to measurements along the central axis of the
beam only, with several different geometries and two different beam qualities
(4 and 15 MV). Further benchmark data especially 2D and 3D data for various
geometries are needed.385
Zhu and Boyer 218 made measurements in water with a 0.6 cc ionization
chamber with an inner diameter of 6.25 mm. Measurements in plastic were
made with a 0.1 cc chamber and with TLD. In addition, Zhu made measurements in the unit density side of interfaces in solid water (Gammex RMI) with
a 0.33 cc parallel plate chamber.
The ionization measurements made by Zhu were corrected for the presence
of the ionization chamber using factors calculated as follows:167
bone

ICFbone = ICFmeas, bone

Ê Lˆ
Á ˜
Ë r ¯ gas

water

Ê Lˆ
Á ˜
Ë r ¯ gas

P reple,bone Pwall ,bone
Prepl ,water Pwall ,water

(37)

lung

ICFlung = ICFmeas,lung

Ê Lˆ
Á ˜
Ë r ¯ gas

water

Ê Lˆ
Á ˜
Ë r ¯ gas

Prepl ,lung Pwall ,lung
Prepl ,water Pwall ,water

(38)

The physical factors in equations (37) and (38) are defined and explained in
TG 21.385
For the lung measurements, the corrections to the ionization measurements
were not significantly different from unity (see also measurements from
Mauceri and Kase386). For bone the factors were more significant, i.e., 0.928 for
6 MV and 0.925 for 18 MV. Thus “raw” ionization readings should not be used
directly for bone dosimetry with ion chambers.
All measurements reported in Tables 10 through 12 were made with a fixed
source-to-surface distance (SSD). For cobalt-60 and 4 MV x-rays the SSD was
81

80 cm. For x-ray energies from 6 MV to 18 MV, the SSD was 100 cm. These
type of data are preferred for checking computer calculations since it allows the
comparison of several depths from one field size calculation, and since it checks
the computer modeling of intensity variation with distance from the source.
The machines used in studies in the tables are listed in Table 9.
A sample of correction factors for uniform slabs of lung and bone are given
in Tables 10, 11, and 12. Highlights of the tables are plotted in Figures 30
through 33. The lower panels in Figures 31 and 33 show lung slabs at 6 MV and
15 MV x-rays, respectively. At both energies there is a rise in primary
(TERMA) transmission through the lung slab. At 6 MV ICFs decrease with
increasing field size. At 15 MV, there is little difference between 10 cm ¥ 10 cm
and 20 cm ¥ 20 cm field sizes. However, the ICF for a 5 cm ¥ 5 cm field is less
than unity in the lung due to lateral equilibrium effects (see previous Figure
20). It is apparent from examining Table 10 that the correction factor in lung
decreases with increasing energy. This characteristic is demonstrated more
clearly in Figure 34 in which data from Takeshi for a 10 cm ¥ 10 cm field is
plotted for lung heterogeneity for a range of energies between cobalt-60 and 15
MV. Beyond the lung slab the ICF is greater than unity due to the higher primary transmission through the slab.
Typical ICFs for bone are shown in the upper panels of Figures 31 and 33 at
6 MV and 18 MV x-rays, respectively. For 6 MV x-rays, there is a build-up,
build-down, and rebuild-up effect. When the energy is increased to 18 MV,
there is a build-down effect beyond the interface. Beyond the bone slab ICFs
are less than unity.
Data in split slab phantoms are tabulated in Tables 11 and 12. Highlights of
the tables are plotted in Figure 32. The lower panel of Figure 32 shows ICFs
measured around a lung heterogeneity. The effect on the ICF is a decrease in
dose due to a loss of photon scatter in the surrounding lung material. The effect
decreases with increasing energy because the scattering is more forwardpeaked with increasing energy. The upper panel depicts ICFs measured in the
presence of bone slabs. Here, the ICFs rise because of greater scattering in the
high-density bone. The effect decreases and becomes foreshortened because of
Table 9. The machines used in studies
(refer to the data given in Tables 10–12).
Stated Energy

Model

Manufacturer

Cobalt 60

Theratron 780C

Atomic Energy of Canada, Ltd.
(now MDS Nordion)

Clinac 4

Varian Radiation Division

4 MV
6 MV

Mevatron KD

Siemens Medical Laboratories

15 MV

Mevatron 77

Siemens Medical Laboratories

18 MV

Mevatron KD

Siemens Medical Laboratories

82

83

20 ¥ 20

7.7
8.0
8.1

6.0
6.1
6.3
7.0
7.1

4.1
4.6
5.0
5.1
5.7

1.034

1.041

* * Interface * *

1.030

1.001

0.983

1.020

0.975

0.969

1.147

1.099

1.093

1.031

1.011

1.069

1.050

1.009

0.982
0.986

0.982

1.069

1.048

1.023

0.992

0.982
0.987

0.976

0.996
* * Interface * *

2 cm
10 cm

4 MV
10 ¥ 10

2.7
3.0
3.3
3.5
4.0

5¥5

* * Interface * *
0.999
0.982
0.982
0.995
0.985
0.980
0.984
0.988

3 cm
5 cm

Cobalt-60
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

2.0
2.1
2.3
2.5

DB
ST

Lung Slab

1.047

1.029

1.006

0.980

* * Interface * *

1.060

1.035

1.007

0.990

* * Interface * *

3 cm
5 cm

6 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20
5 cm
10 cm

15 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

0.944

0.942

0.942

1.009

1.006

0.996

1.012

1.007

0.997

0.989
0.990
0.993
* * Interface * *
0.968
0.982
0.976
0.953
0.985
0.982

5¥5

1.028

1.019

1.007

0.996

(continues)

* * Interface * *

1.028

1.006

0.994

0.948

* * Interface * *

3 cm
5 cm

18 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

Table 10. “Inhomogeneity Correction Factors” for heterogeneities composed of lung-equivalent plastic.

84
1.147
1.152

1.175
1.180

13.7
13.9
14.0
14.7
15.0

1.144

1.168

1.138

1.131

1.149

1.159

1.124

1.115

1.139

1.124

12.4
12.9
13.0
13.1
13.4

11.3
11.5
11.7
12.0
12.3

10.0
10.1
10.5
11.0
11.1

8.2
8.3
8.4
9.0

Cobalt-60
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

1.144
1.168
1.182

1.125

4 MV
10 ¥ 10

1.141
1.134
1.147

1.098

20 ¥ 20

1.356

1.344

1.315
1.332

1.280

1.266

1.243
1.257

1.233

1.221

1.198
1.210

1.188
1.154
1.197
1.161
1.192
1.154
* * * Interface * * *

1.255
1.257

1.202
1.224
1.124

1.160

5¥5

1.126

1.123

1.119

1.114

1.110

1.104

1.085
1.097

1.083

1.104

1.102

1.100

1.096

1.091

1.087

1.076
1.082

1.072

6 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

Table 10. Continued.

1.102

1.089

1.074

1.065

1.050

1.043

1.017

15 MV
10 ¥ 10

1.104

1.091

1.080

1.072

1.055

1.047

1.022

20 ¥ 20

1.029
1.121
1.119
* * * Interface * * *

1.009

0.996

0.964

0.969

0.959

0.952

0.930

5¥5

1.077

1.075

1.073

1.071

1.068

1.065

1.060

(continues)

1.066

1.064

1.064

1.063

1.059

1.057

1.054

18 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

85
1.344
1.370
1.372

1.412
1.418

1.323

1.397
1.408

1.331

4 MV
10 ¥ 10

1.381

5¥5

1.311
1.305

1.282

1.264

1.246

20 ¥ 20

6 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

DB: thickness of build up layer of solid water, ST: thickness of lung-equivalent slab.

26.4
28.9

19.6
20.4
21.4
23.9
25.4

15.1
15.4
15.9
16.4
17.4

Cobalt-60
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

Table 10. Continued.

1.210
1.214

1.197
1.213

1.192

1.108
1.145
1.154

5¥5

1.176
1.182

1.166
1.174

1.167

1.140
1.143
1.146
1.146
1.155

15 MV
10 ¥ 10

1.154
1.158

1.147
1.151

1.151

1.140
1.133
1.133
1.132
1.136

20 ¥ 20

18 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

86

0.990
0.986

0.996
0.994
0.987
0.981
0.976
0.971
0.967
0.966
0.969
0.972
0.979
0.983
0.989
0.995

3.3
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0

8.0
9.0
10.0
11.0
12.0

13.0
14.0
15.0
18.0
21.0

0.975
0.981
0.987

0.958
0.959
0.960
0.964
0.970

0.981
0.973
0.967
0.961

0.998
0.995

1.001
0.999

3 cm
5 cm
2.5 cm

0.5
1.0
1.6
1.8
2.0
3.0

DB
ST
S

Cobalt-60
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

Lung Split Slabs

0.931
0.922

0.957

0.948

0.986

5 cm
16 cm
2 cm

4 MV
10 ¥ 10

0.960

0.973

0.993

5¥5

0.928

0.933

0.944

0.980

20 ¥ 20

0.987
0.992
0.993

0.978
0.977
0.980
0.981
0.983

0.993
0.989
0.985
0.981

0.999
––––
0.997
0.990

0.987
0.990
0.996

0.977
0.975
0.979
0.982
0.985

0.988
0.984
0.980
0.978

––––
0.990
0.990
0.998

3 cm
5 cm
2.5 cm

6 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

0.953

0.950

0.966

0.987

5¥5

0.952

0.956

0.972

0.984

5 cm
16 cm
2 cm

15 MV
10 ¥ 10

0.959

0.959

0.974

0.986

20 ¥ 20

0.989
0.990
0.991

0.984
0.985
0.987
0.988
0.988

0.997
0.994
0.990
0.986
0.984

(continues)

0.986
0.988
0.988

0.984
0.984
0.986
0.984
0.987

0.996
0.993
0.991
0.988
0.985

3 cm
5 cm
2.5 cm

18 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

Table 11. “Inhomogeneity Correction Factors” for heterogeneities composed of lung-equivalent plastic.

87
1.110
1.101

1.057
1.052

1.049

0.986

1.010
1.037

0.933

4 MV
10 ¥ 10

0.968

5¥5

1.115

1.126

1.059

1.002

0.948

20 ¥ 20

6 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

1.021

1.014

1.007

0.991

5¥5

1.018

0.999

0.982

0.967

15 MV
10 ¥ 10

1.022

1.003

0.990

0.975

20 ¥ 20

18 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

DB: thickness of build up layer of solid water, ST: thickness of lung-equivalent slab, S: separation between the lung-equivalent slabs (split
slab geometry)

30.1
34.9
35.1
35.6

22.0
22.9
26.0
27.1
30.0

Cobalt-60
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

Table 11. Continued.

88
0.932
0.925
0.921
0.918
0.913
0.909

10.0
11.0
12.0

0.928
0.925
0.922

0.937
0.935
0.931

* * Interface * *

0.939
0.937
0.935

0.945
0.944
0.943

* * Interface * *
0.925
0.929
0.934
0.938
0.938
0.944
0.946
0.948
0.944
0.949
0.941
0.947

0.938
0.936

0.940
0.931

0.987
0.983

0.967
0.984

* * Interface * *

–––

–––

* * Interface * *

3 cm
3 cm

6 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

3 cm
3 cm

Cobalt-60
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

Solid Slab

6.0
6.2
6.4
6.7
7.0
8.0
9.0

3.0
3.3
4.0
5.0

0.5
1.0
1.6
1.8
2.0

DB
ST
S

Bone

0.971
0.966

0.948
0.945
0.944

0.953
0.952
0.951

* * Interface * *
0.987
0.988
0.982
0.986
0.978
0.982
0.968
0.971
0.957
0.963
0.951
0.957

0.976
0.972

* * Interface * *

–––

3 cm
3 cm

18 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

1.016
1.012
1.010

1.019
1.019
1.017

1.018

1.011
1.015

1.026
1.022
1.019

1.027
1.029
1.028

1.026

1.020
1.022

1.017

1.013

1.006
1.008

1.007
1.011

1.004
1.004

3 cm
3 cm
2.5 cm

Cobalt-60
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

Split* Slab

1.018
1.015
1.014

1.019
1.017
1.017

1.018

1.014
1.020

1.005

1.004
–––
1.006

1.019
1.018
1.017

1.015
1.017
1.017

1.015

1.007
1.011

1.002

–––
0.998
0.999

3 cm
3 cm
2.5 cm

6 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

1.012
1.011
1.009

1.019
1.015
1.012

1.023

1.012
1.017
1.022

(continues)

1.013
1.010
1.011

1.020
1.015
1.014

1.024

1.011
1.016
1.024

3 cm
3 cm
2.5 cm

18 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

Table 12. “Inhomogeneity Correction Factors” for heterogeneities composed of bone-equivalent plastic.

89
0.901

15.0

0.915

0.920
0.917
0.930

0.933
0.931
0.938

0.941
0.941

6 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

0.940

0.942
0.941
0.946

0.949
0.948

18 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

1.001

1.006
1.003
1.012

1.016
1.016

Cobalt-60
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

Split* Slab

1.012

1.012
1.014

1.016

1.016
1.016

6 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

1.007

1.009
1.008

1.009

1.010
1.011

18 MV
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

*Note: 2.5-cm gap at split.

DB: thickness of build up layer of solid water, ST: thickness of bone-equivalent slab, S: separation between the bone-equivalent slabs (split
slab geometry)

0.907
0.903

13.0
14.0

Cobalt-60
10 ¥ 10
20 ¥ 20

Solid Slab

Table 12. Continued.

Figure 30. Inhomogeneity correction factor for cobalt-60 for two different field
sizes as a function of depth below the surface of the phantom. (a) lung slab,
(b) bone slab.

90

Figure 31. Inhomogeneity correction factor as a function of depth in a layered
bone (a) and lung (b) phantoms for a 6 MV photon beam with field sizes of
10 ¥ 10 and 20 ¥ 20 cm2.

91

Figure 32. Dose correction factor as a function of depth in mediastinum bone
(a) and lung (b) phantoms for 6 MV x-rays with field sizes of 10 ¥ 10 and 20 ¥
20 cm2.

92

Figure 33. Inhomogeneity correction factor as a function of depth in (a) layered
bone phantom for an 18 MV photon beam with field sizes of 10 ¥ 10 and 20 ¥
20 cm2 and (b) lung phantom for a 15 MV photon beam with field sizes of 5 ¥
5, 10 ¥ 10, and 20 ¥ 20 cm2.

93

Figure 34. A 10 ¥ 10 cm2 field is plotted for lung heterogeneity for a range of
energies between cobalt-60 and 15 MV. Beyond the lung slab the ICF is greater
than unity due to the higher primary transmission through the slab. (Reprinted
from P. J. Gullane,85 “Primary mandibular reconstruction: analysis of 64 cases
and evaluation of inter face radiation dosimet r y on br idging plates,”
Laryngoscope 101:1–24 (1991) with permission of Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.)
the narrow scattering angle of the higher energy x-rays. The details of the ICFs
are complex and vary significantly with energy. This sample of data illustrates
the major characteristics.

H. Data Trends
Although there is an abundance of measured data that often leads to different conclusions, there are still some consistent messages. Some are obvious and
others require closer analysis.
• Doses increase downstream beyond (> dmax) low-density media (air, lung).
• There are build-up and build-down regions within tissue near the interface
of the low-density media. The severity increases with increasing energy,
decreases with increasing field size.
• The penumbra increases in the region of low-density medium and
increases with energy.
• Doses decrease downstream beyond (> dmax) high-density media (bone,
metal prosthetics).

94

The physicist is strongly advised to understand these trends, especially as
they apply to specific clinical situations and how their treatment planning system does or does not account for them.

VI. THE EFFECT OF INHOMOGENEITY IN IMRT
The impact of the inclusion of inhomogeneity corrections for intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) can be more complex than for conventional 3D
planning, partly due to the combinatorial effect of many small fields, the presence of inhomogeneity, and the presence of steep fluence gradients.
Papanikolaou et al.204,387,388,389 have studied the effect of inhomogeneity corrections for non-small-cell lung cancer and found that errors up to 6% can be
expected (see Figure 35a,b,c and related Table 13).
Most commercial inverse treatment planning systems for IMRT rely on fast
but approximate dose calculation algorithms such as the finite sized-pencil
beam method.
Use of inaccurate dose calculation in iterative inverse treatment planning for
IMRT introduces two errors in the plan. One is the systematic error, which is
similar to the systematic error in the conventional treatment planning. The second is the convergence error that appears because the optimization converges to
the solution optimal for the inaccurate dose calculation beamlets, which is different from the solution for the accurate dose calculation. The convergence
error is similar to the noise convergence error, which appears when Monte
Carlo dose calculation is used in inverse treatment planning.390,391
A study of three cases (head and neck, lung, and prostate) with the use of
several different objective functions by Jeraj et al.391 was performed to characterize both errors. While the systematic error was found to be small for superposition (1%), it was much larger for pencil beam dose calculation (up to 8%),
even though dose calculations in water were accurate to within 1%.
The convergence error is dependent on the systematic error of the dose calculation method; however, it is also very strongly dependent on the specified
objectives. It was found to be smaller for superposition than the pencil beam
method for the objectives studied. Because of the current uncertainty in the definition of the optimality and definition of the objective function, the clinical
significance of the convergence error is unclear. The clinical significance of the
convergence error could be reduced if the final dose calculation is performed
with an accurate dose calculation. In the case that the final plan, based upon an
accurate dose calculation, is judged to be still acceptable, the existence of a better plan (i.e., removal of the convergence error) is of little consequence. If,
however, compromises still exist in the final plan, the existence of the convergence error could be clinically important.
As both the systematic and convergence errors were found to be significant
for the pencil beam calculations, the reported results suggest that vendors and
users who currently use pencil-beam-based dose calculations for IMRT should
95

Figure 35. Dose distributions for a lung patient treated with nine 6 MV coplanar IM beams in (a) transverse, (b) sagittal, and (c) coronal views. Calculations
were performed using a superposition/convolution algorithm and compared to a
homogeneous calculation. For comparison, the distribution using the superposition algorithm but with the homogeneously computed MU is also shown.
96

Figure 35. Continued.

Table 13. Comparison of dose to target and organs at risk for a lung patient
demonstrating the effect of inhomogeneity correction. Dose normalization
is beams isocenter. Volumes correspond to the entire organ (lung and
Ratio of
Inhomogeneous
MUs and
Homogeneous

Homogeneous
Calculation

Inhomogeneous
Calculation

Inhomogeneous
w/ Homogeneous
MUs

Max.
Dose
cGy

Mean
Dose
cGy

Max.
Dose
cGy

Mean
Dose
cGy

Max.
Dose
cGy

Mean
Dose
cGy

Max.
Dose
Ratio
in %

Mean
Dose
Ratio
in %

GTV

5400

5348

5429

5384

5092

5045

-5.7

-5.7

Adenopathy

5420

5341

5451

5399

5109

5049

-5.7

-5.5

Lt. Lung

5393

1057

5451

1077

5110

1012

-5.2

-4.2

Soft Tissue

5420

293

5457

299

5115

277

-5.6

-5.4

97

upgrade to either superposition or Monte Carlo-based dose calculation, at least
for the final dose calculation to eliminate the systematic error. The same reason
(lack of accuracy) that has been driving treatment planning system vendors and
users to improve their dose calculation algorithms for conventional forward
treatment planning, should also be considered in IMRT.
Comparison between importance of dose calculation accuracy and statistical
uncertainty for inverse treatment planning390,391 shows (see Figures 36 and 37 and

Figure 36. 6 MV 100 cm SSD depth dose curves (top) and profiles at 10 cm
depth (bottom) in water for narrow 1 ¥ 5 cm2 fields as calculated by Monte
Carlo, superposition (collapsed cone convolution), and pencil beam dose calculation. While depth dose curves agree well, the pencil beam dose profile shows
an underdose in the penumbra region. Comparisons for a water/lung/water
phantom are also shown. Note the good agreement between the Monte Carlo
and superposition depth dose and dose profile curves, and the overestimation of
the pencil beam depth dose curve within the lung and the underestimation of
the lateral dose spread within the lung region (Reprinted from R. Jeraj, P. J.
Keall, and J. V. Siebers,391 “The effect of dose calculation accuracy on inverse
treatment planning,” Phys. Med. Biol. 47:391–407 (2002) with permission
from the Institute of Physics Publishing.)

98

Figure 37. Optimal (left) and recalculated (right) dose distributions for the lung
MC
S
tumor case: Monte Carlo ( d MC upper left), superposition ( dS middle left),
PB
recalculated superposition ( dSMC middle right), pencil beam ( d PB
lower left)
MC
and recalculated pencil beam ( d PB lower right). The following isodose curves
are shown: 20% (blue), 50% (green), 70% (yellow), 90% (orange) and 95%
(red). The objective function used for the optimization in these cases was exponential (tumor) with sparing of the left lung. (Reprinted from R. Jeraj, P. J.
Keall, and J. V. Siebers,391 “The effect of dose calculation accuracy on inverse
treatment planning,” Phys. Med. Biol. 47:391–407 (2002) with permission
from the Institute of Physics Publishing.)
Table 14) that the systematic and convergence errors for superposition type of
dose calculation are approximately equal to the 2% statistical error of a Monte
Carlo dose calculation. Therefore, to gain anything with the use of Monte Carlo
dose calculation in inverse treatment planning, precision of the dose calculation
should be below 2% for the final dose distribution, which is in agreement with
the data reported by Keall et al.392 for Monte Carlo precision in conventional
treatment planning. However, since there is also some systematic error in the definition of the linear accelerator geometry and/or source model used for charac99

Table 14. Systematic and convergence errors for superposition and pencil
beam dose calculations. The mean difference and standard deviations
are given for the systematic error and the range of standard deviations for
the convergence error. The ranges in the convergence error indicate the
differences observed between different objective functions. (a) Errors for the
lung tumor and left lung, (b) errors for the prostate tumor and rectum and
(c) errors for the head & neck tumor and spinal cord.
(a)
Superposition

Pencil beam

Error (%Dmax)

Tumor

Lung

Tumor

Lung

Systematic

-0.1 ± 2

-1 ± 1

+8 ± 3

+6 ± 5

Convergence

2-5

1-4

3-6

6-7

(b)
Superposition

Pencil beam

Error (%Dmax)

Tumor

Lung

Tumor

Lung

Systematic

-0.3 ± 2

-1 ± 1

+5 ± 1

+6 ± 1

Convergence

2-5

2-7

3-6

2-5

(c)
Superposition

Pencil beam

Error (%Dmax)

Tumor

Lung

Tumor

Lung

Systematic

-0.1 ± 2

-3 ± 1

-3 ± 2

+2 ± 1

Convergence

3-6

1-3

3-4

1-3

terizing the phase space of particles used in Monte Carlo simulations, which are
typically of the order of 1% to 2%, superposition dose calculation in inverse
treatment planning might be sufficient for the current accuracy of dosimetry protocols and geometry modeling in Monte Carlo simulations. On the other hand,
the difference in speed between superposition and fast Monte Carlo dose computations is getting less, therefore, one might consider employing Monte Carlo
dose calculation to avoid potential problems with the accuracy (especially in difficult cases like head and neck, metal implants, etc.), which might be even more
severe when the actual beam delivery characteristics are taken into account.

VII. SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The uncertainty on the dose at a point in the patient is due to a combination
of largely independent sources of error including patient movement, fluctuations in machine output, uncertainty in the basic calibration of the reference
100

point in terms of dose, and, very significantly, uncertainties in the very complex
calculation which corrects the measured distribution in a water phantom for the
irregular patient skin surface and the inhomogeneities in the body; most notably
bone, air passages, cavities, and lung. The problem of the radiation transport
can be summarized as follows: photons scatter through the Compton process,
not just singly, but multiply, and the dose is actually delivered not by primary or
scattered photons, but by primary electrons which transport the energy away
from the point where they were generated; a 6 MeV electron will travel approximately 2.5 cm in water. Both of these phenomena are very difficult to deal with
analytically and a solution to only one of these transport problems is of limited
value for higher energy x-ray beams incident on low-density media.
The accuracy of a calculation is a complex function of the dose algorithm,
the number of beams, the site that is irradiated, the geometry that was used,
and the resolution of the dose calculation grid.
Although the currently implemented algorithms for inhomogeneity corrections often overestimate or underestimate the actual dose to the patient, they
still present the treatment planner with a better solution compared to not performing any inhomogeneity correction at all. 23,24,25,26,28,31 In other words, the
inherent estimations are often closer to the actual values than those calculations
with no inhomogeneity corrections. The 3D scatter integration algorithms, such
as convolution and superposition do account in first approximation for the photon scatter component, and some also can predict the change in dose where
electron disequilibrium exists. This requires that the primary scatter kernel,
representing electron transport, be used explicitly and independently of the
photon scatter kernels during the superposition procedures. As discussed in
section IV, Monte Carlo algorithms are now becoming more attractive in a clinical setting, since it only takes a few minutes (PEREGRINE, Macro-MC) to a
fraction of an hour to calculate the dose with complex geometries where both
the photon and the electron component of the dose are more correctly transported through the inhomogeneities.
Table 15 describes many of the current (August 2003) commercial treatment
planning systems and their photon algorithms. Please note that the table represents a sampling of treatment planning systems familiar to the Task Group
members and is not intended to be exhaustive. There is no implied value judgment on a particular system or algorithm if it has not been included in the table.
In terms of the dose calculation parameters, the resolution of the dose grid
becomes an important factor in evaluating the effect of the inhomogeneities.
When large voxel sizes are used in the computation, there is an interpolation
that reduces the accuracy of the calculation, especially in areas where dose
gradients are steep such as the penumbra, build-up region, and interfaces. This
is a special concern for IMRT, where very small pencil beams (≤ 5 mm) are
used for calculations and treatment. In this situation, the penumbra is much
more significant and grid size limitations can lead to erroneous distributions for
these very small pencil beams.
101

Table 15. Dose calculation algorithms of commercial
treatment planning systems.
Company

Product

Version

Algorithm

1.4.1.

• 3D Pencil Beam Based
Algorithm
• Equivalent Path Length

3D LINE
MEDICAL
SYSTEMS

DYNART/ERGO

BRAINLAB

BRAINSCAN (Stereo)

Computerised
Medical
Systems—CMS

FOCUS

2.4.0

• Clarkson (effective
pathlength)
• FFT convolution kernels
(not scaled but beam hardening taken into account)

Computerised
Medical
Systems—CMS

FOCUS

2.5.0
and later

Multigrid Superposition
(convolution kernels scaled
with density)

Computerised
Medical
Systems—CMS

XIO

3.2.1

FFT Convolution /
Superposition, Collapsed
Cone Convolution

ELEKTA

PrecisePLAN

1.1

TAR and 3D SAR
integration

FIXMA

DOSIGRAY

STRYKER—
LEIBINGER

RADIO
PACKAGE

Virtuoso: Pencil beam based
convolution algorithm with
inhomogeneity correction

LLNL

PEREGRINE
first release

3D Monte Carlo

MEDICALIBRATION

PC3D EXPERT
SYSTEM

Pencil Beam

MDS
NORDION

THERAPLAN
Plus

3.5

Equivalent TAR plus
electron transport

MDS
NORDION

HELAX-TMS

6.0

• pencil kernel with depth
scaling
• collapsed cone point
kernel with 3D scaling

MDS
NORDION

ONCENTRA OTP

1.0

• pencil kernel with depth
scaling
• collapsed cone point
kernel with 3D scaling

Pencil Beam algorithm

(continues)

102

Table 15. Continued.
Company

Product

Version
2.1

Algorithm

MEDTRONIC
SOFAMOR
DAINEK

ARTS 3D

ETAR (equivalent TAR)

MKS Inc

MKS 3D

• Differential SAR method
• Batho method

MULTIDATA

DSS+

PRISM (effective) path
length algorithm

NOMOS

CORVUS
PEREGRINE

1.0

1D ray trace

NUCLETRON

Plato RTS 3D

2.5.2

ETAR method (Yu and
Wong)

PHILIPS/
MARCONI

ACQPLAN 3D

PHILIPS

PINACLE3

6.2d

Adaptive collapsed cone
convolution / superposition

PRISM
MICROSYSTEMS

PRISM-TPS

PROWESS

PROWESS - 3D

• Effective Path Length
• Batho Power Law Method

RHAD

RHAD - 3D

ROCS

ROCS

5.0

• Equivalent path length
• TMR ratio

TECHNOLOGIE
DIFFUSION /
INSTITUTE
CURIE /
EUREKA

ISIS 3D

2.33

Clarkson—Cunningham,
3D Beam Substraction
Method

VARIAN

ECLIPSE

• Modified Batho power
law method
• ETAR

It has also been observed in clinical measurements that inhomogeneity corrections are less important for multiple beam arrangements. In addition, beam
energy has bearing as to complexity of the heterogeneity correction and as to
decision on treatment margins and even prescriptions. On the surface of this
issue, it is obvious that the lower the energy the larger the correction on central
axis to points far from interfaces where electron equilibrium exists. However,
103

the corrections are more complex and even contradictory depending on algorithm, as the energy increases. Therefore, the clinician should be made aware of
the constraints with high-energy beams and heterogeneity corrections when,
not only prescribing, but also when choosing energies. Some examples of where
energy and related heterogeneity correction considerations should mandate
using low-energy photon beams, include: larynx (due to additive underdosage
effects of missing tissue and air cavity; chest wall (due to the absence of breast
tissue and underlying lung); and coin lesions in the lung (due to the non-equilibrium condition).
The Task Group has the following recommendations:
• The Task Group recommends that heterogeneity corrections be applied to
treatment plans and dose prescriptions, with the provision that the algorithms used for the calculations are reviewed and tested384 by the medical
physicist. Discussions pertaining to the application of inhomogeneous calculations for specific clinical sites should be initiated with the clinicians,
so they can appreciate and anticipate the changes in the treatment plans.
While reviewing the algorithms, the medical physicist should seek answers
to some basic concepts, such as, “Is scatter corrected for in 1D, 2D, or
3D?” or, “Does the algorithm handle electron transport?” It is clear that
simple 1D algorithms are suitable in most clinical situations where interest
points are far from the heterogeneous media, but will most likely fail proximal to an interface. In the following clinical examples, we shall describe
the performance requirements for a dose algorithm.
• Head and Neck: For points of interest well beyond the mandible and air
cavities, even simplistic 1D equivalent path corrections are reasonable for
point dose estimates. However, for soft tissue regions that are within the
proximity of these heterogeneous structures, the superposition/convolution
or Monte Carlo algorithms may be considered. Another limitation comes
into play with the presence of high-Z implanted mandible wires. The user
should ensure that the algorithm properly accounts for the attributes of the
high atomic number or otherwise correct for the high-Z implant. Refer to
the TG 63 report48 for specific recommendations on how to implement
such procedures.
• Larynx: For points of interest well beyond the air-tissue interface (beyond
d max), even simplistic 1D equivalent path corrections are reasonable for
point dose estimates. However for ascertaining dosage at tumor-air interfaces and for accounting for disturbed scatter conditions, the superposition/convolution or Monte Carlo algorithms may be considered. The most
severe case is the location of the anterior commissure, which is located
anterior to the cavity and does not have enough tissue build-up upstream.
• Lung: For points of interest well beyond the lung even simplistic 1D
equivalent path corrections are reasonable for point dose estimates.
However for ascertaining dosage at tumor-lung interfaces and for accounting for disturbed scatter and equilibrium, the superposition/convolution or
104

Monte Carlo algorithms may be considered. The strongest test is to calculate accurately the peripheral dose of a tumor that is imbedded within
lung in the presence of small, high-energy fields. Loss of electron equilibrium within and adjacent to lung can result in a dose reduction along the
central axis and near the beam edge for megavoltage photon beams. In this
context, it is recommended to use photon beams of energy 12 MV or less
for non-small-cell lung cancer therapy.
• Breast: As the entire breast parenchyma is the planning target volume in
this case, the heterogeneity question is complex. As CT-based planning is
becoming an acceptable method of simulating and planning breast cancer
patients, more data are available to the planner, physicist, and physician to
ascertain the effects of the presence of lung below the chest wall (see
Butker et al.393). Though the calculated dose to most of the breast tissue is
not affected by the presence of the lung below the chest wall (typically
prescription points are anterior enough from the chest wall), the loss of
lateral photon scatter can be significant. Also, optimization of compensators (wedges, etc.) is affected by the presence of lung tissue as the
increased dose to the corners of the breast, lateral to the lung, but can be
somewhat predicted by simplistic 1D equivalent path cor rections.
However, the dose distribution to the chest wall itself is greatly affected by
the adjacent lung. Dosimetric improvement can be achieved if applying a
complex 3D plan utilizing multiple contours instead of simple contours
based on manual methods. Consequently, calculations to the chest wall
must be accurately calculated and therefore, the superposition/convolution
or Monte Carlo algorithms may be considered. The same recommendation
applies to post-mastectomy patients.
• Upper GI: The abdomen is a site relatively insensitive to the inclusion of
inhomogeneity corrections. Although it is tempting to suggest that one
need not be concerned with corrections for this site, one should remember
that the effects are highly dependent on the specific geometry. Transient
gas and barium are potential problems if observed on CT since they are
not stable and, therefore, corrections will not be representative of the
actual dose delivered to the patient. When barium contrast is used, the signal-enhanced volume can be contoured and its density can be overridden
(to unity) to remove any erroneous increased dose absorption due to the
high density of the contrast agent.
• Pelvis and Prostate: For points of interest well beyond the femoral heads,
even simplistic 1D equivalent path corrections are reasonable for point
dose estimates. The main limitation comes into play with the presence of
high-Z implanted hip prostheses. The user needs to evaluate whether the
algorithm properly accounts for the attributes of the high-atomic number.
For the most part, interface and lateral scattering issues are not a factor for
the pelvis region. See AAPM TG 6348 for a full description of issues
associated with high-Z hip prostheses.
105

In summary:
(1) The physicist needs to understand the algorithm(s) that are within the
treatment planning system and monitor unit calculation programs.
(2) The physicist is strongly advised to test the planning system to ascertain
if the system can predict the common trends listed at the end of section
V. The physicist may use some of the benchmark data presented in
Tables 10 through 12 or within the references directly. The data presented in Tables 10 through 12 are also to be used by vendors of treatment planning systems to test their algorithms. The Task Group
recommends that potential clients should ask a vendor for the results of
these calculations.
(3) The physicist is advised to measure benchmark data for his/her own
beam and compare with the calculated (planning system or hand calculations) data. If possible, the physicist may also use Monte Carlo calculations to support measured data.
(4) The physicist should understand the importance of the dose calculation
resolution grid. Its value is typically user selectable. As the resolution
decreases (e.g., 0.6 cm grid) the calculation gets faster but the effect of
the inhomogeneity is less resolved due to volumetric averaging. If the
dose needs to be accurately evaluated, especially in areas of steep dose
gradients and tissue interfaces, a high-resolution grid (e.g., 0.2 cm grid)
should be employed.
(5) The physicist should maintain an open dialogue with the clinician and
be clear on limitations of the planning system. If the clinician is comfortable with using corrections to dose prescriptions and dose distributions for inhomogeneities, then the following lear ning cur ve is
recommended. For each clinical site (e.g., left breast, right lung, larynx,
etc.), there should be 5 to 10 treatment plans generated, with and without inhomogeneity corrections. The dose prescription should be the
same for both cases. The plans should be compared, with differences
highlighted in absolute dose and dose coverage. This should also be
repeated if a new algorithm is implemented or a new release of software
is received.
(6) The physicist should keep abreast of new algorithm developments and, if
evaluating the purchase of a new treatment planning system, be thoroughly informed as to the accuracy and adequacy of its ability to deal
with tissue inhomogeneities. The vendors should provide clear documentation of the inhomogeneity correction methods implemented in
their systems. The vendors also should be strongly encouraged to provide algorithm in-services at their user’s meetings.
(7) Since physicists usually teach residents, tissue inhomogeneity effects on
the doses delivered at the main clinical sites should be carefully discussed in residents’ physics didactic lectures. Comparative plans, as

106

described in paragraph 5 above, are an important teaching tool and
physicists should advise residents to run them for themselves.
(8) The physicist should finally confirm that the method to calculate treatment time or monitor units, whether it is derived by the treatment planning software, or with an alternative method, is accurate to deliver the
planned absolute dose to the point of interest.

VIII. REFERENCES
1. B. Emami, J. Lyman, A. Brown, L. Coia, M. Goitein, F. W. Munzinrider, B.
Shank, L. J. Solin, and M. Wesson, “Tolerance of normal tissue to therapeutic
irradiation,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 21:109–122 (1991).
2. C. Burman, G. J. Kutcher, B. Emami, and M. Goitien, “Fitting of normal tissue
tolerance data to an analytic function,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.
21:123–135 (1991).
3. H. D. Thames and J. H. Hendry, Fractionation in Radiotherapy. (London: Taylor
& Francis) (1987).
4. K. Mah, J. Van Dyk, T. J. Keane, and P. Y. Poon, “Acute radiation induced pulmonary damage: a clinical study on the response to fractionated radiation therapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 13:179–188 (1987).
5. B. J. Mijnheer, J. J. Battermann, and A. Wambersie, “What degree of accuracy is
required and can be achieved in photon and neutron therapy?” Radiother. Oncol.
8:237–252 (1987).
6. M. K. Martel, R. K. Ten Haken, M. B. Hazuka, M. L. Kessler, M. Strawderman,
A. T. Turrisi, S. T. Lawrence, B. A. Fraass, and A. S. Lichter, “Estimation of
tumor control probability model parameters from 3-D dose distributions of nonsmall cell lung cancer patients,” Lung Cancer 24(1):31–37 (1999).
7. P. Mavroidis, B. K Lind, J. Van Dijk, K. Koedooder, W. De Neve, C. De Wagter,
B. Planskoy, J.-C. Rosenwald, B. Proimos, C. Kappas, C. Danciu, M. Benassi, G
Chierego and A. Brahme, “Comparison of conformal radiation therapy techniques within the dynamic radiotherapy project ‘DYNARAD’,” Phys. Med. Biol.
45:2459–2481 (2000).
8. A. Brahme, “Dosimetric precision requirements in radiation therapy,” Acta
Radiol. Oncol. 23:379–391 (1984).
9. P. Kallman, Optimization of Radiation Therapy Planning Using Physical and
Biological Objective Functions. Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Radiation Physics,
Stockholm University (1992).
10. P. Kallman, A. Ågren, and A. Brahme, “Tumour and normal tissue responses to
fractionated non-uniform dose delivery,” Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 62:249–62 (1992b).
11. P. Kallman, B. K. Lind, and A. Brahme, “An algorithm for maximizing the probability of complication-free tumour control in radiation therapy,” Phys. Med.
Biol. 37:871–90 (1992a).
12. A. Brahme, “Treatment optimization using physical and radiobiological objective
functions,” in Radiation Therapy Physics, A. Smith (ed.) (Berlin: Springer)
(1995).

107

13. D. F. Herring, and D. M. J. Compton, “The degree of precision required in the
radiation dose delivered in cancer radiotherapy,” Comput. Radiother. Br. J.
Radiol Special Report 5:51–58 (1971).
14. A-K. Ågren-Cronqvist, Quantification of the response of heterogeneous tumours
and organized normal tissues to fractionated radiotherapy, Ph.D. Thesis,
University of Stockholm (1995).
15. J. C. Kim, D. Elkin, and F. R. Hendrickson, “Carcinoma of the vocal cord: results
of treatment and time-dose relationships,” Cancer 42:1114 (1978).
16. A. Dau and J. Denekamp, “Superfractionation as a potential hypoxic cell
radiosensitizer: prediction of an optimum dose per fraction,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol. Biol. Phys. 43:1083–94 (1999).
17. J. Overgaard and H. Bartelink, “About tolerance and quality. An important notice
to all radiation oncologists,” Radiother. Oncol. 35:1–3 (1995).
18. S. Dische, M. I. Saunders, C. Williams, A. Hopkins, and E. Aird, “Precision in
reporting the dose given in a course of radiotherapy,” Radiother. Oncol.
29:287–93 (1993).
19. A. L. Boyer and T. Schultheiss, “Effects of dosimetric and clinical uncertainty on
complication-free local tumor control,” Radiother. Oncol. 11:65–71 (1988).
20. A. Dutreix, “When and how can we improve precision in radiotherapy?”
Radiother. Oncol. 2:275–292 (1984).
21. J. G. Stewart and A. W. Jackson, “The steepness of the dose response curve both
for tumor curve and normal tissue injury,” Laryngoscope 85:1107–1111 (1975).
22. S. M. Bentzen, “Radiobiological considerations in the design of clinical trials,”
Radiother. Oncol. 32:1–11 (1994).
23. K. Mah and J. Van Dyk, “On the impact of tissue inhomogeneity corrections in
clinical thoracic radiation therapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.
21:1257–1267 (1991).
24. C. G. Orton, S. Chungbin, E. E. Klein, M. T. Gillin, T. E. Schultheiss, and W. T.
Sause, “Study of lung density corrections in a clinical trial (RTOG 88-08),” Int.
J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 41(4):787–794 (1998).
25. A. Van’t Riet, H. C. Stam, A. C. A. Mak, and F. H. S. van Slooten, “Implications
of lung corrections for dose specification in radiotherapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.
Biol. Phys. 11:621–625 (1985).
26. W. G. McKenna, K. Yeakel, A. Klink, B. A. Fraass, J. van de Geijn, E. Glatstien,
and A. Lichter, “Is correction for lung density in radiotherapy treatment planning
necessary?” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 13:273–278 (1987).
27. H. J. van Kleffens and B. J. Mijnheer, “Determination of the Accuracy of the
Tissue Inhomogeneity Correction in Some Computer Planning Systems for
Megavoltage Photon Beams,” in Proceedings of the 8th International Conference
on the Use of Computers in Radiation Therapy. Toronto, Canada, (Silver Spring,
MD: Computer Society Press IEEE), pp. 45–49 (1984).
28. C. G. Orton, P. M. Mondalek, J. T. Spicka, D. S. Herron, L. I. Andres, “Lung corrections in photon beam treatment planning: are we ready?” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.
Biol. Phys. 10(12):2191–9 (1984).
29. Radiation Therapy Oncology Group, “A Phase III Study of Radiation Therapy
Alone or in Combination with Chemotherapy for Patients with Non-Small Cell
Lung Cancer,” RTOG 88-08 (Revision 1991).

108

30. M. L. Graham, B. Emami, and J. A. Purdy, “A phase I/II dose escalation study
using three dimensional conformal radiation therapy in patients with inoperable,
non-small cell lung cancer,” Radiation Therapy Oncology Group RTOG 93–11
(1999).
31. N. Papanikolaou, E. E. Klein, and W. R. Hendee, “Heterogeneity corrections
should be used in treatment planning for lung cancer?” Med. Phys. 27 (8),
1702–1704 (2000), Editorial
32. M. J. P. Brugmans, A. van der Horst, J. V. Lebesque, and B. J. Mijnheer, “Beam
intensity modulation to reduce the field size for conformal irradiation of lung
tumors: a dosimetric study,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 43:893–904
(1999).
33. K. E. Ekstrand and W. H. Barnes, “Pitfalls in the use of high energy x-rays to
treat tumors in the lung,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 18:249–252 (1990).
34. P. W. Hoban, P. J. Keal, and W. H. Round, “The effect of density on the 10MV
photon beam penumbra,” Australas. Phys. Eng. Sci. Med. 15(3):113–23 (1992).
35. R. O. Kornelsen and M. E. Young, “Changes in the dose-profile of a 10 MV x-ray
beam within and beyond low density material,” Med. Phys. 9:114–116 (1982).
36. T. Knoos, A. Ahnesjo, P. Nilsson, and L. Weber, “Limitations of a pencil beam
approach to photon dose calculations in lung tissue,” Phys. Med. Biol.
40:1411–20 (1995).
37. M. A. Hunt, G. E. Desobry, B. Fowble, and L. R. Coia, “Effect of low-density lateral interfaces on soft-tissue doses,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.
37:475–482 (1997).
38. R. Mohan, Q. Wu, X. Wang, and J. Stein, “Intensity modulation optimization, lateral transport of radiation, and margins,” Med. Phys. 23:2011–2021 (1996).
39. M. L. Graham, J. W. Matthews, W. B. Harms, B. Emami, H. S. Glazer, and J. A.
Purdy, “Three-dimensional radiation treatment planning study for patients with
carcinoma of the lung,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 29:1105–1117 (1994).
40. ICRU Report No. 24, “Determination of Absorbed Dose in a Patient Irradiated by
Beams of X or Gamma Rays in Radiotherapy Procedures,” (Washington, DC:
International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements) (1976).
41. H. Svensson, “Quality assurance in radiation therapy: physical aspects,” Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 10:59–65 (1984).
42. K. A. Johansson, Studies of Different Methods of absorbed Dose Determination
and a Dosimetric Intercomparison at the Nordic Radiotherapy Centers, Thesis,
University of Gothenberg, Sweden (1982).
43. A. Brahme et al, “Accuracy requirement and quality assurance of external beam
therapy with photons and electrons,” Acta Radiol. Oncol. Suppl.1 (1988).
44. IAEA, Absorbed Dose Determination in Photon and electron Beams. An
International Code of Practice, IAEA Technical Report Series No. 277 (Vienna:
International Atomic Energy Agency) (1987).
45. J. Venselaar, H. Welleweerd, and B. Mijnheer, “Tolerances for the accuracy of
photon beam dose calculations of treatment planning systems,” Radiother. Oncol.
60:191–201 (2001).
46. J. Van Dyk, R. B. Barnett, J. E. Cygler, P. C. Shragge, “Commissioning and quality assurance of treatment planning computers,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.
26:261–73 (1993).

109

47. P. Andreo, “Uncertainties in dosimetric data and beam calibration,” Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 19:1233–47 (1990).
48. R. Alecu, C. Reft, I. J. Das, B. J. Gerbi, P. Keall, E. Lief, B. J. Mijnheer, N.
Papanikolaou, C. Sibata, and J. Van Dyk, “Dosimetric considerations for patients
with hip prostheses undergoing pelvic irradiation,” Report of the AAPM
Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 63, Med. Phys. 30(6):1162–1182
(2003).
49. H. E. Johns and J. R. Cunningham, The Physics of Radiology, (Springfield, IL:
C.C. Thomas) (1983).
50. R. Mohan, C.-S. Chui, and L. Lidofsky, “Energy and angular distributions of
photons from medical linear accelerators,” Med. Phys. 12:592–596 (1985).
51. R. Mohan, “Monte Carlo Simulation of Radiation Treatment Machine Heads,” in
Monte Carlo Transport of Electrons and Photons,” T. M. Jenkins, W. R. Nelson,
A. Rindi (eds.), (New York: Plenum Press), pp. 453–468 (1988).
52. D. W. O. Rogers, B. A. Faddegon, G. X. Ding, C.-M. Ma, J. We, and T. R.
Mackie, “BEAM - A Monte Carlo code to simulate radiotherapy treatment units,”
Med. Phys. 22:503–524 (1995).
53. F. A. Attix, Introduction to Radiological Physics and Radiation Dosimetry,
(New York: Wiley) (1986).
54. D. W. O. Rogers, “Fluence to dose equivalent conversion factors calculated with
EGS3 for electrons from 100 keV to 20 GeV and photons from 11 keV to 20
GeV,” Health Phys. 46:891–914 (1984).
55. A. Ahnesjo, P. Andreo, and A. Brahme, “Calculation and application of point
spread functions for treatment planning with high energy photon beams”, Acta
Oncologica 26:49–56 (1987).
56. N. Papanikolaou and T. R. Mackie, “Extension of the convolution/superposition
based algorithms to include atomic number effects,” Med. Phys. 22:977 (1995).
57. J. McLellan, L. Papiez, G. A. Sandison, W. Huda, and P. Therrien, “A numerical
method for electron transport calculations”, Phys. Med. Biol. 37:1109–25 (1992).
58. G. Starkschall, A. A. Shiu, S. W. Bujnowski, L. L. Wang, D. A. Low, and K. R.
Hogstrom, “Effect of dimensionality of heterogeneity corrections on the implementation of a three-dimensional electron pencil-beam algorithm,” Phys. Med.
Biol. 36(2):207–227 (1991).
59. I. Kawrakow, M. Fippel, and K. Friedrich, “3D electron dose calculation using a
voxel based monte carlo algorithm,” Med. Phys. 23:445–457 (1996).
60. I. Kawrakow, “Accurate condensed history Monte Carlo simulation of electron
transport. I. EGSnrc, the new EGS4 version,” Med. Phys. 27:485–98 (2000).
61. M. K. Woo, D. Scora, and E. Webb, “The regional Monte Carlo method: a dose
calculation method based on accuracy requirement,” Med. Phys. 25:1866–1871
(1998).
62. I. Kawrakow, “Accurate condensed history Monte Carlo simulation of electron
transport. II. Application to ion chamber response simulations,” Med. Phys.
27:499–513 (2000).
63. I. Kawrakow, “VMC++, Electron and Photon Monte Carlo Calculations
Optimized for Radiation Treatment Planning,” in Advanced Monte Carlo for
Radiation Physics, Particle Transport Simulation and Applications: Proc.
Monte Carlo 2000 Meeting Lisbon, A. Kling, F. Barao, M. Nakagawa, L. Tavora,
and P. Vaz (eds.), (Berlin: Springer), pp. 229–236 (2001).

110

64. H. Neuenschwander, T. R. Mackie, and P. Reckwerdt, “MMC-a high-performance
Monte Carlo code for electron beam treatment planning,” Phys. Med. Biol.
40(4):543–74 (1995).
65. M. Fippel, I. Kawrakow, K. Friedrich, “Electron beam dose calculations with the
VMC algorithm and the verification data of the NCI working group,” Phys. Med.
Biol. 42:501–20 (1997).
66. C. Manfredotti, U. Nastasi, R. Marchisio, C. Ongaro, G. Gervino, R. Ragona, S.
Anglesio and G. Sannazzari, “Monte Carlo simulation of dose distribution in
electron beam radiotherapy treatment planning,” Nucl. Instrum. Methods
A291:646–54 (1990).
57. P. Keall and P. Hoban, “A review of electron beam dose calculation algorithms,”
Australas. Phys. Eng. Sci. Med. 19:111–30 (1996).
68. G. A. Carlsson, “Absorbed dose equations. on the derivation of a general
absorbed dose equation and equations valid for different kinds, of radiation equilibrium,” Radiat. Res. 85:219–237 (1981).
69. A. Dutreix and A. Bridier, “Dosimetry for External Beams of Photon and
Electron Radiation” (Chapter 3) in The Dosimetry of Ionizing Radiation,”
Kenneth R. Kase, Bengt Björngard, and Frank Attix (eds.), (San Diego:
Academic Press Inc., Harcourt Brace Jovanovitch) V.1, pp. 163–228 (1985).
70. W. M. C. Roesch, “Dose for non electronic equilibrium conditions,” Radiat. Res.
9:399–410 (1958).
71. R. Loevinger, “A formalism for calculation of absorbed dose to a medium from
photon and electron beams,” Med. Phys. 8:1–12 (1981).
72. T. R. Mackie, A. F. Bielajew, D. W. Rogers, and J. J. Battista, “Generation of
photon energy deposition kernels using the EGS Monte Carlo code,” Phys. Med.
Biol. 33:1–20 (1988).
73. H. E. Johns, E. K. Darby, R. N. Haslam, L. Katz, and E. L. Harrington, “Depth
dose data and isodose distributions for radiation from a 22 MeV betatron,” Am.
J. Roentgenol. 62:257–68 (1949).
74. J. Dutreix, A. Dutreix, and M. Tubiana, “Electronic equilibrium and transition
stages.” Phys. Med. Biol. 10:177–190 (1965).
75. J. Dutreix and M. Bernard, “Dosimetry at interfaces for high energy X and
gamma rays,” Br. J. Radiol. 39:205–210 (1966).
76. A. A. Mustafa and D. F. Jackson, “The relationship between x-ray CT numbers
and charged particle stopping powers and its significance in radiotherapy treatment planning,” Phys. Med. Biol. 28:169–76 (1983).
77. E. C. McCullough and A. M. Krueger, “Performance evaluation of computerized
treatment planning systems for radiotherapy: external photon beams,” Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 6:1599–1605 (1980).
78. R. P. Parker, P. A. Hobday, and K. J. Cassell, “The direct use of CT numbers in
radiotherapy dosage calculations for inhomogeneous media,” Phys. Med. Biol.
24:802–809 (1979).
79. J. J. Battista, M. J. Bronskill, “Compton scatter imaging of transverse sections: an
overall appraisal and evaluation for radiotherapy planning,” Phys. Med. Biol.
26:81–99 (1981).
80. U. Fano, “Note on the Bragg-Gray cavity principle for measuring energy dissipation,” Radiat. Res. 1:237–40 (1954).

111

81. A. Ahnesjo, M.-M. Aspradakis, “Dose calculations for external photon beams in
radiotherapy” (Topical Review), Phys. Med. Biol. 44(11):99–155 (1999).
82. D. Harder, “Fano’s theorem and the multiple scattering correction,” Fourth
Symposium On Microdosimetry (Verbania –Pallanza, Italy) J. Booz, H. G. Ebert,
R. Eickel, and A. Waker (eds.) (Luxembourg: Commission of the European
Communities), pp. 677–93 (1974).
83. M. Nilsson and T Knoos, “Application of the Fano theorem in inhomogeneous
media using a convolution algorithm,” Phys. Med. Biol. 37:69–83 (1992).
84. J. E. O’Connor, “The variation of scattered x-rays with density in an irradiated
body,” Phys. Med. Biol. 1:352–69 (1957).
85. P. J. Gullane, “Primary mandibular reconstruction: analysis of 64 cases and evaluation of interface radiation dosimetry on bridging plates,” Laryngoscope
101:1–24 (1991).
86. B. E. Bjarngard, “On Fano’s and O’Connor’s theorems,” Radiat. Res. 109:184–9
(1987).
87. M. B. Sharpe, A Unified Approach of Calculating the Dose Rate and Dose
Distribution for Therapeutic X-Ray Beams,” Ph.D. Thesis. University of Western
Ontario, London, ON Canada.
88. ICRU Report No. 50, “Prescribing, Recording and Reporting Photon Beam
Therapy,” (Washington, DC: International Commission on Radiation Units and
measurements) (1994).
89. C. X. Yu, J. W. Wong, and J. A. Purdy, “Photon dose perturbations due to small
inhomogeneities,” Med. Phys. 14:78–83 (1987).
90. B. L. Werner, I. J. Das, F. M. Khan, and A. S. Meigooni, “Dose perturbations at
interfaces in photon beams,” Med. Phys. 14:585–595 (1987).
91. B. L. Werner, I. J. Das, and W. N. Salk, “Dose perturbations at interfaces in photon beams: secondary electron transport,” Med. Phys. 17:212–226 (1990).
92. K. M. Stenson, J. M. Balter, J. H. Campbell, and C. R. Carroll, “Effects of
implantable biomaterials on radiation dosimetry,” Head and Neck 19:384–390
(1997).
93. M. Tatcher, A. Kuten, J. Helman, and D. Laufer, “Perturbation of cobalt 60 radiation doses by metal objects implanted during oral and maxillofacial surgery,” J.
Oral. Maxillofac. Surg. 42(2):108–10 (1984).
94. M. K. Woo, J. R. Cunningham, and J. J. Jeziorenski, “Extending the concept of
primary and scatter separation to the condition of electronic disequilibrium,”
Med. Phys. 17:588–595 (1990).
95. D. A. Jaffray, J. J. Battista, A. Fenster, and P. Munro, “X-ray sources of medical
linear accelerators: focal and extra-focal radiation,” Med. Phys. 20:1417–27
(1993).
96. M. B. Sharpe, D. A. Jaffray, J. J. Battista, P. Munro, “Extrafocal radiation: a unified approach to the prediction of beam penumbra and output factors for megavoltage x-ray beams,” Med. Phys. 22:2065–2074 (1995).
97. A. Ahnesjo, “Analytic modeling of photon scatter from flattening filters in photon
therapy beams,” Med. Phys. 21:1227–35 (1994).
98. A. Dutreix, B. E. Bjarngard, A. Bridier, B. Mijnheer, J. E. Shaw, and H.
Svensson, “Monitor Unit Calculation For High Energy Photon Beams,” in Physics
for Clinical Radiotherapy Booklet No. 3, European Society for Therapeutic
Radiology and Oncology (ESTRO), ed. Garant Publishers N.V. (1997).

112

99. B. E. Bjarngard and P. L. Petti, “Description of the scatter component in photonbeam data,” Phys. Med. Biol. 33:21–32 (1988).
100. M. K. Woo and J. R. Cunningham, “The validity of the density scaling method in
primary electron transpor t for photon and electron beams,” Med. Phys.
17:187–194 (1990).
101. R. Mohan and C.-S. Chui, “Validity of the concept of separating primary and
scatter dose,” Med. Phys. 12:726–30 (1985).
102. B. E. Bjarngard and J. R. Cunningham, “Comments on ‘Validity of the concept
of separating primary and scatter dose’ (letter),” Med. Phys. 13:760–1 (1986).
103. J. C. Cunningham, “Scatter-air ratios,” Phys. Med. Biol. 17:42-51 (1972).
104. A. Ahnesjo, “Cone Discretization for the Collapsed Cone Algorithm,” in
International Conference on the Use of Computers in Radiation Therapy, XII
ICCR, Salt Lake City, Utah, D. D. Leavitt and G. Starkschall (eds.) (Madison,
WI, Medical Physics Publishing) pp. 114–16 (1997).
105. A. Ahnesjo, “Collimator scatter in photon therapy beams,” Med. Phys.
22:267–78 (1995).
106. A. Ahnesjo, “Collapsed cone convolution of radiant energy for photon dose calculation in heterogeneous media,” Med. Phys. 16:577–92 (1989).
107. T. R. Mackie, J. W. Scrimger, and J. J. Battista, “A convolution method of calculating dose for 15-MV x rays,” Med. Phys. 12:188–196 (1985).
108. R. Mohan, C.-S. Chui, and L. Lidofsky, “Differential pencil beam dose computation model for photons,” Med. Phys. 13:64–73 (1986).
109. M. R. Sontag, Photon Bea m Dose Calculations in Regions of Tissue
Heterogeneity Using Computed Tomography, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON Canada (1979).
110. J. J. Battista, M. B. Sharpe, “True three-dimensional dose computations for
megavoltage x-ray therapy: a role for the superposition principle,” Australas.
Phys. Eng. Sci. Med. 15:159–78 (1992).
111. G. C. Field and J. J. Battista, “Photon Dose Calculations Using Convolution in
Real and Fourier Space: Assumptions and Time Estimates,” Proceedings of the
9th International Conference on Computers in Radiation Therapy, (New York,
Elsevier) pp. 103–106 (1987).
112. J. R. Cunningham and L. Beaudoin, “Calculations for tissue inhomogeneities with
experimental verification,” Proceedings of the XIII International Congress of
Radiology, Madrid, pp. 653–7 (1973).
113. J. E. O’Connor and D. E. Malone, “A cobalt-60 primary dose spread array
derived from measurements,” Phys. Med. Biol. 34:1029–42 (1989).
114. A. L. Boyer and E. C. Mok, “A photon dose distribution model employing convolution calculations,” Med. Phys. 12:169–177 (1985).
115. J. W. Wong, R. M. Henkelman, A. Fenster, and H. E. Johns, “Second scatter contribution to dose in a cobalt-60 beam,” Med. Phys. 8:755–782 (1981).
116. J. W. Wong and R. M. Henkelman, “A new approach to CT pixel-based photon
dose calculations in heterogeneous media,” Med. Phys. 10:199–208 (1983).
117. J. Van Dyk, R. B. Barnett, and J. Battista, “Computerized Radiation Treatment
Planning Systems” in The Modern Technology of Radiation Oncology: A
Compendium for Medical Physicists and Radiation Oncologists, J. Van Dyk
(editor), (Madison, WI: Medical Physics Publishing) pp. 231–286 (1999).

113

118. J. R. Cunningham and J. J. Battista, “Calculation of dose distributions for x ray
radiotherapy,” Physics in Canada 41:190–195 (1995).
119. N. Papanikolaou and T. R. Mackie, “A new convolution approach for the generation of polyenergetic photon beam dose distributions,” Med. Phys. 19 (1992).
120. J. J. Battista, M. B. Sharpe, E. Webb and J. Van Dyk, “A New Classification
Scheme for Photon Beam Dose Algorithms,” in International Conference on the
Use of Computers in Radiation Therapy, XII ICCR, Salt Lake City, Utah, D. D.
Leavitt and G. Starkschall (eds.) (Madison, WI, Medical Physics Publishing) pp.
39–42 (1997).
121. M.-M. Aspradakis, and A. T. Redpath, “A technique for the fast calculation of
three-dimensional photon dose distributions using the superposition model,”
Phys. Med. Biol. 42:1475–89 (1997).
122. M. R. Sontag and S. K. Ray, “Determination of differential scatter-air ratios
(dSAR) for three-dimensional scatter integration,” Med. Phys. 22:775–80 (1995).
123. J. W. Wong and R. M. Henkelman, J. W. Andrew, J. Van Dyk, H. E. Johns,
“Effect of small inhomogeneities on dose in a cobalt-60 beam,” Med. Phys.,
8:783-791 (1981).
124. A. L. Boyer, “Shortening the calculation time of photon dose distributions in an
inhomogeneous medium,” Med. Phys. 11:552–554 (1984).
125. A. L. Boyer and E. C. Mok, “Calculation of photon dose distributions in an inhomogeneous medium using convolutions,” Med. Phys. 13:503–509 (1986).
126. A. Ahnesjo and P. Andreo, “Determination of effective bremsstrahlung spectra
and electron contamination for photon dose calculations,” Phys. Med. Biol.
34:1451–64 (1989).
127. A. Ahnesjo, M. Saxner, and A. Trepp, “A pencil beam model for photon dose calculation,” Med. Phys. 19:263–273 (1992).
128. M. Saxner and A. Ahnesjo, “Implementation of the collapsed cone method for
clinical beam qualities,” Med. Phys. 25, part 1, A185, (1998).
129. A. Ahnesjo and A. Trepp, “Acquisition of the effective lateral energy fluence distribution for photon beam dose calculations by convolution models,” Phys. Med.
Biol. 36:973–85 (1991).
130. R. Mohan and C.-S. Chui, “Use of fast Fourier transforms in calculating dose distributions for irregularly shaped fields for three dimensional treatment planning,”
Med. Phys. 14:70–77 (1987).
131. N. Papanikolaou and T. R. Mackie, “Generation of photon convolution kernels
using a Monte Carlo code for use in radiotherapy treatment planning and cavity
theory,” Med. Phys. 20 (1993).
132. J. D. Bourland and E. L.Chaney, “A finite-size pencil beam model for photon
dose calculations in three dimensions,” Med. Phys. 19:1401–1412 (1992).
133. M. B. Sharpe and J. J. Battista, “Dose calculations using convolution and superposition principles: the orientation of dose spread kernels in divergent x-ray
beams,” Med. Phys. 20:1685–1694 (1993).
134. A. L. Boyer, Y. P. Zhu, L. Wang, and P. Francois, “Fast Fourier transform convolution calculations of x-ray isodose distributions in homogeneous media,” Med.
Phys. 16:248–253 (1989).
135. B. Lind, Radiation Therapy Planning and Optimization Studies as Inverse
Problems, Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Radiation Physics, Stockholm Univeristy
(1991).

114

136. T. R. Mackie, P. Reckwerdt, T. McNutt, M. Gehring, and C. Sanders, “Photon
Beam Dose Computations,” in T.R. Mackie, J.R. Palta (editors). Teletherapy:
Present and Future. (Madison, WI:Advanced Medical Publishing) pp. 103–135
(1996).
137. Photon Treatment Planning Collaborative Working Group, M. Goitein, J.
Laughlin, J. Purdy, M. R. Sontag, “Evaluation of high energy photon external
beam treatment planning: project summary,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.
21:3–8 (1991).
138. Photon Treatment Planning Collaborative Working Group, M. Goitein, J.
Laughlin, J. Purdy, and M. R. Sontag, “Three-dimensional dose calculations for
radiation treatment planning,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 21:25–36
(1991).
139. Photon Treatment Planning Collaborative Working Group, M. Goitein, J.
Laughlin, J. Purdy, and M. R. Sontag, “Role of inhomogeneity corrections in
three-dimensional photon treatment planning,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.
21:59–69 (1991).
140. Photon Treatment Planning Collaborative Working Group, M. Goitein, J.
Laughlin, J. Purdy, and M. R. Sontag, “The clinical three-dimensional treatment
planning studies: A prologue,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 21:165–167
(1991).
141. G. J. Kutcher, Z. Fuks, H. Brenner, A. P. Brown, C. Burman, E. Cheng, L. Coia,
K. Krippner, J. M. Manolis, R. Mohan, J. R. Simpson, M. Urie, B. Vikram, and
R. Wallace, “Three-dimensional photon treatment planning for carcinoma of the
nasopharynx,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 21:169–182 (1991).
142. J. R. Cunningham, “Tissue inhomogeneity corrections in photon beam treatment
planning,” in Progress in Medical Radiation Physics, Vol 1., C. G. Orton (ed.)
pp. 103–131 (1982).
143. J. A. Purdy and S. C. Prasad, “Current Methods and Algorithms in Radiation
Absorbed Dose Calculation and the Role of Computed Tomography: A Review”
in Computed Tomography in Radiation Therapy,” C. C. Ling, C. C. Rogers, and
R. J. Morton (eds.) (New York: Raven Press) pp. 187–97 (1983).
144. R. Mohan, C.-S. Chui, D. Miller, and J. S. Laughlin, “Use of Computerized
Tomography in Dose Calculations for Radiation Treatment Planning, CT,” J.
Comput. Tomogr. 5(3):273–282 (1981).
145. J. A. Purdy, J. W. Wong, W. B. Harms, B. Emami, and J. W. Matthews, “State of
the art of high energy photon treatment planning,” Front. Radiat. Ther. Oncol.
21:4–24 (1987).
146. J. W. Wong and J. A. Purdy, “On methods of inhomogeneity corrections for photon transport,” [Review]. Med. Phys. 17:807–814 (1990).
147. J. W. Wong and J. A. Purdy, “Review of Methods of Inhomogeneity Corrections.”
in Advances in Radiation Oncology Physics: Dosimetry, Treatment Planning
and Brachytherapy (New York: American Institute of Physics) pp. 887–99
(1992).
148. P. Bloch and M. D. Altschuler, “Three-Dimensional Photon Beam Calculations,”
in Radiation Therapy Physics, A. Smith (ed.) (Berlin: Springer) (1995).
149. J. Van Dyk, “Lung dose calculations using computerized tomography: Is there a
need for pixel based procedures?” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 9:1035–1041
(1983).

115

150. J. R. Cunningham, “Current and future Development of Tissue Inhomogeneity
Corrections for Photon Beam Clinical Dosimetry with the Use of CT,” in
Computed Tomography in Radiation Therapy,” C. C. Ling, C. C. Rogers, and R.
J. Morton (eds.) (New York: Raven Press) pp. 209–18 (1983).
151. R. L. Siddon, “Fast calculation of the exact radiological path for a three-dimensional CT array,” Med. Phys. 12:252–255 (1985).
152. M. R. Sontag and J. R. Cunningham, “Clinical application of a CT based treatment planning system,” Comput. Tomogr. 2:117–30 (1978a).
153. M. R. Sontag, J. J. Battista, M. J. Bronskill, and J. R. Cunningham, “Implications
of computed tomography for inhomogeneity corrections in photon beam dose calculations,” Radiology 124:143–149 (1977).
154. P. W. Henson and R. A. Fox, “The electron density of bone for inhomogeneity
correction in radiotherapy planning using CT numbers,” Phys. Med. Biol.
29:351–359 (1984).
155. J.J. Battista, J. Van Dyk, and W.D. Rider, “Computed tomography for radiotherapy planning,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 6:99–107 (1980).
156. P. K. Kijewski and B. E. Bjarngard, “The use of computer tomography data for
radiotherapy dose calculations,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 4:429–435
(1978).
157. H. Dahlin, I.-L. Lamm, T. Landberg, S. Levernes, and N. Ulsø, “User requirements on CT-based computed dose planning systems in radiation therapy,” Acta
Radiol. Oncol. 22:398–414 (1983).
158. G. D. Fullerton, W. Sewchand, J. T. Payne, S. H. Levitt, “CT determination of
parameters for inhomogeneity corrections in radiation therapy of the esophagus,”
Radiology 126:167–171 (1978).
159. E. Glatstein, A. S. Lichter, B. A. Fraass, B. A. Kelly, and J. van de Geijn, “The
imaging revolution and radiation oncology: use of CT, ultrasound, and NMR for
localization treatment planning and treatment delivery,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.
Biol. Phys. 11:299–314 (1985).
160. R. L. Siddon, “Calculation of the radiological depth,” Med. Phys. 12:84–87
(1985).
161. J. Van Dyk, T. J. Keane, and W. D. Rider, “Lung density as measured by computerized tomography: implications for radiotherapy,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol.
Phys. 8:1363–72 (1982).
162. M. D. Altschuler, M. R. Sontag, and P. Bloch, “Three-dimensional dose calculations for photon beam therapy,” Med. Phys. 10:529 (1983).
163. M. Tatcher and S. Palti, “Evaluation of density correction algorithms for photonbeam dose calculations,” Radiology 141:201–205 (1981).
164. R. P. Parker, L. Contier de Freitas, K. J. Cassell, S. Webb, and P. A. Hobday, “A
method of implementing inhomogeneity corrections in radiotherapy treatment
planning: Comparison with experiment and Monte Carlo calculations,” J. Eur.
Radiother. 1(2):93–100 (1980).
165. M. Goitein and M. Abrams, “Multi-dimensional treatment planning: II. Beam’s
eye-view, back projection, and projection through CT sections,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol. Biol. Phys. 9:789–797 (1983).
166. E. C. McCullough and T. W. Holmes, “Acceptance testing computerized radiation
therapy treatment planning systems: Direct utilization of CT scan data,” Med.
Phys. 12:237–242 (1985).

116

167. M. R. Sontag and J. R. Cunningham, “Corrections to absorbed dose calculations
for tissue inhomogeneities”, Med. Phys. 4:431–436 (1977).
168. H. F. Batho, “Lung corrections in cobalt 60 beam therapy,” J. Can. Assoc.
Radiol. 15:79–83 (1964).
169. M. E. Young and J. D. Gaylord, “Experimental tests of corrections for tissue inhomogeneities in radiotherapy,” Br. J. Radiol. 43(509):349–55 (1970).
170. S. Webb and R. A. Fox, “Verification by Monte Carlo methods of a power law tissue-air ratio algorithm for inhomogeneity corrections in photon beam dose calculations,” Phys. Med. Biol. 25:225–40 (1980).
171. R. L. Siddon, “Generalised Batho correction factor (radiotherapy dosimetry),”
Phys. Med. Biol. 29:1575–1579 (1984).
172. K. J. Cassell, P. A. Hobday, and R. P. Parker, “The implementation of a generalized Batho inhomogeneity correction for radiotherapy planning with direct use of
CT numbers,” Phys. Med. Biol. 26:825–33 (1981).
173. E. El-Khatib and J. J. Battista, “Improved lung dose calculation using tissue-maximum ratios in the Batho correction,” Med. Phys. 11:279–86 (1984).
174. K. Kappas and J.-C. Rosenwald, “Calcul des doses en radiotherapie en presence
d’heterogeneites de petites dimensions,” J. Eur. Radiother. 6(1):35–45 (1985).
175. S. J. Thomas, “A modified power-law formula for inhomogeneity corrections in
beams of high-energy x-rays,” Med. Phys. 18:719–23 (1991).
176. S. Chungbin, M. Gillin, and E. E. Klein, “Heterogeneity correction evaluation for
RTOG Protocol 88-08,” Med. Phys. 21:923 (1994).
177. M. R. Arnfield, C. Hartmann Siantar, J. Siebers, P. Garmon, L. Cox, and R.
Mohan, “The impact of electron transport on the accuracy of computed dose,”
Med. Phys. 27:1266–1274 (2000).
178. J. Van Dyk, J. J. Battista, and W. D. Rider, “Half body radiotherapy: The use of
computed tomography to determine the dose to the lung,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.
Biol. Phys. 6:463–470 (1980).
179. J. Van Dyk, T. J. Keane, S. Kan, W. D. Rider, C. J. Fryer, “Radiation pneumonitis
following large single dose irradiation: a re-evaluation based on absolute dose to
lung,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 7(4):461–7 (1981).
180. K. Yuen and R. O. Kornelsen, “Practical application of the differential Batho
method for inhomogeneity correction on kerma in a photon beam,” Med. Phys.
15:74–77 (1988).
181. J. W. Wong and R. M. Henkelman, “Reconsideration of the power-law (Batho)
equation for inhomogeneity corrections,” Med. Phys. 9:521–30 (1982).
182. C. Kappas and J.-C. Rosenwald, “Quality control of inhomogeneity correction
algorithms used in treatment planning systems,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.
32:847–858 (1995).
183. K. Kappas and J.-C. Rosenwald, “A 3-D beam subtraction method for inhomogeneity correction in high energy X-ray radiotherapy,” Radiother. Oncol.
5:223–233 (1986).
184. L. M. Chin, C. W. Cheng, R. L. Siddon, R. K. Rice, B. J. Mijnheer, and J. R.
Harris, “Three-dimensional photon dose distribution with and without lung corrections for tangential breast intact treatments,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.
17:1327–1335 (1991).

117

185. F. C. P. du Plessis, C. A. Willemse, M. G. Lötter, and L. Goedhals, “Comparison
of the Batho, ETAR and Monte Carlo dose calculation methods in CT based
patient models,” Med. Phys. 28:582–589 (2001).
186. A. Iwasaki, “A method of taking into account the inhomogeneity backscatter contribution to the Batho correction factor,” Scientific Note. Phys. Med. Biol.
31(8):923–926 (1986).
187. B. H. Shahine, M. S. A. L. Al-Ghazi, E. El-Khatib, “Experimental evaluation of
interface doses in the presence of air cavities compared with treatment planning
algorithms,” Med. Phys. 26:350–355 (1999).
188. D. S. Shimm, K. P. Doppke, J. C. K. Leong, E. Gregory, and D. E. Dosoretz,
“Variation in the lung inhomogeneity correction factor with beam energy,” Acta
Radiol. Oncol. 24(5):407–410 (1985).
189. W. Tang, F. M. Khan, and B. J. Gerbi, “Validity of lung correction algorithms,”
Med. Phys. 13:683–686 (1986).
190. E. Yorke, L. Harisiadis, B. Wessels, H. Aghdam, and R. Altemus, “Dosimetric
considerations in radiation therapy of coin lesions of the lung,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol. Biol. Phys. 34(2):481–7 (1996).
191. B. A. Lulu and B. E. Bjarngard, “A derivation of Batho’s correction factor for
heterogeneities,” Med. Phys. 9:907–909 (1982).
192. M. R. Sontag and J. R. Cunningham, “The equivalent tissue-air ratio method for
making absorbed dose calculations in a heterogeneous medium,” Radiology
129:787–794 (1978).
193. C. X. Yu and J. W. Wong, “Implementation of the ETAR method for 3D inhomogeneity corrections using FFT,” Med. Phys. 20:627–632 (1993).
194. M. K. Martel, B. A. Fraass and D. L. McShan, “Study of limits of applicability of
ETAR – Like inhomogeneity correction methods,” Med. Phys. 19:785 (1992).
195. A. T. Redpath and D. I. Thwaites, “A 3-dimensional scatter correction algorithm
for photon beams,” Phys. Med. Biol. 36:779–98 (1991).
196. M. Engelsman, E. M.F. Damen, P. W. Koken, A. A. van `t Veld , K. M. van Ingen,
and B. J. Mijnheer, “Impact of simple tissue inhomogeneity correction algorithms
on conformal radiotherapy of lung tumours,” Radiother. Oncol. 60:299–309
(2001).
197. T. P. Wong, W. K. Kan, and M. Law, “The effects of air cavities on X-ray dose
distribution at 6 and 25 MV,” Australas. Phys. Eng. Sci. Med. 19:237–47 (1996).
198. L. Beaudoin, “Analytical Approach to the Solution of the Dosimetry in
Heterogeneous Media,” M.Sc. Thesis, University of Toronto (1968).
199. K. Kappas and J.-C. Rosenwald, “Theoretical and experimental analysis of scatter from inhomogeneous slabs in a 60Co beam: the differential tissue-air ratio
method (DTAR),” Phys. Med. Biol. 31:1211–1228 (1986).
200. J. W. Wong, E. D. Slessinger, F. U. Rosenberger, K. Krippner, and J. A. Purdy,
“The Delta-Volume Method for 3-Dimensional Photon Dose Calculations,” in
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on the Use of Computers in
Radiation Therapy. Toronto, Canada (Silver Spring, MD: Computer Society
Press. IEEE) pp. 26–30 (1984).
201. K. Krippner, J. W. Wong, W. B. Harms, J. A. Purdy, “The Use of an Array
Processor for the Delta-Volume Dose Computation Algorithm,” in Proceedings of
the 9th International Conference on the Use of Computers in Radiation

118

202.

203.
204.

205.

206.

207.
208.

209.

210.

211.

212.

213.

214.

215.

216.
217.

Therapy, Scheveningen, The Netherlands (North Holland, The Netherlands) pp.
533–536 (1987).
K. Kappas, “Les Heterogeneites dans les Faisceaux de Photons de Haute Energie
Employes en Radiotherapie. Recherches Experimentales et Theoriques,” Doctorat
d’ Etat, Univ. Paul Sabatier de Toulouse (Sciences), (1986).
M. J. Day, “The equivalent field method for axial dose determinations in rectangular fields,” Br. J. Radiol. (suppl 11) 95–100 (1978).
N. Papanikolaou, T. R. Mackie, M. Gehring, and J. Fairbanks, “Clinical implementation of a convolution based algorithm for 3D treatment planning,”,Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 32, Suppl. 1, 302 (1995).
M. J. Butson, R. Elferink, T. Cheung, P.K. Yu, M. Stokes, K.Y. Quach, and P.
Metcalfe, “Verification of lung dose in an anthropomorphic phantom calculated
by the collapsed cone convolution method,” Phys. Med. Biol. 45:43–9 (2000).
N. Papanikolaou, J. Erb, M. Gehr ing, C. Sanders, “Commissioning and
Acceptance Testing of a Convolution based 3D RTP System,” in Medical &
Biological Engineering & Computing, V. 35, Suppl. Part 2, p. 994, Nice 1997,
World Congress on Medical Physics 994, Nice (1997).
N. Papanikolaou and B. Heintz, “Speed and accuracy considerations for convolution algorithms in 3D treatment planning,” Med. Phys. 23, (1996).
N. Papanikolaou, T. R. Mackie, and M. Gehring, “A Convolution Based
Algorithm for Dose Computation in Radiation Therapy,” in Proceedings of the
Roentgen Centennial International Congress, Wurzburg-Germany (1995).
N. Papanikolaou, T. R. Mackie, C. Meger-Wells, M. Gehring, and P. Reckwerdt,
“Investigation of the convolution method for polyenergetic spectra,” Med. Phys.
20:1327–1336 (1993).
N. Papanikolaou and T. R. Mackie, “Separation of photon beam output factor into
its phantom and machine generated components using a convolution code,” Med.
Phys. 21:877–878 (1994).
N. Papanikolaou and T. R. Mackie, “The extended phantom concept: modeling
the treatment machine modifiers and portal imaging dosimetry system using a
convolution code,” Med. Phys. 21:877 (1994).
X. R. Zhu, D. A. Low, W. B. Harms, and J. A. Purdy, “A convolution-adapted
ratio-TAR algorithm for 3D photon beam treatment planning,” Med. Phys.
22:1315–1327 (1995).
T. Bortfeld, W. Schlegel, and B. Rhein, “Decomposition of pencil beam kernels
for fast dose calculations in three-dimensional treatment planning,” Med. Phys.
20:311–18 (1993).
O. Z. Ostapiak, Y. Zhu, and J. Van Dyk, “Refinements of the finite-size pencil
beam model of three-dimensional photon dose calculation,” Med. Phys.
24:743–750, (1997).
E. Wong, Y. Zhu, and J. Van Dyk, “Theoretical developments on Fast Fourier
transform convolution dose calculations in inhomogeneous media,” Med. Phys.
23:1511–1521 (1996).
E. Wong, J. Van Dyk and Y. Zhu, “Lateral electron transport in FFT photon dose
calculations,” Med. Phys. 24:1992–2000 (1997).
C. X. Yu, T. R. Mackie, and J. W. Wong, “Photon dose calculation incorporating
explicit electron transport,” Med. Phys. 22:1157–1165 (1995).

119

218. Y. Zhu and A. L. Boyer, “X-ray dose computations in heterogeneous media using
3-dimensional FFT convolution,” Phys. Med. Biol. 35(3):351–368 (1990) (editorial).
219. Y. Zhu and J. Van Dyk, “Accuracy requirements of the primary x-ray spectrum
in dose calculations using FFT convolution techniques,” Med. Phys. 22:421–6
(1995).
220. M. Miften, M. Wiesmeyer, S. Monthofer, and K. Krippner, “Implementation of
FFT convolution and multigrid superposition models in the FOCUS RTP system,”
Phys. Med. Biol. 45:817-33 (2000).
221. A. Iwasaki, “A method of calculating high-energy photon primary absorbed dose
in water using forward and backward spread dose-distribution functions,” Med.
Phys. 12:731–7 (1985).
222. A. Iwasaki, “Calculation of three-dimensional photon primary absorbed dose
using forward and backward spread dose-distribution functions,” Med. Phys.
17:195–202 (1990).
223. A. Iwasaki and T. Ishito, “The differential scatter-air ratio and differential
backscatter factor method combined with the density scaling theorem,” Med.
Phys. 11:755–63 (1984).
224. M. D. Altschuler, M. R. Sontag, and P. Block, “Rapid three dimensional treatment planning: I. Ray-tracing approach to primary component dose calculations,”
Phys. Med. Biol. 32:543–556 (1987).
225. N. Papanikolaou and T. R. Mackie, “A Convolution/Superposition Algorithm for
Photon Beam Dose Computation,” in World Congress on Medical Physics, NiceV.35, Suppl. Part 2, p. 915 (1997).
226. T. R. Mackie, P. Reckwerdt, T. Holmes, N. Papanikolaou, and D. Simpkin, “The
concept of secondary radiation equilibrium,” Med. Phys. 19:785 (1992).
227. M. E. Young and R. O. Kornelsen, “Dose corrections for low-density tissue inhomogeneities and air channels for 10-MV X rays,” Med. Phys. 10:450–455
(1983).
228. P. W. Hoban, “Accounting for the variation in kerma/terma ratio in photon beam
convolution,” Med. Phys. 22:2035–2044 (1995).
229. A. Ahnesjo and T. R. Mackie, “Analytical description of Monte Carlo generated
photon dose convolution kernels,” in Int. Conference on the Use of Computers in
Radiation Therapy, IX ICCR (Scheveningen, The Netherlands), I. A. D. Bruinvis,
P. H. van der Giessen, H. J. van Kleffens and F. W. Wittkamper (eds.)
(Amsterdam: Elsevier) pp. 197–200 (1987).
230. A. Ahnesjo, “Dose Calculation Methods in Photon Beam Therapy Using Energy
Deposition Kernels,” Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Radiation Physics, Stockholm
University (1991).
231. P. J. Reckwerdt and T. R. Mackie, “Superposition/convolution speed improvements using Run-Length Raytracing,” Med. Phys. 19:784 (1992).
232. P. Andreo, “Monte Carlo techniques in medical radiation physics,” [published
erratum appears in Phys. Med. Biol. 1992 37(10):2031–2]. [Review] Phys. Med.
Biol. 36:861–920 (1991).
233. D. W. O. Rogers and A. F. Bielajew, “Monte Carlo Techniques of Electron and
Photon Transport for Radiation” in The Dosimetry of Ionizing Radiation vol 3, K.
R. Kase, B. Bjarngard, and F. H. Attix (eds.) (New York: Academic) pp. 427–539
(1990).

120

234. T. R. Mackie, “Applications of the Monte Carlo Method in Radiotherapy,” in The
Dosimetry of Ionizing Radiation, vol 3, K. R. Kase, B. Bjarngard, and F. H. Attix
(eds.) (New York: Academic) pp. 541–620 (1990).
235. D.W.O. Rogers, “Monte Carlo techniques in radiotherapy,” Phys. in Canada,
Med. Phys. Special Issue (2002).
236. P. Bloch, M. D. Altschuler, B. E. Bjärngar, A. Kassaee, and J. McDonough,
“Determining clinical photon beam spectra from measured depth dose with the
Cimmino algorithm,” Phys. Med. Biol. 45(1):171–183 (2000).
237. C. L. Har tmann-Siantar, W. P. Chandler, M. B. Chadwick, et al, “Dose
Distributions calculated with the PEREGRINE all-particle Monte Carlo Code,”
Med. Phys. 22:994–994 (1999).
238. A. Ahnesjo, L. Weber, and P. Nilsson, “Modeling transmission and scatter for
photon beam attenuators,” Med. Phys. 22:1711–1720 (1995).
239. O. A. Sauer and M. Neumann, “Reconstruction of high-energy bremsstrahlung
spectra by numerical analysis of depth-dose data,” Radiother. Oncol. 18:39–47
(1990).
240. B. R. Archer, P. R. Almond, and L. K. Wagner, “Application of a Laplace transform pair model for high-energy x-ray spectral reconstruction,” Med. Phys.
12:630–3 (1985).
241. C. R. Baker and K. K. Peck, “Reconstruction of 6 MV photon spectra from measured transmission including maximum energy estimation,” Phys. Med. Biol.
42:2041–2051 (1997).
242. P. H. Huang, K. R. Kase, and B. E. Bjarngard, “Reconstruction of 4-MV
bremsstrahlung spectra from measured transimission data,” Med. Phys.
10:778–785 (1983).
243. A. Piermattei, G. Arcovito, L. Azario, C. Bacci, L. Bianciardi, E. De Sapio, and
C. Giacco, “A study of quality of bremsstrahlung spectra reconstructed from
transmission measurements,” Med. Phys. 17:227–233 (1991).
244. C. R. Baker, B. Amaee and N. M. Spyrou, “Reconstruction of megavoltage photon spectra by attenuation analysis,” Phys. Med. Biol. 40:529–42 (1995).
245. P. Francois, F. Coste, J. Bonnet, and O. Caselles, “Validation of reconstructed
bremsstrahlung spectra between 6 MV and 25 MV from measured transmission
data,” Med. Phys. 24:769–73 (1997).
246. A. Nisbet, H. Weatherburn, J. D. Fenwick, and G. McVey, “Spectral reconstruction of clinical megavoltage photon beams and the implications of spectral determination on the dosimetry of such beams,” Phys. Med. Biol. 43:1507–21 (1998).
247. J. J. DeMarco, T. D. Solberg, and J. B. Smathers, “A CT-based Monte Carlo simulation tool for dosimetry planning and analysis,” Med. Phys. 25:1–11 (1998).
248. D. M. Lovelock, C.-S. Chui and R. Mohan, “A Monte Carlo model of photon
beams used in radiation therapy,” Med. Phys. 22:1387–94 (1995).
249. H. H. Liu, T. R. Mackie, and E. C. McCullough, “A dual source photon beam
model used in convolution/superposition dose calculation for clinical megavoltage
x-ray beams,” Med. Phys. 24:1960–74 (1997).
250. J. Sempau, S. J. Wilderman, and A. F. Bielajew, “DPM, a fast, accurate Monte
Carlo code optimized for photon and electron radiotherapy treatment planning
dose calculations,” Phys. Med. Biol. 45:2263–2291 (2000).
251. C.-M. Ma, J. S. Li, T. Pawlicki, S. B. Jiang, J. Deng, “MCDOSE - A Monte Carlo
dose calculation tool for radiation therapy treatment planning,” in Use of

121

252.

253.

254.

255.
256.

257.

258.

259.
260.
261.
262.
263.
264.

265.

266.

Computers in Radiotherapy, XIIIth Int. Conf., Heidelberg, W. Schlegel and T.
Bortfeld (eds.) (Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag) pp. 123–125 (2000).
C.-M. Ma, J. S. Li, T. Pawlicki, S. B. Jiang, J. Deng, M. C. Lee, T. Koumrian, M.
Luxton, and S. Brain, “A Monte Carlo dose calculation tool for radiotherapy
treatment planning,” Phys. Med. Biol. 47(10):1671–1689 (2002).
I. Kawrakow and M. Fippel, “Investigation of variance reduction techniques for
Monte Ca rlo photon dose calculation using XVMC,” Phys. Med. Biol.
45:2163–83 (2000).
C. L. Hartmann-Siantar, P. M. Bergstrom, W. P. Chandler, L. Chase, L. J. Cox, T.
P. Daly, D. Garrett, S. M. Hornstein, R. K. House, E. I. Moses, R. W. Patterson,
J. A. Rathkopf, and A. E. Schach von Wittenau, “Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory’s PEREGRINE Projec” in International Conference on the Use of
Computers in Radiation Therapy, XII ICCR, Salt Lake City, Utah, D. D. Leavitt
and G. Starkschall (eds.) (Madison, WI: Medical Physics Publishing) pp. 19–22
(1997).
L. Wang, C.-S. Chui, and M. Lovelock, “A patient-specific Monte Carlo dose-calculation method for photons beams,” Med. Phys. 25:867–78 (1998).
M. Bernard, “Etude de L’Ionisation au Voisinage des Interfaces Planes Situeés
entre Deux Milieux de Nombres Atomiques Differents Soumis aux Rayons
Gamma du Cobalt 60 et aux Rayons X d’un Betatron de 20 MV”, Doctorat
d’Etat, Univ. de Paris (1964) (in French).
A. F. Bielajew, D. W. O. Rogers, and A. E. Nahum, “The Monte Carlo simulation
of ion chamber response to 60Co-resolution of anomalies associated with interfaces,” Phys. Med. Biol. 30(5):419–427 (1985).
A.F. Bielajew and D.W.O. Rogers, “PRESTA: The parameter reduced electronstep transport algorithm for electron Monte Carlo transport,” Nucl. Instrum.
Methods Phys. Res. B, Beam Interact. Mater. At. (Netherlands) B18, pp. 165–81
(1987).
X. A. Li, C. Yu, and T. Holmes, “A systematic evaluation of air cavity dose perturbation in megavoltage x-ray beams,” Med. Phys. 27:1011–1017 (2000).
T. Haider and E. El-Khatib, “Differential scatter integration in regions of electronic non-equilibrium,” Phys. Med. Biol. 40:31–43 (1995).
D. Hannallah, T. C. Zhu, and B. E. Bjarngard, “Electron disequilibrium in highenergy x-ray beams,” Med. Phys. 23:1867–71 (1996).
T. C. Zhu and B. E. Bjarngard, “The fraction of photons undergoing head scatter
in x-ray beams,” Phys. Med. Biol. 40(6):1127–34 (1995).
O. A. Sauer, “Calculation of dose distributions in the vicinity of high-Z interfaces
for photon beams,” Med. Phys. 22:1685–90 (1995).
I. J. Das, K. R. Kase, A. S. Meigooni, F. M. Khan, and B. L. Werner, “Validity of
transition-zone dosimetry at high atomic number interfaces in megavoltage photon beams,” Med. Phys. 17:10–16 (1990).
W. K. Kan, P. M. Wu, H. T. Leung, T. C. Lo, C. W. Chung, D. L. Kwong, and S.
T. Sham, “The effect of the nasopharyngeal air cavity on x-ray interface doses,”
Phys. Med. Biol. 43(3):529–37 (1998).
P. L. Petti, R. K. Rice, B. J. Mijnheer, L. M. Chin, and B.E. Bjarngard, “A heterogeneity model for photon beams incorporating electron transport,” Med. Phys.
14:349–54 (1987).

122

267. P. L. Petti, R. L. Siddon, and B. E. Bjarngard, “A multiplicative correction factor
for tissue heterogeneities,” Phys. Med. Biol. 31(10):1119–1128 (1986).
268. L. Wang, M. Lovelock, and C.-S. Chui, “Experimental verification of a CT-based
Monte Carlo dose-calculation method in heterogeneous phantoms,” Med. Phys.
26:2626–2634 (1999).
269. S. Webb, “The absorbed dose in the vicinity of an interface between two media
irradiated by a 60Co source,” Br. J. Radiol. 52:962–967 (1979).
270. C.-M. Ma, E. Mok, A. Kapur, T. Pawlicki, D. Findley, S. Brain, K. Forster and A.
L. Boyer, “Clinical implementation of a Monte Carlo treatment planning system,”
Med. Phys. 26:2133–2143 (1999).
271. C.-M. Ma, T. Pawlicki, S. B. Jiang, J. S. Li, J. Deng, E. Mok, A. Kapur, L. Xing,
L. Ma and A. L. Boyer, “Monte Carlo verification of IMRT dose distributions
from a commercial treatment planning optimization system,” Phys. Med. Biol.
45:2483–2495 (2000).
272. L. Wang, E. Yorke, and C.-S. Chui, “Monte Carlo evaluation of tissue inhomogeneity effects in the treatment of the head and neck,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol.
Phys. 50:1339–1349 (2001).
273. M. Miften, M. Wiesmeyer, A. Kapur, and C.-M. Ma, “Comparison of RTP dose
distributions in heterogeneous phantoms with the BEAM Monte Carlo simulation
system,” J. Appl. Clin. Med. Phys. 2:21–31 (2001).
274. R. D. Lewis, S. J. Ryde, A. W. Seaby, D. A. Hancock, and C. J. Evans, “Use of
Monte Carlo computation in benchmarking radiotherapy treatment planning system algorithms,” Phys. Med. Biol. 45:1755–64 (2000).
275. T. R. Mackie, E. El-Khatib, J. J. Battista, J. Scrimger, J. Van Dyk, and J. R.
Cunningham, “Lung dose corrections for 6 MV and 15 MV x-rays,” Med. Phys.
12:327–332 (1985).
276. S. Webb and R. P. Parker, “A Monte Carlo study of the interaction of external
beam X-radiation with inhomogeneous media,” Phys. Med. Biol. 23(6):1043–59
(1978).
277. M. E. Masterson, G. Barest, C.-S. Chui, K. P. Doppke, R. Epperson, W. Harms,
K. Krippner, R. Mohan, E. Slessinger, M. R. Sontag, M. Urie, R. Wallace, W.
Wong, “Interinstitutional experience in verification of external photon dose calculations,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 21:37–58 (1991).
278. J. F. Briesmeister, ‘‘MCNP—A General Monte Carlo N-particle Transport Code,
Version 4A,’’ Los Alamos National Laboratory report, LA-12625 (1993).
279. J. S. Hendricks and J. F. Briesmeister, ‘‘Recent MCNP Developments,’’ Los
Alamos National Laboratory report, LA-UR-91-3456, 1992. 1128 (1996).
280. D. W. O. Rogers and A. F. Bielajew, “Calculated buildup curves for photons with
energies up to 60Co,” Med. Phys. 12:738–44 (1985).
281. D. W. Rogers and A. F. Bielajew, “Differences in electron depth-dose curves calculated with EGS and ETRAN and improved energy-range relationships,” Med.
Phys. 13:687–94 (1986).
282. T. R. Mackie, “A Study of Charged Particles and Scattered Photons in MegaVoltage X-Ray Beams,” Ph.D. Thesis, University of Alberta (1984).
283. BJR, “Central axis depth dose data for use in radiotherapy,” Br. J. Radiol. (suppl
17) (1983).

123

284. K. Ayyangar, J. R. Palta, J. W. Sweet, and N. Suntharalingam, “Experimental verification of a three-dimensional dose calculation algorithm using a specially
designed heterogeneous phantom,” Med. Phys. 20(1):325–329 (1993).
285. D. Greene and J. G. Stewart, “Isodose curves in non-uniform phantoms,” Br. J.
Radiol. 38:378–385 (1965).
286. D. R. White, “Tissue substitutes in experimental radiation physics,” Med. Phys.
5:467–479 (1978).
287. D. R. White, R. J. Martin, and R. Darlison, “Epoxy resin based tissue substitutes,” Br. J. Radiol. 50:814–821 (1977).
288. J. R. Butts and A. E. Foster, “Comparison of commercially available threedimensional treatment planning algorithms for monitor unit calculations in the
presence of heterogeneities,” J. Appl. Clin. Med. Phys. 2:32–41 (2001).
289. P. Dunscombe, P. McGhee, E. Lederer, “Anthropomorphic phantom measurements for the validation of a treatment planning system,” Phys. Med. Biol.
41:399–411 (1996).
290. B. Nilsson and P. O. Schnell, “Build-up effects at air cavities measured with thin
thermoluminescent dosimeters,” Acta Radiol. Ther. Phys. Biol. 15(5):427–32
(1976).
291. M. D. Koskinen and E. Spring, “Build-up and build-down measurements with
thin Lif-teflon dosimeters with special reference to radiotherapy of carcinoma of
the larynx,” Strahlenth. 145:565 (1973).
292. C. Samuelsson, “Influence of air cavities on central depth dose curves for 33 MV
roentgen rays,” Acta Radiologica 16(6):465–488 (1977).
293. P. M. Ostwald, T. Kron, and C. S. Hamilton, “Assessment of mucosal underdosing in larynx irradiation,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 36(1):181–187
(1996).
294. E. E. Klein, L. M. Chin, R. K. Rice, B. J. Mijnheer, “The influence of air cavities
on interface doses for photon beams,” Int. J. Radiat. Biol. Phys. 27:419–427
(1993).
295. J. L. Beach, M. S. Mendiondo, and O. A. Mendiondo, “A comparison of air-cavity inhomogeneity effects for cobalt-60, 6-, and 10- x-ray beams,” Med. Phys.
14:140–144 (1987).
296. A. Niroomand-Rad, K. W. Harter, S. Thobejane, and K. Bertrand, “Air cavity
effects on the radiation dose to the larynx using Co-60, 6 MV, and 10 MV photon beams,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 29(5):1139–1146 (1994).
297. P. Francescon, C. Cavedon, S. Reccanello, S. Cora, “Photon dose calculation of a
three-dimensional treatment planning system compared to the Monte Carlo code
BEAM,” Med. Phys. 27:1579–87 (2000).
298. E. R. Epp, A. L. Boyer, and K. P. Doppke, “Underdosing of lesions resulting from
lack of electronic equilibrium in upper respiratory air cavities irradiated by 10
MV x-ray beams,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 2:613–619 (1977).
299. E. R. Epp, M. N. Lougheed, and J. W. McKay, “Ionization buildup in upper air
passages during teletherapy with cobalt-60 radiation,” Br. J. Radiol. 31:361–367
(1958).
300. T. P. Wong, P. E. Metcalfe, T. Kron, and T. G. Emeleus, “Radiotherapy x-ray dose
distribution beyond air cavities,” Australas. Phys. Eng. Sci. Med. 15(3):138–46
(1992).

124

301. C. Hurkmans, T. Knoos, P. Nilsson, G. Svahn-Tapper, and H. Danielsson,
“Limitations of a pencil beam approach to photon dose calculations in the head
and neck region,” Radiother. Oncol. 37:74–80 (1995).
302. L. Coia, J. Galvin, M. R. Sontag, P. Blitzer, H. Brenner, E. Cheng, K. Doppke, W.
Harms, M. Hunt, R. Mohan, and J. J. Munzenrider Simpson, “Three-dimensional
photon treatment planning in carcinoma of the larynx,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.
Biol. Phys. 21:183–192 (1991).
303. I. Izuno, S. Sone, M. Oguchi, K. Kiyons, and K. Takei, “Treatment of early vocal
cord carcinoma with 60Co gamma rays, 8/10 MV X-rays, or 4 MV X-rays: Are the
results different?” Acta Oncol. 29:637–639 (1990).
304. G. L. Jiang, K. K. Ang, L. J. Peters, C. D. Wendt, M. J. Oswald, and H.
Goephert, “Maxillary sinus carcinomas: Natural history and results of postoperative radiotherapy,” Radiother. Oncol. 21:193–200 (1991).
305. J. van de Geijn, “The extended net fractional depth dose: Correction for inhomogeneities, including effects of electron transport in photon beam dose calculation,” Med. Phys. 14:84–92 (1987).
306. R. K. Rice, B. J. Mijnheer, L. M. Chin, “Benchmark measurements for lung dose
corrections for x-ray beams,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 15:399–409
(1988).
307. E. El-Khatib and J. J. Battista, “Accuracy of lung dose calculations for large-field
irradiation with 6-MV x rays,” Med. Phys. 13:111–116 (1986).
308. J. E. O’Connor and D. E. Malone, “An equivalent shape approximation for photon doses in lung,” Phys. Med. Biol. 35(2):223–234 (1990).
309. P. E. Metcalfe, T. P. Wong, and P. W. Hoban, “Radiotherapy x-ray beam inhomogeneity corrections: the problem of lateral electronic disequilibrium in lung,”
Australas. Phys. Eng. Sci. Med. 16:155–167 (1993).
310. P. W. Hoban, D. C. Murray, P. E. Metcalfe, and W. H. Round, “Superposition
dose calculation in lung for 10 MV photons,” Australas. Phys. Eng. Sci. Med.
13:81–92 (1990).
311. R. Mayer, A. Williams, T. Frankel, Y. Cong, S. Simons, N. Yang, R. Timmerman,
“Two-dimensional film dosimetry application in heterogeneous materials exposed
to megavoltage photon beams,” Med. Phys. 24:455–460 (1997).
312. R. K. Rice, J. L. Hansen, L. M. Chin, B. J. Mijnheer, and B.E. Bjarngard, “The
influence of ionization chamber and phantom design on the measurement of lung
dose in photon beams,” Med. Phys. 15:884–890 (1988).
313. E. E. Klein, A. Morrison, J. A. Purdy, M. V. Graham, and J. Matthews, “A volumetric study of measurements and calculations of lung density corrections for 6
MV and 18 MV photons,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 37:1163–1170
(1997).
314. M. Blomquist and M. Karlsson, “Measured lung dose correction factors for 50
MV photons,” Phys. Med. Biol. 43:3225–3234 (1998).
315. P. J. White, R. D. Zwicker, and D. T. Haung, “Comparison of dose homogeneity
effects due to electron equilibrium loss in lung for 6 MV and 18 MV photons,”
Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 34:1141–1146 (1996).
316. M. Essers, J. H. Lanson, G. Leunens, T. Schnabel, and B. J. Mijnheer, “The
accuracy of CT-based inhomogeneity corrections and in vivo dosimetry for the
treatment of lung cancer,” Radiother. Oncol. 37(3):199–208 (1995).

125

317. R. C. Miller, J. A. Bonner, and R. W. Kline, “Impact of beam energy and field
margin on penumbra at lung tumor-lung parenchyma interfaces,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol. Biol. Phys. 41:707–713 (1998).
318. L. Wang, E. Yorke, G. Desobry, and C.-S. Chui, “Dosimetric advantage of using
6 MV over 15 MV photons in conformal therapy of lung cancer: Monte Carlo
studies in patient geometries,” J. Appl. Clin. Med. Phys. 3:51–59 (2002).
319. Radiation Therapy Oncology Group, “Prospective randomized trial of postoperative adjuvant therapy in patients with completely resected stage II and stage IIIa
nonsmall cell lung caner,” RTOG 91-05 Revised Edition, August 24 (1992).
320. S. B. Easterling, N. Papanikolaou, and A. Meigooni, “Quantitative analysis of
dose in an anthropomorphic lung phantom using thermoluminescent dosimetry,
convolution algorithm, and radiochromic film,” Med. Phys. 23:1114–1115
(1996).
321. E. E. Klein, J. Gibbons, Z. Li, S. Chungbin, and C. Orton, “Benchmark measurements for lung corrections for energies ranging from Co-60 to 24 MV,” Med.
Phys. 21:945 (1994).
322. S. L. S. Kwa, J. C. M. Theuws, A. Wagenaar, E. F. M. Damen, L. J. Boersma, P.
Baas, S. H. Muller, and J. V. Lebesque, “Evaluation of two dose-volume histogram reduction models for the prediction of radiation pneumonitis,” Radiother.
Oncol. 48:61–69 (1998).
323. A. Aref, D. Thornton, E. Youssef, T. He, S. Tekyi-Mensah, L. Denton, and G.
Ezzell, “Dosimetric improvements following 3D planning of tangential breast
irradiation,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 48:1569–1574 (2000).
324. A. Fogliata, A. Bolsi, and L. Cozzi, “Critical appraisal of treatment techniques
based on conventional photon beams, intensity modulated photon beams and proton beams for therapy of intact breast,”,Radiother. Oncol. 62(2):137–145 (2002).
325. C. W. Hurkmans, B. C. J. Cho, E. Damen, L. Zijp, and B. J. Mijnheer,
“Reduction of cardiac and lung complication probabilities after breast irradiation
using conformal radiotherapy with or without intensity modulation,” Radiother.
Oncol. 62(2):163–171 (2002).
326. L. A. Farraday, G. T. Doswell, “Treatment planning for the breast patient: with or
without lung correction?” Med. Dosim. 17:1–9 (1992).
327. M. M. Ellen, K. R. Hogstrom, L. A. Miller, R. C. Erice, T. A. Buchholz, “A comparison of 18-MV and 6-MV treatment plans using 3D dose calculation with and
without heterogeneity correction,” Med. Dosim. 24:287–94 (1999).
328 .B. J. Mijnheer, S. Heukelom, J. H. Lanson, L. J. van Battum, N. A. van Bree,
and G. van Tienhoven, “Should inhomogeneity corrections be applied during
treatment planning of tangential breast ir radiation?” Radiother. Oncol.
22:239–44 (1991).
329. C. L. Creutzberg, V. G. M. Althof, H. Huizenga, A. G. Visser, and P. C.
Levandag, “Quality assurance using portal imaging – the accuracy of the patient
positioning in irradiation of breast cancer,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.
25:529–539 (1993).
330. B. K. Lind, P. Kallman, B. Sundelin, and A. Brahme, “Optimal radiation beam
profiles considering uncertainties in beam patient alignment,” Acta Oncol.
32:331–42 (1993).

126

331 .C. Mitine, A. Dutreix, E. Vanderschueren, “Tangential breast irradiation – influence of technique of set-up on transfer errors and reproducibility,” Radiother.
Oncol. 22:308–310 (1991).
332. A. Bel, M. Vanherk, H. Bartelink, and J. V. Lebesque, “A verification procedure
to improve patient set-up accuracy using portal images,” Radiother. Oncol.
29:253–260 (1993).
333. H. D. Kubo, B. C. Hill, “Respiration gated radiotherapy treatment: a technical
study,” Phys. Med. Biol. 41:83–91 (1996).
334. A. E. Lujan, E. W. Larsen, J. M. Balter, and R. K. Ten Haken, “A method for
incorporating organ motion due to breathing into 3D dose calculations,” Med.
Phys. 26:715–720 (1999).
335. J. M. Balter, R. K. Ten Haken, T. S. Lawrence, K. L. Lam, and J. M. Robertson,
“Uncertainties in CT-based radiation therapy treatment planning associated with
patient breathing,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 36:167–174 (1996).
336. K. E. Rosenzweig, J. Hanley, D. Mah, G. Mageras, M. Hunt, S.Toner, C. Burman,
C. C. Ling, B. Mychalczak, Z. Fuks, and S. A. Leibel, “The deep inspiration
breath-hold technique in the treatment of inoperable non-small-cell lung cancer,”
Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 48:81–87 (2000).
337. J. Hanley, M. M. Debois, D. Mah, G. S. Mageras, A. Raben, K. Rosenzweig, B.
Mychalczak, L. H. Schwartz, P. J. Gloeggler, W. Lutz, C. C. Ling, S. A Leibel, Z.
Fuks, and G. J. Kutcher, “Deep inspiration breath-hold technique for lung tumors:
The potential value of target immobilization and reduced lung density in dose
escalation,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 45:603–611 (1999).
338. G. Mageras, “Respiratory Motion-Induced Treatment Uncertainties,” in Medical
Physics, C. Kappas, A. del Guerra, Z. Kolitsi, Y. Damilakis, K. Theodorou (eds.)
(Bologna: Monduzzi Editore) pp. 33–8 (1999).
339. M. Engelsman, P. Remeijer, M. van Herk, J. V. Lebesque, B. J. Mijnheer, E. M.
F. Damen, “Field size reduction enables ISO-NTCP escalation of tumor control
probability for irradiation of lung tumors,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.
51:1290–1298 (2001).
340. P. Mavroidis, S. Axelsson, S. Hyodynmaa, J. Rajala, M. A. Pitkanen, B. K. Lind,
and A. Brahme, “Effects of positioning uncertainty and breathing on dose delivery and radiation pneumonitis prediction in breast cancer,” Acta Oncol.
41(5):471–85 (2002), Erratum in Acta Oncol. 42(3):255 (2003).
341. W. Spiers, “The influence of energy absorption and electron range on dosage in
irradiated bone,” Br. J. Radiol. 22:521–533 (1949).
342. W. Spiers, “Dosage in irradiated soft tissue and bone,” Br. J. Radiol. 25:365–370
(1951).
343. W. K. Sinclair, “The relative biological effectiveness of 22-MV x-rays, cobalt-60
gamma rays, and 200-kVp x-rays. Absorbed dose to the bone marrow in the rat
and the mouse,” Radiat. Res. 16:369–383 (1962).
344. N. Aspin and H. E. Johns, “The absorbed dose in cylindrical cavities within irradiated bone,” Br. J. Radiol. 36(425):350–362 (1963).
345. I. J. Das. “Study of Dose Perturbation at Bone-Tissue Interfaces in Megavoltage
Photon Beam Therapy,” Ph.D. Thesis, University of Minnesota, 1988.
346. C. S. Reft and F. T. Kuchnir, “Dose Correction Factors at Bone-Tissue Surface for
High Energy Photon Beams,” Presented at annual AAPM meeting (1986).

127

347. B. J. Mijnheer, R. K. Rice, and L. M. Chin, “Lead polystyrene transition zone
dosimetry in high energy photon beams,” Radiol. Oncol. 11:379–386 (1988).
348. I. J. Das and F. M. Khan, “Backscatter dose perturbation at high atomic number
interfaces in megavoltage photon beams,” Med. Phys. 16:367–375 (1989).
349. I. J. Das, F. M. Khan, and B. J. Gerbi, “Interface dose perturbation as a measure
of megavoltage photon beam energy,” Med. Phys. 15:78–81 (1988).
350. B. L. Werner, “Dose perturbations at interfaces in photon beams: Annihilation
radiation,” Med. Phys. 18:713–718 (1991).
351. S. W. Jacob, P. Gullane, D. Galbraith, and B. Cummings, “Implications of radiation dose distribution at mandibular prosthesis/tissue interface,” Internal Report.
OCI/PMH (1985).
352. M. Farahani, F. C. Eichmiller, W. L. McLaughlin, “Measurement of absorbed
doses near metal and dental material interfaces irradiated by x- and gamma-ray
therapy beams,” Phys. Med. Biol. 35:369–85 (1990).
353. R. Nadrowitz, T. Feyerabend, “Backscatter dose from metallic materials due to
obliquely incident high-energy photon beams,” Med. Phys. 28(6):959–65 (2001).
354. X. A. Li, J. C. Chu, W. Chen, T. Zusag, “Dose enhancement by a thin foil of highZ material: a Monte Carlo study,” Med. Phys. 26:1245–51 (1999).
355. M. B. Hazuka, D. N. Stroud, J. Adams, G. S. Ibbott, and J. J. Kinzie, “Prostatic
thermoluminescent dosimeter analysis in a patient treated with 18 MV X rays
through a prosthetic hip,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 25(2):339–343
(1993).
356. E. E. Klein and R. R. Kuske, “Changes in photon dose distributions due to breast
prostheses,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 25:541–549 (1993).
357. A. Niroomand-Rad, R. Razavi, S. Thobejane, and K.W. Harter, “Radiation dose
perturbation at tissue-titanium dental interfaces in head and neck cancer
patients,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 34:475–80 (1996).
358. G. X. Ding and C. W. Yu, “A study on beams passing through hip prosthesis for
pelvic radiation treatment,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 51:1167–75
(2001).
359. R. Wang, K. Pillai, and P. K. Jones, “Dosimetric measurement of scattered radiation from dental implants in simulated head and neck radiotherapy,” Int. J. Oral
Maxillofac. Implants 13:197–203 (1998).
360. T. A. Mian, M. C. Jr. Van Putten, D. C. Kramer, R. F. Jacob, and A. L. Boyer,
“Backscatter radiation at bone-titanium interface from high-energy X and gamma
rays,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 13:1943–7 (1987).
361. F. A. Gibbs, B. Palos, and D. R. Goffinet, “The metal/tissue interface effect in
irradiation of the oral cavity,” Radiology 119:705–7 (1976).
362. D. L. Zellmer, J. D. Chapman, C. C. Stobbe, F. Xu, and I. J. Das, “Radiation
fields backscattered from material interfaces. I. Biological effectiveness,” Radiat.
Res. 150:406–15 (1998).
363. D. L. Newman, G. Dougherty, A. Al Obaid, and H. Al Hajrasy, “Limitations of CT
in assessing cortical thickness and density,” Phys. Med. Biol. 43:619–626 (1998).
364. R. A. Geise and E.C. McCullough, “The use of CT scanners in megavoltage photon beam therapy planning,” Radiology 124:133–141 (1977).
365. D. Verellen, V. Vinh-Hung, P. Bijdekerke, F. Nijs, N. Linthout, A. Bel, and G.
Storme, “Characteristics and clinical application of a treatment simulator with CT
option,” Radiother. Oncol. 50:355–366 (1999).

128

366. J. C. H. Chu, B. Ni, R. Kriz, and V. A. Saxena, “Applications of simulator computed tomography number for photon dose calculations during radiotherapy treatment planning,” Radiother. Oncol. 55:65–73 (2000).
367. M. A. Mosleh-Shirazi, P. M. Evans, W. Swindell, S. Webb, M. Partridgem, “A
cone-beam megavoltage CT scanner for treatment verification in conformal radiotherapy,” Radiother. Oncol. 48:319–328 (1998).
368. U. Schneideryx, E. Pedroniz, and A. Lomaxz, “The calibration of CT Hounsfield
units for radiotherapy treatment planning,” Phys. Med. Biol. 41:111–124 (1996).
369. W. Kilby, J. Sage, and V. Rabett, “Tolerance levels for quality assurance of electron density values generated from CT in radiotherapy treatment planning,” Phys.
Med. Biol. 47:1485–1492 (2002).
370. H. Guan, F.-F. Yin, and J. H. Kim, “Accuracy of inhomogeneity correction in
photon radiotherapy from CT scans with different settings,” Phys. Med. Biol.
47:N223-N231 (2002).
371. Task Group 40.
372. K. Rustgi, M. A. Samuels, and S. N. Rustgi, “Influence of air inhomogeneities in
radiosurgical beams,” Med. Dosim. 22(2):95–100 (1997).
373. S. N. Rustgi, A. K. Rustgi, S. B Jiang, and K. M. Ayyangar, “Dose perturbation
caused by high-density inhomogeneities in small beams in stereotactic radiosurgery,” Phys. Med. Biol. 43:3509–3518 (1998).
374. K. Theodorou, S. Stathakis, B. Lind, A. Liander, C. Kappas, “Study of the
Perturbation of Dose distribution for Linac and Gamma Knife Stereotactic
Radiotherapy due to Head Heterogeneities,” Proceed. 19th Annual ESTRO
Meeting, Istanbul, Turkey, Sept. 2000.
375. T. D. Solberg, F. E. Holly, A. A. F. De Salles, R. E. Wallace, and J. B. Smathers,
“Implications of tissue heterogeneity for radiosurgery in head and neck tumors,”
Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 32:235–239 (1995).
376. K. M. Ayyangar and S. B. Jiang, “Do we need Monte Carlo treatment planning
for linac based radiosurgery? A case study,” Med. Dosim. 23:161–167 (1998).
377. M. Blomquist, J. Li, C.-M. Ma, B. Zackrisson, and M. Karlsson, “Comparison
between a conventional treatment energy and 50 MV photons for the treatment of
lung tumours,” Phys. Med. Biol. 47:889–897 (2002).
378. R. Mohan and P. P. Antich, “A method of correction for curvature and inhomogeneities in computer aided calculation of external beam radiation dose distributions,” Comput. Progr. Biomed. 9:247–257 (1979).
379. R. Mohan, G. Barest, L. J. Brewster, et al. “A comprehensive three-dimensional
radiation treatment planning system,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.
15:481–495 (1988).
380. W. R. Nelson, H. Hirayama, and D. W. O. Rogers. The EGS4 code system.
Stanford, CA: Stanford Linear Accelerator Center; 1985.
381. C. Constantinou, “Phantom materials for radiation dosimetry. I. Liquids and
gels,” Br. J. Radiol. 55(651):217–24 (1982).
382. C. Constantinou, F. H. Attix, and B. R. Paliwal, “A solid water phantom material
for radiotherapy x-ray and gamma-ray beam calibrations,” Med. Phys. 9:436–41
(1982).
383. E. El-Khatib, M. Evans, M. Pla, and J. R. Cunningham, “Evaluation of lung dose
correction methods for photon irradiations of thorax phantoms,” Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol. Biol. Phys. 17:871–878 (1989).

129

384. B. Fraass, K. P. Doppke, M. Hunt, G. Kutcher, G. Starkschall, R. Stern, and J.
Van Dyk, “American Association of Physicists in Medicine Radiation Therapy
Committee Task Group 53: Quality assurance for clinical radiotherapy treatment
planning,” Med. Phys. 25:1773–829 (1998).
385. American Association of Physicists in Medicine, Radiation therapy Committee
Task Group 21, “A protocol for the determination of absorbed dose from highenergy photon and electron beams,” Med. Phys. 10:741–771 (1983).
386. T. Mauceri and K. Kase, “Effects of ionization chamber construction on dose
measurements in a heterogeneity,” Med. Phys. 14:653–656 (1987).
387. N. Papanikolaou, “Dose calculation algorihtms in the IMRT era,” Radiother.
Oncol. 61 (Suppl. 1):S12 (2001).
388. N. Papanikolaou, Y. Tsougos, and C. Kappas, “The effect of tissue inhomogeneities in IMRT,” Proceed. 44th Annual Meeting ASTRO Med. Phys. 28(7)
(2001).
389. N. Papanikolaou, J. Penagaricano, and V. Ratanatharathorn, “The effect of lung
inhomogeneity in IMRT,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 50(Suppl. 1):302
(2001).
390. R. Jeraj and P. Keall, “The effect of statistical uncertainty on inverse treatment
pla nning based on Monte Ca rlo dose calculation,” Phys. Med. Biol.
45:3601–3613 (2000).
391. R. Jeraj, P. J. Keall, and J. V. Siebers, “The effect of dose calculation accuracy on
inverse treatment planning,” Phys. Med. Biol. 47:391–407 (2002).
392. P. J. Keall, J. V. Siebers, R. Jeraj, and R. Mohan, “The effect of dose calculation
uncertainty on the evaluation of radiotherapy plans,” Med. Phys. 27:478–84
(2000).
393. E. K. Butker, D. J. Helton, J. W. Keller, L. L. Hughes, T. Crenshaw, and L. W.
Davis, “A totally integrated simulation technique for three-field breast treatment
using a CT simulator,” Med. Phys. 23:1809–14 (1996).

130

AAPM REPORT SERIES
No. 1
No. 3
No. 4
No. 5
No. 6
No. 7
No. 8
No. 9
No. 10
No. 11
No. 12

No. 13

No. 14
No. 15
No. 16
No. 17
No. 18
No. 19
No. 20
No. 21
No. 22
No. 23
No. 24

“Phantoms for Performance Evaluation and Quality Assurance of CT
Scanners” (1977)
“Optical Radiations in Medicine: A Survey of Uses, Measurement and
Sources” (1977)
“Basic Quality Control in Diagnostic Radiology,” AAPM Task Force on
Quality Assurance Protocol (1977)
“AAPM Survey of Medical Physics Training Programs,” Committee on the
Training of Medical Physicists (1980)
“Scintillation Camera Acceptance Testing & Performance Evaluation,” AAPM
Nuclear Medicine Committee (1980)
“Protocol for Neutron Beam Dosimetry,” AAPM Task Group #18 (1980)
“Pulse Echo Ultrasound Imaging Systems: Performance Tests & Criteria,” P.
Carson & J. Zagzebski (1980)
“Computer-Aided Scintillation Camera Acceptance Testing,” AAPM Task
Group of the Nuclear Medicine Committee (1982)
“A Standard Format for Digital Image Exchange,” Baxter et al. (1982)
“A Guide to the Teaching of Clinical Radiological Physics to Residents in
Radiology,” AAPM Committee on the Training of Radiologists (1982)
“Evaluation of Radiation Exposure Levels in Cine Cardiac Catherization
Laborator ies,” AAPM Cine Task Force of the Diagnostic Radiology
Committee (1984)
“Physical Aspects of Quality Assurance in Radiation Therapy,” AAPM
Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group #24, with contribution by Task
Group #22 (1984)
“Performance Specifications and Acceptance Testing for X-Ray Generators
and Automatic Exposure Control Devices” (1985)
“Performance Evaluation and Quality Assurance in Digital Subtraction
Angiography,” AAPM Digital Radiology/ Fluorography Task Group (1985)
“Protocol for Heavy Charged-Particle Therapy Beam Dosimetry,” AAPM Task
Group #20 of the Radiation Therapy Committee (1986)
“The Physical Aspects of Total and Half Body Photon Irradiation,” AAPM
Task Group #29 of the Radiation Therapy Committee (1986)
“A Primer on Low-Level Ionizing Radiation and its Biological Effects,”
AAPM Biological Effects Committee (1986)
“Neut ron Measurements Around High Energy X-Ray Radiotherapy
Machines,” AAPM Radiation Therapy Task Group #27 (1987)
“Site Planning for Magnetic Resonance Imaging Systems,” AAPM NMR Task
Group #2 (1987)
“Specification of Brachytherapy Source Strength,” AAPM Radiation Therapy
Task Group #32 (1987)
“Rotation Scintillation Camera Spect Acceptance Testing and Quality
Control,” Task Group of Nuclear Medicine Committee (1987)
“Total Skin Electron Therapy: Technique and Dosimetry,” AAPM Radiation
Therapy Task Group #30 (1988)
“Radiotherapy Portal Imaging Quality,” AAPM Radiation Therapy Task
Group #28 (1988)

131

No. 25

No. 26
No. 27
No. 28

No. 29
No. 30
No. 31
No. 32
No. 33
No. 34

No. 35

No. 36
No. 37
No. 38
No. 39
No. 40

No. 41
No. 42

No. 43
No. 44
No. 45

“Protocols for the Radiation Safety Surveys of Diagnostic Radiological
Equipment,” AAPM Diagnostic X-Ray Imaging Committee Task Group #1
(1988)
“Per for ma nce Evaluation of Hyp er ther mia Equipment,” AAPM
Hyperthermia Task Group #1 (1989)
“Hyperthermia Treatment Planning,” AAPM Hyperthermia Committee Task
Group #2 (1989)
“Quality Assurance Methods and Phantoms for Magnetic Resonance
Imaging,” AAPM Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Committee Task Group #1,
Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 17, Issue 2 (1990)
“Equipment Requirements and Quality Control for Mammography,” AAPM
Diagnostic X-Ray Imaging Committee Task Group #7 (1990)
“E-Mail and Academic Computer Networks,” AAPM Computer Committee
Task Group #1 (1990)
“Standardized Methods for Measuring Diagnostic X-Ray Exposures,” AAPM
Diagnostic X-Ray Imaging Committee Task Group #8 (1991)
“Clinical Electron-Beam Dosimetry,” AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee
Task Group #25, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 18, Issue 1 (1991)
“Staffing Levels and Responsibilities in Diagnostic Radiology,” AAPM
Diagnostic X-Ray Imaging Committee Task Group #5 (1991)
“Acceptance Testing of Magnetic Resonance Imaging Systems,” AAPM
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Task Group #6, Reprinted from Medical
Physics, Vol. 19, Issue 1 (1992)
“Recommendations on Performance Characteristics of Diagnostic Exposure
Meters,” AAPM Diagnostic X-Ray Imaging Task Group #6, Reprinted from
Medical Physics, Vol. 19, Issue 1 (1992)
“Essentials and Guidelines for Hospital Based Medical Physics Residency
Training Programs,” AAPM Presidential AD Hoc Committee (1992)
“Auger Electron Dosimetry,” AAPM Nuclear Medicine Committee Task
Group #6, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 19, Issue 1 (1993)
“The Role of the Physicist in Radiation Oncology,” Professional Information
and Clinical Relations Committee Task Group #1 (1993)
“Specification and Acceptance Testing of Computed Tomography Scanners,”
Diagnostic X-Ray Imaging Committee Task Group #2 (1993)
“Radiolabeled Antibody Tumor Dosimetry,” AAPM Nuclear Medicine
Committee Task Group #2, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 20, Issue 2,
Part 2 (1993)
“Remote Afterloading Technology,” Remote Afterloading Technology Task
Group #41 (1993)
“ The Role of the Clinical Medical Physicist in Diagnostic Radiology,”
Professional Information and Clinical Relations Committee Task Group #2
(1994)
“Quality Assessment and Improvement of Dose Response Models,” (1993).
“Academic Program for Master of Science Degree in Medical Physics,”
AAPM Education and Training of Medical Physicists Committee (1993)
“Management of Radiation Oncology Patients with Implanted Cardiac
Pacemakers,” AAPM Task Group #4, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol.
21, Issue 1 (1994)

132

No. 46

No. 47

No. 48

No. 49

No. 50

No. 51

No. 52
No. 53
No. 54
No. 55

No. 56

No. 57
No. 58
No. 59

No. 60
No. 61

No. 62

No. 63

“Comprehensive QA for Radiation Oncology,” AAPM Radiation Therapy
Committee Task Group #40, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 21, Issue 6
(1994)
“AAPM Code of Practice for Radiotherapy Accelerators,” AAPM Radiation
Therapy Task Group #45, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 21, Issue 7
(1994)
“ The Calibration and Use of Plane-Parallel Ionization Chambers for
Dosimetry of Electron Beams,” AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task
Group #39, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 21, Issue 8 (1994)
“Dosimetry of Auger-Electron-Emitting Radionuclides,” AAPM Nuclear
Medicine Task Group #6, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 21, Issue 12
(1994)
“Fetal Dose from Radiotherapy with Photon Beams,” AAPM Radiation
Therapy Committee Task Group #36, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol.
22, Issue 1 (1995)
“Dosimetry of Interstitial Brachytherapy Sources,” AAPM Radiation Therapy
Committee Task Group #43, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 22, Issue 2
(1995)
“Quantitation of SPECT Performance,” AAPM Nuclear Medicine Committee
Task Group #4, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 22, Issue 4 (1995)
“Radiation Information for Hospital Personnel,” AAPM Radiation Safety
Committee (1995)
“Stereotactic Radiosurgery,” AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task
Group #42 (1995)
“Radiation Treatment Planning Dosimetry Verification,” AAPM Radiation
Therapy Committee Task Group #23 (1995), $48, (Includes 2 disks, ASCII
format).
“Medical Accelerator Safety Considerations,” AAPM Radiation Therapy
Committee Task Group #35, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 20, Issue 4
(1993)
“Recommended Nomenclature for Physical Quantities in Medical Applications
of Light,” AAPM General Medical Physics Committee Task Group #2 (1996)
“Managing the Use of Fluoroscopy in Medical Institutions,” AAPM Radiation
Protection Committee Task Group #6 (1998)
“Code of Practice for Brachytherapy Physics,” AAPM Radiation Therapy
Committee Task Group #56, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 24, Issue
10 (1997)
“Instrumentation Requirements of Diagnostic Radiological Physicists,” AAPM
Diagnostic X-Ray Committee Task Group #4 (1998)
“High Dose Brachytherapy Treatment Delivery,” AAPM Radiation Therapy
Committee Task Group #59, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 25, Issue 4
(1998)
“Quality Assurance for Clinical Radiotherapy Treatment Planning,” AAPM
Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group #53, Reprinted from Medical
Physics, Vol. 25, Issue 10 (1998)
“Radiochromic Film Dosimetry,” AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task
Group #55, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 25, Issue 11 (1998)

133

No. 64

No. 65

No. 66
No. 67

No. 68
No. 69

No. 70
No. 71
No. 72
No. 73

No. 74
No. 75

No. 76

No. 77
No. 78

No. 79

No. 80

“A Guide to the Teaching Of Clinical Radiological Physics To Residents in
Diagnostic and Therapeutic Radiology,” Revision of AAPM Report #11,
AAPM Committee on the Training of Radiologists (January 1999)
“Real-Time B-Mode Ultrasound Quality Control Test Procedures,” AAPM
Ultrasound Task Group #1, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 25, Issue 8
(1998)
“Intravascular Brachytherapy Physics,” AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee
Task Group #60, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 26, Issue 2 (1999)
“Protocol for Clinical Reference Dosimetry of High-Energy Photon and
Electron Beams,” AAPM Task Group #51, Reprinted from Medical Physics,
Vol. 26, Issue 9 (1999)
“Permanent Prostate Seed Implant Brachytherapy,” AAPM Medicine Task
Group #64, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 26, Issue 10 (1999)
“Recommendations of the AAPM on 103Pd Interstitial Source Calibration
and Dosimetry: Implications for Dose Specification and Prescription,” Report
of the Low Energy Interstitial Brachytherapy Dosimetry Subcommittee of the
Radiation Therapy Committee, Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 27,
Issue 4 (2000)
“Cardiac Catherization Equipment Performance,” AAPM Task Group #17
Diagnostic X-ray Imaging Committee (February 2001)
“A Primer for Radioimmunotherapy and Radionuclide Therapy,” AAPM Task
Group #7 Nuclear Medicine Committee (April 2001)
“Basic Applications of Multileaf Collimators,” AAPM Task Group #50
Radiation Therapy Committee (July 2001)
“Medical Lasers: Quality Control, Safety, Standards, and Regulations,” Joint
Report of Task Group #6 AAPM General Medical Physics Committee and
ACMP (July 2001)
“Quality Control in Diagnostic Radiology,” Report of AAPM Task Group 12,
Diagnostic X-ray Imaging Committee (2002)
“Clinical Use of Electronic Portal Imaging,” AAPM Radiation Therapy
Committee Task Group #58. Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 28, Issue 5
(2001)
“AAPM Protocol for 40-300 kV X-ray Beam Dosimetry in Radiotherapy and
Radiobiology,” AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group #61.
Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 28, Issue 6 (2001)
“Practical Aspects of Functional MRI,” AAPM NMR Task Group #8.
Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 29, Issue 8 (2002)
“Proton Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy in the Brain: Report of AAPM
Magnetic Resonance Task Group #9.” Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol.
29, Issue 9 (2002)
“Academic Program Recommendations For Graduate Degrees In Medical
Physics,” Revision of AAPM Report No. 44. AAPM Education and Training of
Medical Physicists Committee (2002)
“The Solo Practice of Medical Physics in Radiation Oncology: Report of TG
#1 of the AAPM Professional Information and Clinical Relations Committee”
(2003)

134

No. 81

“Dosimetric Considerations for Patients with Hip Prostheses Undergoing
Pelvic Irradiation: Report of the AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task
Group 63,” Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 30, Issue 6 (2003)
No. 82 “Guidance Document on Deliver y, Treatment Planning, and Clinical
Implementation of IMRT: Report of the IMRT subcommittee of the AAPM
Radiation Therapy Committee,” Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 30,
Issue 8 (2003)
No. 83 “Quality Assurance for Computed-Tomography Simulators and the ComputedTomography-Simulation Process: Report of the AAPM Radiation Therapy
Committee Task Group No. 66,” Reprinted from Medical Physics, Vol. 30,
Issue 10 (2003)
No. 84 “A Revised AAPM Protocol for Brachytherapy Dose Calculations (Update of
AAPM TG 43; Report No. 51),” Report of the Low Energy Interstitial
Brachytherapy Subcommittee of the Radiation Therapy Committee, Reprinted
from Medical Physics, Vol. 31, Issue 3 (2004)
No. 85 “Tissue Inhomogeneity Corrections for Megavoltage Photon Beams,” AAPM
Task Group #65 Radiation Therapy Committee (July 2004)

135

