Stereotactic Radiosurgery
and Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy

Edited by

Stanley H. Benedict, PhD • David J. Schlesinger, PhD
Steven J. Goetsch, PhD • Brian D. Kavanagh, MD, MPH

Stereotactic Radiosurgery
and Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy

ImagIng In medIcal dIagnosIs and Therapy
William R. Hendee, Series Editor
Published titles
Quality and safety in radiotherapy
Todd Pawlicki, Peter B. Dunscombe,
Arno J. Mundt, and Pierre Scalliet, Editors
ISBN: 978-1-4398-0436-0

adaptive radiation Therapy
X. Allen Li, Editor
ISBN: 978-1-4398-1634-9

Quantitative mrI in cancer
Thomas E. Yankeelov, David R. Pickens,
and Ronald R. Price, Editors
ISBN: 978-1-4398-2057-5

Informatics in medical Imaging
George C. Kagadis and Steve G. Langer,
Editors
ISBN: 978-1-4398-3124-3

adaptive motion compensation in
radiotherapy
Martin J. Murphy, Editor
ISBN: 978-1-4398-2193-0

Image-guided radiation Therapy
Daniel J. Bourland, Editor
ISBN: 978-1-4398-0273-1

Targeted molecular Imaging
Michael J. Welch and William C. Eckelman,
Editors
ISBN: 978-1-4398-4195-0

proton and carbon Ion Therapy
C.-M. Charlie Ma and Tony Lomax, Editors
ISBN: 978-1-4398-1607-3

comprehensive Brachytherapy:
physical and clinical aspects
Jack Venselaar, Dimos Baltas, Peter J. Hoskin,
and Ali Soleimani-Meigooni, Editors
ISBN: 978-1-4398-4498-4

physics of mammographic Imaging
Mia K. Markey, Editor
ISBN: 978-1-4398-7544-5

physics of Thermal Therapy:
Fundamentals and clinical applications
Eduardo Moros, Editor
ISBN: 978-1-4398-4890-6

emerging Imaging Technologies in
medicine
Mark A. Anastasio and Patrick La Riviere,
Editors
ISBN: 978-1-4398-8041-8

cancer nanotechnology: principles and
applications in radiation oncology
Sang Hyun Cho and Sunil Krishnan, Editors
ISBN: 978-1-4398-7875-0

monte carlo Techniques in radiation
Therapy
Joao Seco and Frank Verhaegen, Editors
ISBN: 978-1-4665-0792-0

Image processing in radiation Therapy
Kristy Kay Brock, Editor
ISBN: 978-1-4398-3017-8

Informatics in radiation oncology
George Starkschall and R. Alfredo C. Siochi,
Editors
ISBN: 978-1-4398-2582-2

cone Beam computed Tomography
Chris C. Shaw, Editor
ISBN: 978-1-4398-4626-1

Tomosynthesis Imaging
Ingrid Reiser and Stephen Glick, Editors
ISBN: 978-1-4398-7870-5

stereotactic radiosurgery and
stereotactic Body radiation Therapy
Stanley H. Benedict, David J. Schlesinger,
Steven J. Goetsch, and Brian D. Kavanagh,
Editors
ISBN: 978-1-4398-4197-6

ImagIng In medIcal dIagnosIs and Therapy
William R. Hendee, Series Editor
Forthcoming titles
computer-aided detection and
diagnosis in medical Imaging
Qiang Li and Robert M. Nishikawa, Editors

handbook of small animal Imaging:
preclinical Imaging, Therapy, and
applications
George Kagadis, Nancy L. Ford,
George K. Loudos, and Dimitrios Karnabatidis,
Editors

physics of cardiovascular and
neurovascular Imaging
Carlo Cavedon and Stephen Rudin, Editors

Ultrasound Imaging and Therapy
Aaron Fenster and James C. Lacefield, Editors

physics of peT Imaging
Magnus Dahlbom, Editor

hybrid Imaging in cardiovascular
medicine
Yi-Hwa Liu and Albert Sinusas, Editors

scintillation dosimetry
Sam Beddar and Luc Beaulieu, Editors

Stereotactic Radiosurgery
and Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy

Edited by

Stanley H. Benedict, PhD
David J. Schlesinger, PhD
Steven J. Goetsch, PhD
Brian D. Kavanagh, MD, MPH

MATLAB® is a trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. and is used with permission. The MathWorks does not warrant the
accuracy of the text or exercises in this book. This book’s use or discussion of MATLAB® software or related products
does not constitute endorsement or sponsorship by The MathWorks of a particular pedagogical approach or particular
use of the MATLAB® software.

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2015 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Version Date: 20140304
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4398-4198-3 (eBook - PDF)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have been
made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright
holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this
form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may
rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the
publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://
www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923,
978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For
organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for
identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

I would like to dedicate this book to my many clinician and scientist friends in radiation
oncology. I have had the benefit of many mentors over the years—too many to list
them all here—but would like to thank James Smathers (UCLA), who taught me
the wonders of medical physics; Rupert Schmidt-Ullrich (MCVH-VCU), the value
of clinical research and clinical trials; and James Larner (UVA), the importance of
sound business and management practices. Finally, I would like to dedicate this to my
loving wife, Lori, and our daughters, Erin & Noelle; may you stay forever young.
Stanley Benedict
In memory of Robert and Marguerite Palmer. We will never
forget the strength and dignity with which you fought.
David Schlesinger
I would like to dedicate this book to my mentors in radiological physics, medical physics,
and radiation biology: Herman Cember, Herb Attix, Paul De Luca Jr., and Jack
Fowler. There are too many colleagues to begin thanking them all. I would also like to
thank my wife Mona and son David for putting up with me during trying times.
Steven J. Goetsch
I am deeply indebted to the abiding love and support I receive from my family (Julia,
Clare, and Thomas), without which I could not possibly achieve any meaningful success.
Brian Kavanagh

Contents
Series preface
Foreword
Preface
Acknowledgments
Editors
Contributors
Part I

EARLY HISTORY OF STEREOTACTIC RADIATION THERAPY

xi
xiii
xv
xvii
xix
xxi
1

1. Historic development of stereotactic radiosurgery and stereotactic body radiation
therapy
Steven J. Goetsch

3

Part II

37

STEREOTACTIC RADIATION THERAPY DELIVERY SYSTEMS

2. Gamma Knife
Steven J. Goetsch

39

3. Conventional medical linear accelerators adapted for stereotactic radiation therapy
William H. Hinson and Timothy D. Solberg

55

4. Dedicated linear accelerators for stereotactic radiation therapy
Malika Ouzidane, Joshua Evans, and Toufik Djemil

67

5. Light ion beam programs for stereotactic radiosurgery and stereotactic radiation
therapy
Michael F. Moyers, Marc R. Bussiére, and Richard P. Levy
6. Small animal irradiators for stereotactic radiation therapy
Ke Sheng, Patricia Lindsay, and John Wong
Part III STEREOTACTIC RADIATION THERAPY, PRECISION PATIENT POSITIONING,
AND IMMOBILIZATION

91
125

151

7. Developing stereotactic frames for cranial treatment
Habeeb Saleh and Bassel Kassas

153

8. Frames for extracranial treatment
D. Michael Lovelock

173

9. Motion management
Krishni Wijesooriya, Rohini George, and Mihaela Rosu

185

10. Image-guided radiation therapy and frameless stereotactic radiation therapy
Ryan McMahon and Fang-Fang Yin

211

Part IV STEREOTACTIC RADIATION THERAPY TREATMENT PLANNING AND
DOSIMETRY
11. Stereotactic treatment planning
Bill J. Salter, Brian Wang, and Vikren Sarkar

231
233

x

Contents

12. Small-field dosimetry for stereotactic radiosurgery and radiotherapy
Kamil M. Yenice, Yevgeniy Vinogradskiy, Moyed Miften, Sonja Dieterich, and Indra J. Das

265

Part V

287

NEW DIRECTIONS IN STEREOTACTIC RADIATION THERAPY

13.	Radiation biology of stereotactic radiotherapy
Igor Barani, Zachary Seymour, Ruben Fragoso, and Andrew Vaughan
14. Clinical outcomes using stereotactic body radiation therapy and stereotactic
radiosurgery
Megan E. Daly, Anthony L. Michaud, and Kyle E. Rusthoven
15.	The future of stereotactic radiosurgery
Joshua Evans, Cedric Yu, Michael Wright, Edwin Crandley, and David Wilson

289

315
349

Series preface
Advances in the science and technology of medical imaging and radiation therapy are more profound
and rapid than ever before since their inception more than a century ago. Further, the disciplines are
increasingly cross-linked as imaging methods become more widely used to plan, guide, monitor, and
assess treatments in radiation therapy. Today, the technologies of medical imaging and radiation therapy
are so complex and so computer-driven that it is difficult for the persons (physicians and technologists)
responsible for their clinical use to know exactly what is happening at the point of care when a patient is
being examined or treated. The persons best equipped to understand the technologies and their applications
are medical physicists, and these individuals are assuming greater responsibilities in the clinical arena to
ensure that what is intended for the patient is actually delivered in a safe and effective manner.
The growing responsibilities of medical physicists in the clinical arenas of medical imaging and radiation
therapy are not without their challenges, however. Most medical physicists are knowledgeable in either
radiation therapy or medical imaging and expert in one or a small number of areas within their discipline.
They sustain their expertise in these areas by reading scientific articles and attending scientific talks at
meetings. In contrast, their responsibilities increasingly extend beyond their specific areas of expertise. To
meet these responsibilities, medical physicists periodically must refresh their knowledge of advances in
medical imaging or radiation therapy, and they must be prepared to function at the intersection of these
two fields. How to accomplish these objectives is a challenge.
At the 2007 annual meeting of the American Association of Physicists in Medicine in Minneapolis,
Minnesota, this challenge was the topic of conversation during a lunch hosted by Taylor & Francis
Publishers and involving a group of senior medical physicists (Arthur L. Boyer, Joseph O. Deasy, C.-M.
Charlie Ma, Todd A. Pawlicki, Ervin B. Podgorsak, Elke Reitzel, Anthony B. Wolbarst, and Ellen D.
Yorke). The conclusion of this discussion was that a book series should be launched under the Taylor &
Francis banner with each volume in the series addressing a rapidly advancing area of medical imaging
or radiation therapy of importance to medical physicists. The aim would be for each volume to provide
medical physicists with the information needed to understand technologies driving a rapid advance and
their applications to safe and effective delivery of patient care.
Each volume in the series is edited by one or more individuals with recognized expertise in the
technological area encompassed by the book. The editors are responsible for selecting the authors of
individual chapters and ensuring that the chapters are comprehensive and intelligible to someone without
such expertise. The enthusiasm of volume editors and chapter authors has been gratifying and reinforces
the conclusion of the Minneapolis luncheon that this series of books addresses a major need of medical
physicists.
Imaging in Medical Diagnosis and Therapy would not have been possible without the encouragement and
support of the series manager, Ms. Luna Han of Taylor & Francis Publishers. The editors and authors are
and, most of all, I am indebted to her steady guidance of the entire project.
William R. Hendee, Series Editor
Rochester, Minnesota

Foreword
Stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) has substantially progressed since it was conceived of by Professor Lars
Leksell in 1951. As a concept markedly distinct from then-current radiation therapy and open neurosurgery
approaches, radiosurgery was met with skepticism and resistance by some. Ultimately, the disruptive
technology has become the preferred treatment strategy for many benign and malignant conditions.
Advances in manufacturing and control system engineering have led to breakthroughs in linear accelerator
(linac) technology that allow treatment of multiple small targets at extremely high doses. Improvements
in imaging science have translated into tremendous advances in the accuracy and precision of targeting
both static and moving targets. The accumulation of clinical evidence for the efficacy of radiosurgery has
broadened its reach beyond its initial home in the brain to locations throughout the body. Radiosurgery
technology continues to evolve and improve even today.
The University of Virginia (UVA) was fortunate to have one of the first Gamma Knife installations in
North America in 1989. The intervening years have brought changes that mirror the evolution of the field
as a whole. Gamma Knife technology at UVA saw a significant improvement with the installation of the
Perfexion model Gamma Knife in 2007, which enhanced workflow and improved treatment efficiency.
Linac-based radiosurgery for lung and spine tumors began to gain traction at about the same time, and
they are now both busy clinical programs at UVA using our Varian TrueBeam and TomoTherapy HD
treatment systems. In addition, we continue to explore new minimally invasive approaches for treating
small, well-localized targets, demonstrated by our program for MR-guide–focused ultrasound surgery.
In this text, the editors and authors have taken on a new strategy in their approach to covering the
topic of SRS and SBRT. While other works have focused, in large part, on identifying specific anatomical
sites and the application of SRT techniques to disease-specific clinical applications, this book explores the
historical developments of the Gamma Knife and linac-based SRS, the physics and radiobiology of SRS
and SRT using photons and charged particles, dedicated SRS and SBRT devices, and patient positioning
and immobilization strategies as well as a comprehensive clinical chapter on the various disease sites with
relevant ongoing and completed protocols. This refreshing approach for assessing SRS and SBRT thereby
allows the reader to explore well-referenced chapters on many individual aspects of the developing field.
We trust the physicians, physicists, and other professionals involved in radiation oncology will find this
book very valuable for their practices of SRS and SBRT.
James Larner, MD
Chairman, University of Virginia Department of Radiation Oncology
Jason Sheehan, MD, PhD
Professor and Vice-Chair, University of Virginia Department of Neurological Surgery

Preface
Since its inception as a field more than 50 years ago, stereotactic radiation surgery (SRS) has developed into
arguably the most sophisticated external beam radiation therapy delivery available today. SRS incorporates
the most rigorously developed strategies for patient simulation and immobiliza
(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read in chunks)