Medical Radiology
Radiation Oncology

Series Editors
Luther W. Brady
Hans-Peter Heilmann
Michael Molls
Carsten Nieder

For further volumes:
http://www.springer.com/series/4353

Simon S. Lo • Bin S. Teh
Jiade J. Lu • Tracey E. Schefter
Editors

Stereotactic Body
Radiation Therapy

123

Editors
Simon S. Lo
Department of Radiation Oncology
University Hospitals Seidman Cancer
Center
Case Comprehensive Cancer Center
Case Western Reserve University
Cleveland, OH
USA
Bin S. Teh
Department of Radiation Oncology
Weill Cornell Medical College
The Methodist Hospital Cancer
Center and Research Institute
Houston, TX
USA

Jiade J. Lu
Department of Radiation Oncology
National University Cancer Institute of
Singapore (NCIS)
National University of Singapore
Singapore
Tracey E. Schefter
Department of Radiation Oncology
University of Colorado
Aurora, CO
USA

ISSN 0942-5373
ISBN 978-3-642-25604-2
ISBN 978-3-642-25605-9
DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-25605-9

(eBook)

Springer Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2012947064
Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is
concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting,
reproduction on microfilm or in any other way, and storage in data banks. Duplication of this publication
or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the German Copyright Law of September 9,
1965, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Violations are
liable to prosecution under the German Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, etc. in this publication does not
imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
Product liability: The publishers cannot guarantee the accuracy of any information about dosage and
application contained in this book. In every individual case the user must check such information by
consulting the relevant literature.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

To my parents, my wife, and my children for their support and
encouragement in this project
Simon S. Lo, M.D.
Dedicated to the support and love from my mother, wife, daughter,
and siblings. The chapter on renal cell carcinoma is a special
dedication to my late father who passed away from renal cell
carcinoma. He had great impact on my life and career and motivated
both my brother and I to pursue research and contribute to the
advances in the field of renal cell carcinoma
Bin S. Teh, M.D.
To my family for their support and encouragement in this project and
many others
Jiade J. Lu, M.D.
In loving memory of my mother who lost her short battle with breast
cancer in 1986. Her spirit lives within me
Tracey E. Schefter, M.D.

Foreword

Stereotactic Radiosurgery
In 1980, the National Cancer Institute on the advice of the Committee for
Radiation Oncology Studies proposed an investigation into the feasibility for
the dynamic treatment planning and dynamic treatment delivery which would
allow for the tumor to be in the ﬁeld of treatment throughout the entire course
of the treatment program accommodating for motion of the tumor with respiration or motion of the patient during treatment. A number of institutions in
the United States were involved in this project but the ultimate result indicated
that the technology and computer programs were not adequate to deal with the
issue.
As a consequence of the work being done by Professor Mort Kligerman at
the Los Alamos Pi-Meson project, various devices for immobilization were
developed allowing a much more sophisticated technology for immobilization
than had existed before and these were rapidly incorporated into clinical
practice. This allowed for the development of three-dimensional conformal
treatment programs, leading ultimately to the development of the intensity
modulated radiation therapy in the early 1990s to image guided radiation
therapy in the later 1990s, and ultimately to linear accelerator-based stereotactic radiation therapy technologies, and then to the CyberKnife.
The stereotactic body radiosurgery procedures allowed for focusing on the
tumor throughout the entire course of treatment accommodating for motion
and breathing with the machine operating in synchrony with the table. Without
question, this represented a dramatic advance in terms of the potential for
improvement in control rates for tumors based on the evolution of technology
and imaging studies, and the ability to fuse these imaging studies to more
precisely deﬁne the tumor but also with the reduction in side effects relative to
the treatment program itself.
The results from the stereotactic body radiosurgery programs are now
becoming more widely available, clearly indicating that this is a dramatic step
forward in terms of allowing for maximum control of the tumor with minimum
in the way of complication.

vii

viii

Foreword

The present volume deals in a most effective fashion with all the issues that
are mandated by stereotactic body radiosurgery. It is a document that needs to
be on the shelf of every radiation oncologist in the world because of the clarity,
the comprehensive character, and the signiﬁcance of the data being presented.
7 June 2012

Luther W. Brady
Hans-Peter Heilmann
Michael Molls
Carsten Nieder

Foreword

The Desperate Role of Clinical Science in the Implementation
of Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy/Stereotactic Ablative
Radiotherapy
Most physicians have extensive undergraduate training in science and speciﬁcally
the scientiﬁc method. They also have training in art, history, languages, and other
liberal arts intended to give them balance and social conscience. Subsequent
medical training is almost purely in the realm of science aside from the occasional
class in humanities like courses for developing interviewing skills. Success in the
science courses in medical school allows future physicians to choose from the best
residencies and fellowships to train for their life’s craft. After more than a decade
of medical training and hard work, they reach the point where they are competent
to care for patients...and then, oddly, they abruptly abandon the scientiﬁc
method. Instead, they champion non-scientiﬁc attributes like strong will, emotional fervor, and parochial (even religious) zeal relating to their specialty.
Indeed, the physician products of the most competitive residency programs are
frequently the worst of the anti-science contingency. They continue to work hard
and hone their skills, but unbiased scientiﬁc growth is stiﬂed.
The science of clinical practice that too many physicians abandon is called
clinical science or the science of determining the best management options for
our patients. It is a well developed, serious, and critically important science in
that it is the best pathway to prudent change. Ongoing patient suffering is the
obvious motivation for this change. How could the medical community not be
motivated to change? Patients suffer from their commonly poor health status,
and they will potentially suffer from the course of diseases that they will
develop. Clinical science allows us to make a valid comparison between the
status quo and the various prospects for a changing evaluation or management.
What a shame it is that clinical science and the scientiﬁc method play such a
small role in day-to-day clinical operations where so few patients will ever be
offered a clinical trial as a diagnostic or therapeutic option.
Stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR), also known as stereotactic body
radiation therapy (SBRT), was ﬁrst introduced in the mid-1990s and constituted
a dramatic change in the way radiation had been previously delivered in both
conduct and biology. It primarily exploited modern technological innovations to
achieve geometric avoidance of high dose to normal tissues. Importantly, though,
was the use of oligofractionated (i.e., few fractions) radiation delivery that would

ix

x

undoubtedly result in biological effects very different from conventionally
fractionated radiation. This different biology constituted a potential for a
dramatic change in outcome. While change in therapy outcome for deadly
cancers, like lung cancer, should have been welcomed, it also put a veil of
uncertainty over the use of stereotactic radiation in regard to informing patients
about risks and beneﬁts.
When there is potential for a positive change in the outcome of a previously
dismal disease with simultaneous uncertainty about toxicity, the only rational
course is to apply a legitimate clinical science approach. This involves forming a
hypothesis, deﬁning a clinical model, devising an experiment (i.e., a clinical
trial), testing the hypothesis under controlled circumstances, collecting data,
and reporting the results. The earliest implementation of SABR in the clinic was
mostly uncontrolled, similar to the implementation of too many innovations in
radiation oncology. These early reports were both compelling and, frankly,
frightening. More historical use of such large dose per fraction radiotherapy
brought disaster than promise for patients. Early investigators recognized two
important caveats surrounding stereotactic radiotherapy: (1) Patients deserved
the utmost protection from risk and (2) The potentially paradigm changing
therapy was at risk of being marginalized if the level of evidence was low. Both
of these caveats are best addressed with legitimate clinical testing using validated clinical science.
Early investigators of SABR from across the world met at any chance to
share ideas. A series of clinical trials were developed and performed using
variations of the technology, dosing, and patient selection. Despite the differences, the biology was strikingly similar such that outcomes could be systematically assessed. Phase I and II trials were performed selecting patients who
were properly consented to understand the uncertainties associated with the
therapy. Fortunately, the outcomes have been overall positive. Hence, the
impetus for new textbooks on the subject.
As a case in point, the Indiana University experience in early lung cancer
demonstrates the strength of the scientiﬁc approach. The clinical model chosen
for investigation by the researchers was early lung cancer in patients too frail
for standard surgical resection. The technique for radiation delivery was deﬁned
and used consistently. A logistically attractive 3-fraction regimen was chosen
for comprehensive study. Initially, a phase I dose escalation study was performed trying to hone in on the optimal dose. Patients were consented with full
disclosure that such treatments could lead to previously unobserved toxicity. To
the surprise of all associated with the experiment, dose was escalated to strikingly high dose levels (24 Gy per fraction times 3 fractions, total 72 Gy) before
dose limiting toxicity was ﬁnally observed. This dose dramatically exceeded the
‘‘expectations’’ of the researcher via any logical predictions. Patients enjoyed
very high levels of tumor control at the tolerable high dose levels. In reality,
without the framework of a scientiﬁcally valid clinical approach, patients would
not have been treated at the dose levels affording such impressive tumor
eradication. Clinical science literally saved patients both in this trial and future
trials from dying of lung cancer via treatment with inadequate dose.
The lessons of clinical science from the Indiana experience goes farther. The
phase I study described above was underpowered with regard to patient
subgroups. It enrolled any medically inoperable patient with early lung cancer

Foreword

Foreword

xi

irrespective of the location of the tumor in the lung. By design, a small number
of patients were enrolled to each level of a broad range of dose levels. In the
subsequent phase II study, a larger (more statistically powered) group of
patients was enrolled to the highest tolerable dose level. In the phase II study, a
subtle but important reality was observed that patients with centrally located
tumors had higher risk of severe toxicity as compared to patients with
peripheral tumors. This distinction was critical in both selecting appropriate
patients for the most potent form of the therapy as well as protecting those at
high risk of harm. Again, this important distinction was afforded by an
appreciation of valid clinical science.
The value of legitimate clinical science does not go unnoticed. The best
journals now require that key elements to the scientiﬁc method of discovery,
like statistical power and data safety monitoring, be conveyed in order to
publish. Retrospective reports, so ﬂawed in their approach to reaching valid
conclusions, will increasingly be rejected for publication by good journals.
Ideally, as technologies used in stereotactic radiotherapy delivery are improved
or initially introduced, investigators will perform valid testing in patients to
draw conclusions about the value of the new therapy. The same goes for using
chemical and biological modulators in conjunction with potent stereotactic
radiation.
More than most radiotherapy innovations, the implementation of SABR has
followed a clinically scientiﬁc approach. Even only 15 years after the ﬁrst
extracranial stereotactic radiation treatments, it is clear that the impact will be
paradigm changing. Phase III trials possibly changing the standard of care are
underway. Unfortunately, they are in danger of failing from problems of
accrual. Why? Recall the ﬁrst two paragraphs of this preface describing the
‘‘anti-science’’ perspective of too many clinicians. Nonetheless, we hope that the
success of the therapy will continue as it is implemented in new organ systems
and body sites. Yet hope, as any clinical scientist will tell you, must give way to
prudent evaluations, evidence gathering, and, ultimately, appreciation of
reality.
Dallas, TX, USA

Robert D. Timmerman

Foreword

SBRT: Present and Future Directions
Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a ﬁeld in its formative years
with very promising early results. For example, as reported by Timmerman and
colleagues (JAMA 17:1070–1076, 2010), for inoperable early stage lung cancer,
a 3-year primary tumor control rate of 90.6% was reported which prior to the
advent of SBRT was unheard of. This book on SBRT edited by Drs. Lo, Teh,
Lu, and Schefter is an important comprehensive book that informs practitioners, researchers, trainees, and students, and allied health professionals of
the potential beneﬁts to patients of applying SBRT to a variety of tumor types,
both in the primary and metastatic setting through proper patient selection. The
risk of harms to patients is also present, since much larger fraction sizes are
utilized with few opportunities to make corrections although fortunately there
is a heightened awareness of the importance of safety, and efforts to improve
safety processes and technologies are constantly ongoing. A PubMed search in
2011 reveals approximately 400 publications in the literature. It is expected that
this number will exponentially increase as investigators in oncology continue to
become more focused on minimizing ‘‘collateral damage’’ in the patient through
the use of customized systemic targeted agents, and minimally invasive surgeries. How to integrate these innovate therapies with SBRT will certainly be
the subject of future publications. While normal tissue tolerances have been
fairly well-deﬁned for radiation therapy given in conventional fractionation,
data are sorely lacking at this point in time on normal tissue complication
probabilities to organs at risk when subjected to SBRT-type fractionation
regimens. As such, much work remains to 
(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read in chunks)