Task Group 142 report: Quality assurance of medical acceleratorsa…
Eric E. Kleinb兲
Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri

Joseph Hanley
Hackensack University Medical Center, Hackensack, New Jersey

John Bayouth
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa

Fang-Fang Yin
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina

William Simon
Sun Nuclear Corp., Melbourne, Florida

Sean Dresser
Northside Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia

Christopher Serago
Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida

Francisco Aguirre
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

Lijun Ma
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California

Bijan Arjomandy
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

Chihray Liu
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida

Consultants:
Carlos Sandin
Elekta Oncology, Crawley, United Kingdom

Todd Holmes
Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto, California

共Received 24 February 2009; revised 8 July 2009; accepted for publication 8 July 2009;
published 17 August 2009兲
The task group 共TG兲 for quality assurance of medical accelerators was constituted by the American
Association of Physicists in Medicine’s Science Council under the direction of the Radiation
Therapy Committee and the Quality Assurance and Outcome Improvement Subcommittee. The task
group 共TG-142兲 had two main charges. First to update, as needed, recommendations of Table II of
the AAPM TG-40 report on quality assurance and second, to add recommendations for asymmetric
jaws, multileaf collimation 共MLC兲, and dynamic/virtual wedges. The TG accomplished the update
to TG-40, specifying new test and tolerances, and has added recommendations for not only the new
ancillary delivery technologies but also for imaging devices that are part of the linear accelerator.
The imaging devices include x-ray imaging, photon portal imaging, and cone-beam CT. The TG
report was designed to account for the types of treatments delivered with the particular machine.
For example, machines that are used for radiosurgery treatments or intensity-modulated radiotherapy 共IMRT兲 require different tests and/or tolerances. There are specific recommendations for
MLC quality assurance for machines performing IMRT. The report also gives recommendations as
to action levels for the physicists to implement particular actions, whether they are inspection,
scheduled action, or immediate and corrective action. The report is geared to be flexible for the
physicist to customize the QA program depending on clinical utility. There are specific tables
according to daily, monthly, and annual reviews, along with unique tables for wedge systems, MLC,
and imaging checks. The report also gives specific recommendations regarding setup of a QA
program by the physicist in regards to building a QA team, establishing procedures, training of
personnel, documentation, and end-to-end system checks. The tabulated items of this report have
4197

Med. Phys. 36 „9…, September 2009

0094-2405/2009/36„9…/4197/16/$25.00

© 2009 Am. Assoc. Phys. Med.

4197

4198

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

4198

been considerably expanded as compared with the original TG-40 report and the recommended
tolerances accommodate differences in the intended use of the machine functionality 共non-IMRT,
IMRT, and stereotactic delivery兲. © 2009 American Association of Physicists in Medicine.
关DOI: 10.1118/1.3190392兴
Key words: accelerator, QA, quality assurance, radiotherapy
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4198
I.A. Purpose. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4198
I.B. Background. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4198
II. QUALITY ASSURANCE OF MEDICAL
ACCELARATORS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4199
II.A. General. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4199
II.B. Test frequencies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4204
II.C. Guidelines for tolerance values. . . . . . . . . . . . 4204
II.C.1. Acceptance testing procedure standards... 4204
II.C.2. Commissioning baseline values. . . . . . . . . 4204
II.C.3. Tolerances and action levels. . . . . . . . . . . . 4205
II.C.4. Uncertainties, repeatability, and precision.. 4205
II.D. Ancillary treatment devices not in TG-40.... 4206
II.D.1. Asymmetric jaws. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4206
II.D.2. Dynamic/virtual/universal wedge. . . . . . . . 4206
II.D.3. MLC. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4206
II.D.4. TBI/TSET. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4207
II.D.5. Radiographic imaging. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4207
II.D.6. Respiratory gating. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4208
III. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS/
IMPLEMENTATION SCHEME. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4209
I. INTRODUCTION
I.A. Purpose

The AAPM TG-401 report published in 1994 is a widely
used and referenced document which includes recommendations for general quality assurance 共QA兲 tests for medical
linear accelerators. Since the publication of TG-40, several
new technologies have been developed and are now commonly used in clinical practice. These technologies include
multileaf collimation 共MLC兲, asymmetric jaws, dynamic and
virtual wedges, and electronic portal imaging devices
共EPIDs兲. Image guidance devices such as cone-beam CT
共CBCT兲, static kilovoltage 共kV兲 imaging, and respiratory
gating were rarely used in 1994. In addition, TG-40 did not
consider the demands placed on an accelerator by procedures
such as stereotactic radiosurgery 共SRS兲, stereotactic body radiation therapy 共SBRT兲, total body photon irradiation 共TBI兲,
and intensity-modulated radiotherapy 共IMRT兲 treatment.
Also, the quality of linear accelerators in terms of accuracy
and precision has improved in recent years, allowing for procedures such as SRS, SBRT, and IMRT.
The purpose of this report is to build upon the recommendations of TG-40 for QA of medical linear accelerators including the before mentioned technologies 共MLC, newer
wedge systems, asymmetric jaws, imaging systems, and resMedical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

piratory systems兲 and procedures such as SRS, SBRT, TBI,
and IMRT. During the development of this report, investigation of technologies that deliver MLC-based IMRT with simultaneous gantry rotation had just begun, and therefore QA
for these technologies is not included in the report.
The recommendations of this task group are not intended
to be used as regulations. These recommendations are guidelines for QMPs to use and appropriately interpret for their
individual institution and clinical setting. Each institution
may have site-specific or state mandated needs and requirements which may modify their usage of these recommendations.
I.B. Background

The underlying principle behind TG-40 was the International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements2
共ICRU兲 recommendation that the dose delivered to the patient be within ⫾5% of the prescribed dose. Taking into consideration the many steps involved in delivering dose to a
target volume in a patient, each step must be performed with
accuracy better than 5% to achieve this recommendation.
The goal of a QA program for linear accelerators is to
assure that the machine characteristics do not deviate significantly from their baseline values acquired at the time of
acceptance and commissioning.3 There are several publications that describe procedures and conditions for acceptance
testing and commissioning, and the reader is referred to
these: The International Electrotechnical Commission4,5
共IEC兲, American Association of Physicists in Medicine3,6,7
共AAPM兲, and American College of Medical Physics8
共ACMP兲. Many of these baseline values are entered into
treatment planning systems to characterize and/or model the
treatment machine, and therefore can directly affect treatment plans calculated for every patient treated on that machine. Deviation from the baseline values could thus result in
suboptimal treatment of patients. Machine parameters can
deviate from their baseline values as a result of many reasons. There can be unexpected changes in machine performance due to machine malfunction, mechanical breakdown,
physical accidents, or component failure. Major component
replacement 共waveguide, bending magnet, etc.兲 may also alter machine performance from the original parameters. In
addition there can be gradual changes as a result of aging of
the machine components. These patterns of failure must be
considered when establishing a periodic QA program.
It is not the goal of this report to describe the experimental techniques for performing QA tests, as these tests are
described in a number of publications.9–35 We also realize the
increased demands on staff in the current healthcare environ-

4199

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

4199

TABLE I. Daily.
Machine-type tolerance
Procedure

Non-IMRT

IMRT

SRS/SBRT

Dosimetry
X-ray output constancy 共all energies兲
Electron output constancy 共weekly,
except for machines with unique
e-monitoring requiring daily兲

3%

Mechanical
Laser localization
Distance indicator 共ODI兲 @ iso
Collimator size indicator

2 mm
2 mm
2 mm

1.5 mm
2 mm
2 mm

1 mm
2 mm
1 mm

Safety
Door interlock 共beam off兲
Door closing safety
Audiovisual monitor共s兲
Stereotactic interlocks 共lockout兲
Radiation area monitor 共if used兲
Beam on indicator

ment and recognize the fact that the tests should be simple,
rapid, and reproducible. Since the publication of TG-40 there
have been many QA products designed around the TG-40
table that make execution of these tests more efficient.
TG-40 stated that the test procedures should be able to distinguish parameter changes smaller than tolerance or action
levels. A definition of repeatability is included in Sec. II C.
As noted in TG-40, the QA program for linear accelerators is very much a team effort, and the responsibilities of
performing various tasks are typically divided among physicists, dosimetrists, therapists, and accelerator engineers.
However, we reiterate the recommendation that the overall
responsibility for a linear accelerator QA program be assigned to one individual: The qualified medical physicist
共QMP兲.
The foundation of linear accelerator based QA lies in
Table II of TG-40. Since its publication linear accelerators
have changed not only with respect to their physical construction but also in their role as treatment devices. Asymmetric jaws, dynamic/virtual wedges, and multileaf collimators have been added. Intensity-modulated radiation therapy
and image-guided radiation therapy 共IGRT兲 have increased
demands on the accuracy required of the linear accelerator
for precise dose delivery. The types of treatments delivered
with the machine should also have a role in determining the
QA program that is appropriate for that treatment machine.
For example, machines that are used for SRS/SBRT treatments, TBI, or IMRT require different tests and/or tolerances. Some older machines may be upgraded 共MLCs, portal
vision兲 in order to perform IMRT or stereotactic radiotherapy. This will change the machine category for testing
requirements. Solid compensator based IMRT is an option
for some machines that are not IMRT capable. Many of the
mechanical and dosimetric tests that apply to IMRT maMedical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

NA

Functional
Functional
Functional
NA
Functional
Functional

Functional

chines will therefore be applied to these machines and in
most cases, specific for the particular manufacturer.
And finally, this report does give recommendations in regards to imaging devices that are connected to the accelerator and with gating as the accelerators operation can be tied
to the respiratory system’s signals. This was necessary as
safety, mechanical, and operational attributes of imaging and
gating are tied to the accelerator.
II. QUALITY ASSURANCE OF MEDICAL
ACCELARATORS
II.A. General

The recommendations of this report are summarized in six
tables. The first three tables, Table I 共daily兲, Table II
共monthly兲, and Table III 共annual兲, essentially replace Table II
of TG-40. However, as is evident, the scope of testing and
the number of variables have increased compared to TG-40.
Each table has specific recommendations based on the nature
of the treatments delivered on the individual machine. The
tables are differentiated into non-IMRT or nonstereotactic
machines, IMRT machines, and IMRT/stereotactic machines.
There are also explicit recommendations based on the equipment manufacturer as a result of the design characteristics of
those machines. The recommendations in each table utilize
the QA categories used in Table II of TG-40, dosimetry, mechanical, and safety, while adding a new category: Respiratory gating. The tests for asymmetric jaws and TBI/total skin
electron therapy 共TSET兲 are contained in Tables II and III.
Three additional tables were created for dynamic/virtual/
universal wedges 共Table IV兲, MLC 共Table V兲, and imaging
共Table VI兲. All of these ancillary devices not covered in
TG-40 are discussed in Sec. II D. Test frequencies for each
test are listed in the tables and the rationale for them is dis-

4200

Klein et al.: Task Group 142 Report: QA of Medical Accelerators

4200

TABLE II. Monthly.
Machine-type tolerance
Procedure

Non-IMRT

IMRT

SRS/SBRT

Dosimetry
X-ray output constancy
Electron output constancy
Backup monitor chamber constancy
Typical dose ratea output constancy

2%
NA

Photon beam profile constancy
Electron beam profile constancy
Electron beam energy constancy

2% 共@ IMRT dose rate兲

2% 共@ stereo dose rate, MU兲

1%
1%
2%/2 mm

Mechanical
Light/radiation field coincidenceb
Light/radiation field coincidenceb 共asymmetric兲
Distance check device for lasers compared with
front pointer
Gantry/collimator angle indicators
共@ cardinal angles兲 共digital only兲
Accessory trays 共i.e., port film graticle tray兲
Jaw position indicators 共symmetric兲c
Jaw position indicators 共asymmetric兲d
Cross-hair centering 共walkout兲
Treatment couch position indicatorse
Wedge placement accuracy
Compensator placement accuracyf
Latching of wedges, blocking trayg
Localizing lasers

2 mm or 1% on a side
1 mm or 1% on a side
1mm
1.0°

2 mm/1°

⫾2 mm

2 mm
2 mm
1 mm
1 mm
2 mm/1°
2 mm
1 mm
Functional
⫾1 mm

1 mm/0.5°

⬍ ⫾ 1 mm

Safety
Laser guard-interlock test

Functional

Respiratory gating
Beam output constancy
Phase, amplitude beam control
In-room respiratory monitoring system
Gating interlock

2%
Functional
Functional
Functional

a

Dose monitoring as a function of dose rate.
Light/radiation field coincidence need only be checked monthly if light field is used for clinical setups.
c
Tolerance is summation of total for each width or length.
d
Asymmetric jaws should be checked at settings of 0.0 and 10.0.
e
Lateral, longitudinal, and rotational.
f
Compensator based IMRT 共solid compensators兲 require a quantitative value for tray position 共wedge or blocking tray slot兲 set at a maximum deviation of 1.0
mm from the center of the compensator tray mount and the cross hairs.
g
Check at collimator/gantry angle combination that places the latch toward the floor.
b

cussed in Sec. II C. This task group 共TG兲 considers that all of
the tests included in the tables are important for ensuring the
equipment to be suitable for high quality and safe radiation
treatments. For example, in reference to physical wedge
placement accuracy, Table II notes a monthly placement test
with an accuracy of 2 mm. Deviations greater than 2 mm
could result in errors as much as 2% at clinically relevant
depths.
A consistent beam profile is an important quantity for accurate and reproducible dose delivery in radiotherapy. Beam
uniformity was addressed in TG-40 Table II with flatness
constancy, i.e., consistent flatness and symmetry tolerance
Medical Physics, Vol. 36, No. 9, September 2009

levels. Constancy is specifically associated with flatness;
however, symmetry tolerance can be interpreted as either 
(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read in chunks)