American Association of Physicists in Medicine
Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group 53:
Quality assurance for clinical radiotherapy treatment planning
Benedick Fraassa)
University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan

Karen Doppke
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts

Margie Hunt
Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
and Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York

Gerald Kutcher
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York

George Starkschall
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

Robin Stern
University of California, Davis Medical Center, Sacramento, California

Jake Van Dyke
London Regional Cancer Center, London, Ontario, Canada

~Received 15 December 1997; accepted for publication 4 August 1998!
In recent years, the sophistication and complexity of clinical treatment planning and treatment
planning systems has increased significantly, particularly including three-dimensional ~3D! treatment planning systems, and the use of conformal treatment planning and delivery techniques. This
has led to the need for a comprehensive set of quality assurance ~QA! guidelines that can be applied
to clinical treatment planning. This document is the report of Task Group 53 of the Radiation
Therapy Committee of the American Association of Physicists in Medicine. The purpose of this
report is to guide and assist the clinical medical physicist in developing and implementing a
comprehensive but viable program of quality assurance for modern radiotherapy treatment planning. The scope of the QA needs for treatment planning is quite broad, encompassing image-based
definition of patient anatomy, 3D beam descriptions for complex beams including multileaf collimator apertures, 3D dose calculation algorithms, and complex plan evaluation tools including dose
volume histograms. The Task Group recommends an organizational framework for the task of
creating a QA program which is individualized to the needs of each institution and addresses the
issues of acceptance testing, commissioning the planning system and planning process, routine
quality assurance, and ongoing QA of the planning process. This report, while not prescribing
specific QA tests, provides the framework and guidance to allow radiation oncology physicists to
design comprehensive and practical treatment planning QA programs for their clinics. © 1998
American Association of Physicists in Medicine. @S0094-2405~98!03410-5#
Key words: treatment planning, quality assurance, 3D treatment planning
PREFACE
This document is the report of Task Group 53 of the Radiation Therapy Committee of the American Association of
Physicists in Medicine ~AAPM!. The purpose of this report
is to guide and assist the radiation oncology physicist in
developing and implementing a comprehensive but viable
program of quality assurance for radiotherapy treatment
planning. This report is the first guidance on the topic of
treatment planning quality assurance ~QA! from the AAPM,
although there are several related reports,1 including the recent report from Task Group 40 on Comprehensive QA for
Radiation Oncology.2 Further expansion of AAPM recommendations regarding treatment planning quality assurance is
1773

Med. Phys. 25 „10…, October 1998

likely after the radiation oncology community accumulates
some experience with the approach recommended in this report.
In recent years, the increased complexity of the treatment
planning process required to support such procedures as conformal radiotherapy has led to the need for a comprehensive
set of quality assurance guidelines that can be applied to
treatment planning systems that support this complex process. This Task Group has been charged by the AAPM to
prepare this report recommending the scope and content of
necessary quality assurance procedures and the frequency of
tests, from acceptance testing, characterization and commissioning to routine quality assurance of clinical system use.

0094-2405/98/25„10…/1773/57/$10.00

© 1998 Am. Assoc. Phys. Med.

1773

1774

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

These procedures will be tailored to the complexity and
functionality of the treatment planning procedures used clinically. This report provides the overall framework within
which individualized quality assurance programs may be designed and implemented.
This report on treatment planning quality assurance attempts to aid the radiation oncology physicist in creating a
quality assurance program for the clinical use of treatment
planning in the physicist’s department. In general, except for
recommendations summarized in one appendix, this report
does not discuss quality assurance activities that should be
carried out by vendors or other providers of treatment planning systems. The numerous important quality assurance
tasks associated with the design, software engineering, testing, validation, packaging, marketing, and other preparation
of a commercial treatment planning system for safe use are
beyond the scope of the current task group. This document
considers only the responsibility of the radiation oncology
physicist in establishing and maintaining a quality assurance
program for the clinical use of radiotherapy treatment planning.
The report also concentrates on quality assurance for the
treatment planning process, and not just QA or commissioning of the treatment planning system. Although a treatment
planning system ~software and hardware! may be tested extensively, a QA program for treatment planning must also
consider how the treatment planning system is used as well
as how it interacts with the treatment planning process.
Therefore, creation of a treatment planning process that incorporates self-consistency and procedural checks is a major
component of a quality assurance program for treatment
planning.
In order to successfully implement an appropriate quality
assurance program for treatment planning, adequate resources must be allocated. The radiation oncology physicist
must be afforded adequate time to ascertain the extent and
complexity of the treatment planning needs of the radiation
oncology clinic, and based upon this information, the physicist must design and implement an appropriate quality assurance program. For a treatment planning process of a given
complexity, the quality assurance requirements in a small
radiation oncology facility should be no less than those in a
large, academic medical center.
The report begins with a summary intended for radiation
oncology administrators ~Part A!. Part B is directed to the
radiation oncology physicist, and comprises the bulk of the
report. Part B begins with an introduction which delineates
the scope of the task, introduces some definitions and terms,
and establishes targets for the accuracy of treatment planning
results. Chapter 2 describes specifications and acceptance
testing for the treatment planning system. The most extensive part of the report is contained in Chaps. 3 and 4, which
describe commissioning of the nondosimetric and dosimetric
parts of the planning system, respectively. Routine testing of
the treatment planning system is described in Chap. 5. Chapter 6 discusses ways to apply QA to the entire planning process, while Chap. 7 lists computer-system management activities which are an important part of the treatment planning
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1774

quality assurance process. Finally, the last chapter summarizes some of the important recommendations of the task
group. Appendix 1 contains some recommendations and
comments about both vendor and user responsibilities. Appendix 2 contains examples of some nondosimetric test procedures, to give the reader an idea of how to design and
implement test procedures. Appendices 3, 4, and 5 give examples of dose calculation commissioning tests for photon
beams, electron beams, and brachytherapy, respectively.
Terminology used in this report will be similar to that
used in other AAPM task group reports:
• Shall or must are used when the activity is required by
various regulatory agencies.
• Recommend is used when the task group expects that
the procedure should normally be followed as described. However, there may prove to be instances
where other issues, techniques or priorities could force
the modification of the recommendation of the task
group.
• Should is used when it is expected that local analysis of
the situation may change the way a particular activity is
performed.
This report recommends the institution of a comprehensive quality assurance program for treatment planning in
each radiation oncology clinic. As will be seen, this encompasses a large amount of work, requiring the attention particularly of the radiation oncology physicist, but also including dosimetrists/treatment planners, radiation oncologists,
radiation therapists and, if available, computer support staff.
Particularly at this time of downsizing and major restructuring of the way the practice of clinical medicine works, it is
very important for hospital administrators and providers of
medical care reimbursement to understand the critical nature
of appropriate quality assurance for a procedure that is such
an important part of the way high quality radiotherapy is
performed. If compromises must be made in the interest of
cost reduction, these compromises should be made initially
in establishing the complexity and efficiency of the treatment
planning process in the clinic. Once a particular type of process has been established, then it is imperative for the safety
and well-being of the patient that an appropriate quality assurance program be implemented to support that process. In
this report, we have tried to balance the need to be cost
effective and efficient with the need for high quality care. As
the recommendations of this task group are used throughout
the community, it will be important for radiation oncology
physicists to improve their quality assurance tools and programs, so that the quality of treatments can be improved
while also keeping the costs as low as feasible.
OUTLINE
Preface
Part A: INFORMATION FOR RADIATION
ONCOLOGY ADMINISTRATORS
Part B: QUALITY ASSURANCE FOR CLINICAL
RADIOTHERAPY TREATMENT
PLANNING

1775

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

Chapter 1: Introduction
1.1. Introduction
1.2. General definitions and aims
1.3. Scope
1.4. Initial recommendations ~how to use this
report!
1.5. The treatment planning process
1.6. Sources of uncertainties
1.7. Required and/or desired tolerances and
accuracy
Chapter 2: Acceptance tests for treatment planning
systems
2.1. Acceptance testing
2.2. Determination of specifications
2.3. Acceptance testing procedure
Chapter 3: Nondosimetric commissioning
3.1. Introduction
3.2. Patient positioning and immobilization
3.2.1. Immobilization
3.2.2. Positioning and simulation
3.3. Image acquisition
3.3.1. Imaging parameters
3.3.2. Artifacts and distortion in image
acquisition systems
3.4. Anatomical description
3.4.1. Image conversion and input
3.4.2. Anatomical structures
3.4.2.1. 3D structures
3.4.2.2. Contours
3.4.2.3. 3D points and lines
3.4.3. Density representation
3.4.3.1. Bolus and editing the 3D
density distribution
3.4.4. Image use and display
3.4.5. Dataset registration
3.5. Beams
3.5.1. Beam arrangements and definition
3.5.2. Machine description, limits and
readouts
3.5.3. Geometric accuracy
3.5.4. Field shape design
3.5.4.1. Manual aperture entry
3.5.4.2. Automatic aperture definition
3.5.4.3. Special MLC features
3.5.5. Wedges
3.5.6. Beam and aperture display
3.5.7. Compensators
3.6. Operational aspects of dose calculations
3.6.1. Methodology and algorithm use
3.6.2. Inhomogeneity correction effects
3.7. Plan evaluation
3.7.1. Dose display
3.7.2. Dose volume histograms
3.7.3. Use of NTCP/TCP and other tools
3.7.4. Composite plans
3.8. Hardcopy output
3.9. Plan implementation and verification
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1775

3.9.1. Coordinate systems and scale
conventions
3.9.2. Data transfer
3.9.3. Portal image verification
3.10. Brachytherapy issues
Chapter 4: Dose calculation commissioning
4.1. Introduction
4.2. Measurement of self-consistent dataset
4.2.1. Self-consistency
4.2.2. Data analysis, handling, and storage
4.3. Data input into the RTP system
4.3.1. General considerations
4.3.2. Computer transfer of data from a
water phantom
4.3.3. Manual data entry
4.3.4. Verification of input data
4.4. Dose calculation algorithm parameter
determination
4.5. Methods for dosimetric comparison and
verification
4.6. External beam calculation verification
4.6.1. Introduction
4.6.2. Required and/or achievable accuracy
4.6.3. Photon calculation verification
experiments
4.6.4. Electron calculation verification
experiments
4.7. Brachytherapy calculation verification
4.8. Absolute dose output and plan normalization
4.8.1. General guidelines for QA for
normalization and MU calculation
4.8.2. Verification of the steps in the process
4.9. Clinical verifications
Chapter 5: Periodic quality assurance testing
Chapter 6: QA as part of the daily planning process
Chapter 7: System management and security
7.1. Management personnel
7.1.1. Responsible physicist
7.1.2. Computer systems manager
7.2. Computer system management tasks
7.3. Data management tasks
7.4. Computer networks
7.5. System security
Chapter 8: Summary of recommendations
Chapter 9: Conclusions
Appendix 1: Vendor and user responsibilities
A1.1. Vendor responsibilities
A1.1.1. Documentation
A1.1.2. User training
A1.1.3. Software quality assurance
A1.1.4. Version updates
A1.1.5. Release of data formats
A1.1.6. Communication with users
A1.1.7. Suggestions for vendors
A1.2. User responsibilities
A1.2.1. Responsible physicist
A1.2.2. Documentation
A1.2.3. User training

1776

Fraass et al.: Task Group 53 report on quality assurance

A1.2.4. Software quality assurance
A1.2.5. Version updates
A1.2.6. Use of data formats
A1.2.7. Education and communication with
vendor
Appendix 2: Example QA tests
Appendix 3: Photon dose calculation commissioning
A3.1. Depth dose
A3.2. Output factors
A3.3. Open field data
A3.4. Patient shape effects
A3.5. Wedges
A3.6. Blocks
A3.7. Multileaf collimator
A3.8. Asymmetric fields
A3.9. Density corrections
A3.10. Compensators
A3.11. Anthropomorphic phantoms
Appendix 4: Electron dose calculation commissioning
A4.1. Depth dose and open fields
A4.2. Output factors
A4.3. Extended distance
A4.4. Shaped fields
A4.5. ECWG test cases
Appendix 5: Brachytherapy dose calculation
commissioning
A5.1. Source entry methods
A5.2. Source library
A5.3. Source strength and decay
A5.4. Single source dose calculations
A5.5. Multiple source dose calculations and
optimization algorithms
A5.6. Global system tests
A5.7. Other tests
References

PART A: INFORMATION FOR RADIATION
ONCOLOGY ADMINISTRATORS
The goal of radiotherapy treatment of cancer is to cure or
locally control the disease while minimizing complications
in normal tissues. The process of treatment planning, inasmuch as it determines the detailed technique used for a patient’s radiation treatments, is instrumental in accomplishing
that goal. The term ‘‘treatment planning’’ has sometimes
been narrowly interpreted as a process primarily concerned
with dosimetry procedures such as the generation of computerized dose distributions and the calculation of treatment
times or monitor unit settings.
In actuality, treatment planning is a much broader process
than just performing dose calculations: it encompasses all of
the steps involved in planning a patient’s treatment.
• The initial step in the treatment planning process is patient positioning and immobilization, during which an
optimum patient position for treatment is determined
and immobilization devices necessary to maintain the
patient in that position during treatment are constructed.
Medical Physics, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1998

1776

• Next, the size, extent, and location of the patient’s tum
(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read in chunks)